System Analysis, Design,
and Development
Concepts, Principles, and Practices

Charles S. Wasson




A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
System Analysis, Design,
and Development
System Analysis, Design,
and Development
Concepts, Principles, and Practices

Charles S. Wasson




A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.

Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under
Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of
the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the web
at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011,
fax (201) 748-6008, e-mail: permreq@wiley.com.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness
of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

For general information on our other products and services please contact our Customer Care Department
within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print, however,
may not be available in electronic format.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Wasson, Charles S., 1948–
  System analysis, design, and development : concepts, principles, and practices / by Charles S. Wasson.
     p. cm.
  “A Wiley-Interscience publication.”
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN-13 978-0-471-39333-7
  ISBN-10 0-471-39333-9 (cloth : alk. paper)
  1. System design. 2. System analysis. I. Title.
QA76.9.S88W373 2005
004.2¢1—dc22
                                                                                    2004061247

Printed in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

“If an error or omission is discovered, please notify the publisher with corrections in writing.”
Table of Contents




Preface    ix                                         System Mission Concepts Series
Acknowledgements       xii
                                                13 Organizational Roles, Missions,
                                                   and System Applications              122
 1 Introduction                            1
                                                14 Understanding the Problem,
 2 Book Organization and                           Opportunity, and Solution
   Conventions                             3       Spaces                               135

                                                15 System Interactions with its
                                                   Operating Environment                146
 Part I    System Analysis Concepts
                                                16 System Mission Analysis              159
          System Entity Concepts Series
                                                17 System Use Cases and Scenarios       167
 3 What Is a System?                      17

 4 System Attributes, Properties,
   and Characteristics                    27        System Operations Concepts Series
                                                18 System Operations Model              178
 5 System Roles and Stakeholders          39
                                                19 System Phases, Modes, and
 6 System Acceptability                   46
                                                   States of Operation                  189
 7 The System/Product Life Cycle          59
                                                20 Modeling System and Support
                                                   Operations                           206

   System Architecture Concepts Series
 8 The Architecture of Systems            67        System Capability Concepts Series
 9 System Levels of Abstraction                 21 System Operational Capability
   and Semantics                          76       Derivation and Allocation            217

10 The System of Interest                       22 The Anatomy of a System
   Architecture                           86       Capability                           229

11 The Operating Environment
   Architecture                           97
                                                        System Concept Synthesis
12 System Interfaces                      110   23 System Analysis Synthesis            241

                                                                                          v
vi    Table of Contents


 Part II System Design and                    39 Developing an Entity’s Behavioral
 Development Practices                           Domain Solution                       451

     System Development Strategies Series     40 Developing an Entity’s Physical
                                                 Domain Solution                       465
24 The System Development
   Workﬂow Strategy                     251   41 Component Selection
                                                 and Development                       480
25 System Design, Integration, and
   Veriﬁcation Strategy                 265   42 System Conﬁguration
                                                 Identiﬁcation                         489
26 The SE Process Model                 275
                                              43 System Interface Analysis,
27 System Development Models            290      Design, and Control                   507

                                              44 Human–System Integration              524
          System Speciﬁcation Series
                                              45 Engineering Standards, Frames
28 System Speciﬁcation Practices        302      of Reference, and Conventions         544
29 Understanding Speciﬁcation                 46 System Design and Development
   Requirements                         315      Documentation                         562
30 Speciﬁcation Analysis                327

31 Speciﬁcation Development             340             Decision Support Series
                                              47 Analytical Decision Support           574
32 Requirements Derivation,
   Allocation, Flow Down,                     48 Statistical Inﬂuences
   and Traceability                     358      on System Design                      586

33 Requirements Statement                     49 System Performance Analysis,
   Development                          370      Budgets, and Safety Margins           597

                                              50 System Reliability, Availability,
          System Development Series              and Maintainability (RAM)             615

34 Operational Utility, Suitability,          51 System Modeling and Simulation        651
   and Effectiveness                    390
                                              52 Trade Study Analysis of
35 System Design To/For Objectives      400      Alternatives                          672

36 System Architecture Development      410
                                                   Veriﬁcation and Validation Series
37 Developing an Entity’s
   Requirements Domain Solution         430   53 System Veriﬁcation
                                                 and Validation                        691
38 Developing an Entity’s Operations
   Domain Solution                      439   54 Technical Reviews                     710
                                                                   Table of Contents   vii

55 System Integration, Test,                57 System Operations
   and Evaluation                     733      and Support (O&S)                       773


     System Deployment, Operations,         Epilogue     788
           and Support Series
                                            Index      789
56 System Deployment                  758
Preface



A  s a user, acquirer, or developer of a system, product, or service, have you ever been confronted
with one of the situations listed below?
    • Wondered if the people who designed a product bothered to ask potential users to simply try
      it before selling it to the public.
    • Found that during a major program review prior to component development that someone
      thought a requirement was so obvious it didn’t have to be written down.
    • Participated in a new system development effort and discovered at Contract Award that team
      members were already designing circuits, coding software, and developing mechanical draw-
      ings BEFORE anyone understood WHAT system users expected the system to provide or
      perform?
    • Procured one of those publicized “designed for assembly” products and discovered that it
      was not designed for maintainability?
    • Interacted with a business that employed basic business tools such as desktop computers,
      phones, and fax machines that satisﬁed needs. Then, someone decided to install one of those
      new, interactive Web sites only to have customers and users challenged by a “new and
      improved” system that was too cumbersome to use, and whose performance proved to be
      inferior to that of the previous system?
Welcome to the domain of system analysis, design, and development or, in the case of the scenar-
ios above, the potential effects of the lack of System Engineering (SE).
     Everyday people acquire and use an array of systems, products, and services on the pretense
of improving the quality of their lives; of allowing them to become more productive, effective, efﬁ-
cient, and proﬁtable; or of depending on them as tools for survival. The consumer marketplace
depends on organizations, and organizations depend on employees to ensure that the products they
produce will:
    1. Perform planned missions efﬁciently and effectively when called upon.
    2. Leverage user skills and capabilities to accomplish tasks ranging from simple to highly
       complex.
    3. Operate using commonly available resources.
    4. Operate safely and economically in their intended environment with minimal risk and intru-
       sion to the general public, property, and the environment.
    5. Enable the user to complete missions and return safely.
    6. Be maintained and stored until the next use for low cost.
    7. Avoid any environmental, safety, and health risks to the user, the public, or the
       environment.
In a book entitled Moments of Truth, Jan Carlzon, president of an international airline, observed
that every interaction between a customer and a business through product usage or service support
is a moment of truth. Each customer–product/service interaction, though sometimes brief, produces
and inﬂuences perceptions in the User’s mind about the system, products, and services of each
                                                                                                  ix
x   Preface

organization. Moment of truth interactions yield positive or negative experiences. Thus, the expe-
riences posed by the questions above are moments of truth for the organizations, analysts, and
engineers who develop systems.
     Engineers graduate from college every year, enter the workforce, and learn system analysis,
design, and development methods from the bottom up over a period of 10 to 30 years. Many spend
entire careers with only limited exposure to the Users of their designs or products. As engineers
are assigned increasing organizational and contract responsibilities, interactions with organizational
customers also increase. Additionally, they ﬁnd themselves confronted with learning how to inte-
grate the efforts of other engineering disciplines beyond their ﬁeld. In effect, they informally learn
the rudiments of System Engineering, beginning with buzzwords, from the bottom up through
observation and experience.
     A story is told about an engineering manager with over 30 years of experience. The manager
openly bragged about being able to bring in new college graduates, throw them into the work envi-
ronment, and watch them sink or swim on their own without any assistance. Here was an individ-
ual with a wealth of knowledge and experience who was determined to let others “also spend 30
years” getting to comparable skill levels. Granted, some of this approach is fundamental to the
learning experience and has to evolve naturally through personal trials and errors. However, does
society and the engineering profession beneﬁt from this type of philosophy.
     Engineers enter the workplace from college at the lowest echelons of organizations mainly to
apply their knowledge and skills in solving unique boundary condition problems. For many, the
college dream of designing electronic circuits, software, or impressive mechanical structures is
given a reality check by their new employers. Much to their chagrin, they discover that physical
design is not the ﬁrst step in engineering. They may be even startled to learn that their task is not
to design but to ﬁnd low-cost, acceptable risk solutions. These solutions come from research of the
marketplace for existing products that can be easily and cost-effectively adapted to fulﬁll system
requirements.
     As these same engineers adapt to their work environment, they implicitly gain experience in
the processes and methods required to transform a user’s operational needs into a physical system,
product, or service to fulﬁll contract or marketplace needs. Note the emphasis on implicitly. For
many, the skills required to understand these new tasks and roles with increasing complexity and
responsibility require tempering over years of experience. If they are fortunate, they may be
employed by an organization that takes system engineering seriously and provides formal training.
     After 10 years or so of experience, the demands of organizational and contract performance
require engineers to assimilate and synthesize a wealth of knowledge and experience to formulate
ideas about how systems operate. A key element of these demands is to communicate with their
customers. Communications require open elicitation and investigative questioning, observation, and
listening skills to understand the customer’s operational needs and frustrations of unreliable, poorly
designed systems or products that:

    1. Limit their organization’s ability to successfully conduct its missions.
    2. Fail to start when initiated.
    3. Fail during the mission, or cause harm to its operators, the general public, personal prop-
       erty, or the environment.

Users express their visions through operational needs for new types of systems that require appli-
cation of newer, higher performance, and more reliable technologies, and present the engineer with
the opportunity to innovate and create—as was the engineer’s initial vision upon graduation.
     Task leads and managers have a leadership obligation to equip personnel with the required
processes, methods, and tools to achieve contract performance—for example, on time and within
                                                                                            Preface   xi

budget deliverables—and enterprise survival over the long term. They must be visionary and pro-
active. This means providing just-in-time (JIT) training and opportunities to these engineers when
they need these skills. Instead, they defer training to technical programs on the premise that this is
on-the-job (OJT) training. Every program is unique and only provides a subset of the skills that
SEs need. That approach can take years!
     While browsing in a bookstore, I noticed a book entitled If I Knew Then What I Know Now
by Richard Elder. Mr. Elder’s book title immediately caught my attention and appropriately cap-
tures the theme of this text.
     You cannot train experience. However, you can educate and train system analysts and engi-
neers in system analysis, design, and development. In turn, this knowledge enables them to bridge
the gap between a user’s abstract operational needs and the hardware and software developers who
design systems, products, and services to meet those needs. You can do this in a manner that avoids
the quantum leaps by local heroes that often result in systems, products, or services that culminate
in poor contract program performance and products that fail to satisfy user needs.
     Anecdotal evidence suggests that organizations waste vast amounts of resources by failing to
educate and train engineers in the concepts, principles, processes, and practices that consume on
average 80% of their workday. Based on the author’s own experiences and those of many others,
if new engineers entering and SEs already in the workplace were equipped with the knowledge
contained herein, there would be a remarkable difference in:

    1. System development performance
    2. Organizational performance
    3. Level of personal frustrations in coping with complex tasks

     Imagine the collective and synergistic power of these innovative and creative minds if they
could be introduced to these methods and techniques without having to make quantum leaps. Instead
of learning SE methods through informal, observational osmosis, and trial and error over 30+ years,
What if we could teach system, product, or service problem-solving/solution development as an
educational experience through engineering courses or personal study?
     Based on the author’s experience of over 30 years working across multiple business domains,
this text provides a foundation in system analysis, design, and development. It evolved from a need
to ﬁll a void in the core curriculum of engineering education and the discipline we refer to as system
engineering.
     Academically, some people refer to System Engineering as an emerging discipline. From the
perspective of speciﬁc engineering disciplines, System Engineering may be emerging only in the
sense that organizations are recognizing its importance, even to their own disciplines. The reality
is, however, the practice of engineering systems has existed since humans ﬁrst employed tools to
leverage their physical capabilities. Since World War II the formal term “system engineering” has
been applied to problem solving-solution development methods and techniques that many speciﬁc
engineering disciplines employ. Thus, system engineering concepts, principles, and practices
manifest themselves in every engineering discipline; typically without the formal label.
     In the chapters ahead, I share some of the If I Knew Then What I Knew Now knowledge and
experiences. Throughout my career I have had the good fortune and opportunities to work and learn
from some of the world’s best engineering application and scientiﬁc professionals. They are the
professionals who advanced the twentieth century in roles such as enabling space travel to the Moon
and Mars, creating new building products and approaches, developing highly complex systems, and
instituting high-performance organizations and teams.
     This is a practitioner’s textbook. It is written for advancing the state of the practice in the dis-
cipline we refer to as System Engineering. My intent is to go beyond the philosophical buzzwords
xii   Preface

that many use but few understand and address the HOWS and WHYS of system analysis, design,
and development. It is my hope that each reader will beneﬁt from my discussions and will endeavor
to expand and advance System Engineering through the application of the concepts, principles, and
practices stated herein. Treat them as reference guides by which you can formulate your own
approaches derived from and tempered by your own unique experiences.
     Remember, every engineering situation is unique. As an engineer, you and your organization
bear sole responsibility and accountability for the actions and decisions manifested in the systems,
products, and services you design, develop, and deliver. Each user experience with those products
and services will be a moment of truth for your organization as well as your own professional rep-
utation. With every task, product, or service delivery, internally or externally, make sure the user’s
moment of truth is positive and gratifying.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was made possible by the various contributions of the many people identiﬁed below.
     My special debt of gratitude goes to Dr. Charles Cockrell, mentor, teacher, and leader; Neill
B. Radke; Gerald “Jerry” Mettler; and Robert “Bob” M. Love who persevered through countless
hours and iterations reviewing various sections of this work. Likewise, a special appreciation to
Dr. Gregory M. Radecky for his technical counsel and commentary. Special thanks go to Sandra
Hendrickson for support in revising the manuscript, to Lauren and Emily, and to Sharon Savage-
Stull, and to Jean for coordinating the distribution of draft copies to reviewers. I thank members
of the JPL—Brian Muirhead, Howard Eisen, David Miller, Dr. Robert Shisko, and Mary Beth
Murrill—for sharing their time and experiences. Additionally, I thank Larry Riddle of the Univer-
sity of California, San Diego, and David Weeks for graphics submittals. Thanks also to INCOSE
President-Elect Paul Robitaille and to William E. Greenwood and JoAnne Zeigler for their obser-
vations. To those true leaders who provided insightful wisdom, knowledge mentoring, training, con-
cepts, and opportunities along my career path, I give a special word of recognition and appreciation.
These include Bobby L. Hartway, Chase B. Reed, William F. Baxter, Dan T. Reed, Spencer and Ila
Wasson, Ed Vandiver, and Kenneth King.
     Finally, no words can describe how much I appreciate the dedication and caring of my loving
wife and children who endured through the countless hours, weekends, and holidays and provided
support over many years as this work evolved from concept to maturity. I couldn’t have done this
without you.

                                                                               Charles S. Wasson
                                                                               July, 2005
Chapter              1

     Introduction

1.1 FRAMING THE NEED FOR SYSTEM ANALYSIS,
DESIGN, AND DEVELOPMENT SKILLS

One of the most perplexing problems with small, medium, or large system development programs
is simply being able to deliver a system, product, or service without latent defects on schedule,
within budget, and make a proﬁt.
     In most competitive markets, changes in technology and other pressures force many organi-
zations to aggressively cut realistic schedules to win contracts to sustain business operations. Many
times these shortcuts violate best practices through their elimination under the premise of “selec-
tive tailoring” and economizing.
     Most programs, even under near ideal conditions, are often challenged to translate User needs
into efﬁcient and cost-effective hardware and software solutions for deliverable systems, products,
and services. Technical program leads, especially System Engineers (SEs), create a strategy to
bridge the gap. They translate the User’s abstract vision into a language of speciﬁcations, archi-
tectures, and designs to guide the hardware and software development activities as illustrated in
Figure 1.1. When aggressive “tailoring” occurs, programs attempt to bridge the gap via a quantum
leap strategy. The strategy ultimately defaults into a continuous build–test–redesign loop until
resources such as cost and schedules are overrun and exhausted due to the extensive rework.
Systems delivered by these approaches are often patched and are plagued with undiscovered latent
defects.
     Bridging the gap between User needs and development of systems, products, and services to
satisfy those needs requires three types of technical activities: 1) system analysis, 2) system design,
and 3) system development (i.e., implementation). Knowledge in these areas requires education,
training, and experience. Most college graduates entering the workforce do not possess these skills;
employers provide very limited, if any, training. Most knowledge in these areas varies signiﬁcantly
and primarily comes from personal study and experience over many years. Given this condition,
programs have the potential to be staffed by personnel lacking system analysis, design, and devel-
opment skills attempting to make a quantum leap from user needs to hardware and software
implementation.
     Technically there are solutions of dealing with this challenge. This text provides a ﬂexible,
structural framework for “bridging the gap” between Users and system developers. Throughout this
text we will build on workﬂow to arrive at the steps and practices necessary to plan and implement
system analysis, design, and development strategy without sacriﬁcing best practices objectives.
     Part II System Design and Development Practices presents a framework of practice-based
strategies and activities for developing systems, products, and services. However, system develop-
ment requires more than simply implementing a standard framework. You must understand the

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                     1
2   Chapter 1   Introduction


                                                                        Hardware
                                                                       Engineering
                                                                                         Software
     Operational                                                                        Engineering
      Need(s)
                                             Solutions                                      Specialty
                                                                                           Engineering




       User                                                                          System Developers
                                     Systems Engineering
                                   Concepts, Principles, & Practices




                               Operational Need Requirements

Figure 1.1 Systems Engineering—Bridging the Gap from User Needs to System Developers




foundation for the framework—HOW TO analyze systems. This requires understanding WHAT
systems are; HOW the User envisions deploying, operating, supporting, and disposing of the
system; under WHAT conditions and WHAT outcome(s) they are expected to achieve. Therefore,
Part I addresses System Analysis Concepts as a precursor to Part 2.
     This text identiﬁes fundamental system analysis, design, and development practices that in the
author’s experiences are applicable to most organizations. The concepts, principles, and practices
presented in Parts I and II represent a collection on topics that condense the fundamentals of key
practices. Some of these topics have entire textbooks dedicated to the subject matter.
     Your experiences may be different; that’s okay. You and your organization are responsible and
accountable for identifying the key concepts, principles, and practices unique to your line of busi-
ness and programs and incorporate them into its command media—namely policies and procedures.
Using this knowledge and framework, personnel at all levels of the organization are better postured
to make informed decisions to bridging the gap from User needs to system, product, and service
solutions to meet those needs without having to take a quantum leap.
Chapter              2

     Book Organization and Conventions

2.1 HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED

There is a wealth of engineering knowledge that is well documented in textbooks targeted specif-
ically for disciplinary and specialty engineers. In effect, these textbooks are compartmentalized
bodies of knowledge unique to the discipline. The challenge is that SE requires knowledge, appli-
cation, and integration of the concepts in these bodies of knowledge. The author’s purpose in writing
this book is not to duplicate what already exists but rather to complement and link SE and devel-
opment to these bodies of knowledge as illustrated in Figure 2.1.
     To accomplish these interdisciplinary linkages, the topical framework of the book is organized
the way SEs think. SEs analyze, design, and develop systems. As such, the text consists of two
parts: Part I System Analysis Concepts and Part II System Design and Development Practices. Each
part is organized into series of chapters that address concepts or practices and include Deﬁnitions
of Key Terms and Guiding Principles.

Part I: System Analysis Concepts
Part I provides the fundamentals in systems analysis and consists of a several series of topics:
     • System entity concepts
     • System architecture concepts
     • System mission concepts
     • System operations concepts
     • System capability concepts
Each series within a part consists of chapters representing a speciﬁc topical discussion. Each chapter
is sequentially numbered to facilitate quick location of referrals and topical discussions. The intent
is to isolate topical discussions in a single location rather than a fragmented approach used in most
textbooks. Due to the interdependency among topics, some overlap is unavoidable. In general, Part
I provides the underlying foundation and framework of concepts that support Part II.
     Unlike many textbooks, you will not ﬁnd any equations, software code, or other technical
exhibits in Part I. SE is a problem solving–solution development discipline that requires a funda-
mental understanding in HOW to think about and analyze systems—HOW systems are organized,
structured, deﬁned, bounded, and employed by the User.




System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                    3
4   Chapter 2   Book Organization and Conventions


       Users                                    User
                                         Operational Need(s)                 Abstract
                                                                                          Br
                                                                                            id
                                                                                               gi
                                                                                                 ng
                                                System                                                th
                                                                                                        eG
                                               Analysis,                                                   ap
                                               Design, &
Systems, Products,                            Development
    & Services                                                                                         Physical
                                Disciplinary & Specialty Engineering
                        • Aerospace Engineering           • Test Engineering
                        • Civil Engineering               • Product Engineering
                        • Electrical Engineering          • Human Factors Engineering
                        • Industrial Engineering          • System Safety Engineering
                        • Mechanical Engineering          • System Security Engineering
                        • Nuclear Engineering             • Reliability Engineering
                        • Software Engineering            • Maintainability Engineering
                                               • Systems Engineering

Figure 2.1 Book Scope


Part II: System Design and Development Practices
Part II builds on the system analysis concepts of Part I and describes the system design and devel-
opment practices embodied by the discipline we refer to as system engineering. Part II contents
consists of several series of practices that include:
    • System development strategies
    • System speciﬁcation
    • System design
    • Decision support
    • System veriﬁcation and validation
    • System deployment, operations, and support
Each series covers a range of topical practices required to support the series.


2.2 DEFINITIONS

SE, as is the case with most disciplines, is based on concepts, principles, processes, and practices.
The author’s context for each of these terms can be better understood as follows:
    • Concept A visionary expression of a proposed or planned action that leads to achievement
      of a disciplinary objective.
    • Principle A guiding thought based on empirical deduction of observed behavior or prac-
      tices that proves to be true under most conditions over time.
    • Process A sequence of serial and/or concurrent operations or tasks that transform and/or
      add value to a set of inputs to produce a product. Processes are subject to external controls
      and constraints imposed by regulation and/or decision authority.
                                                                              2.3 Text Conventions    5

    • Operation A collection of outcome-based tasks required to satisfy an operational
      objective.
    • Task The application of methods, techniques, and tools to add value to a set of inputs—
      such as materials and information—to produce a work product that meets “ﬁtness for use”
      standards established by formal or informal agreement.
    • Practice A systematic approach that employs methods and techniques that have been demon-
      strated to provide results that are generally predictable and repeatable under various operating
      conditions. A practice employs processes, operations, or tools.
    • Best or Preferred Practice A practice that has been adopted or accepted as the most suit-
      able method for use by an organization or discipline. Some individuals rebuff the operative
      term “best” on the basis it is relative and has yet to be universally accepted as THE one and
      only practice that is above all others. Instead, they use preferred practice.


2.3 TEXT CONVENTIONS

This textbook consists of several types of annotations to facilitate readability. These include
referrals, author’s notes, guideposts, reference identiﬁers, and examples. To better understand the
author’s context of usage, let’s brieﬂy summarize each.

Referrals. SE concepts, processes, and practices are highly interdependent. Throughout the book
you will ﬁnd Referrals that suggest related chapters of the book that provide additional information
on the topic.

Author’s Notes. Author’s Notes provide insights and observations based on the author’s own
unique experiences. Each Author’s Note is indexed to the chapter and in sequence within the chapter.

Guideposts. Guideposts are provided in the text to provide the reader an understanding of
WHERE you are and WHAT lies ahead in the discussion. Each guidepost is indexed to the chapter
and sequence within the section.

Reference Identiﬁers. Some graphics-based discussions progress through a series of steps that
require navigational aids to assist the reader, linking the text discussion to a graphic. Reference
Identiﬁers such as (#) or circles with numbers are used. The navigational reference IDs are intended
to facilitate classroom or training discussions and reading of detailed ﬁgures. It is easier to refer to
“Item or ID 10” than to say “system development process.”

Examples. Examples are included to illustrate how a particular concept, method, or practice is
applied to the development of real world systems. One way SEs deal with complexity is through
concepts such as abstraction, decomposition, and simpliﬁcation. You do not need a Space Shuttle
level of complexity example to learn a key point or concept. Therefore, the examples are intended
to accomplish one objective—to communicate. They are not intended to insult your intelligence or
impress academic egos.

References. Technical books often contain pages of references. You will ﬁnd a limited number
of references here. Where external references are applicable and reinforce a point, explicit call-outs
are made. However, this is a practitioner’s text intended to equip the reader with the practical
knowledge required to perform system analysis, design, and development. As such, the book is
6   Chapter 2   Book Organization and Conventions

intended to stimulate the reader’s thought processes by introducing fresh approaches and ideas for
advancing the state of the practice in System Engineering as a professional discipline, not
summarizing what other authors have already published.

Naming Conventions. Some discussions throughout the book employ terms that have generic
and reserved word contexts. For example, terms such as equipment, personnel, hardware, software,
and facilities have a generic context. Conversely, these same terms are considered SE system
elements and are treated as RESERVED words. To delineate the context of usage, we will use
lowercase spellings for the generic context and all capitals for the SE unique context—such as
EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, HARDWARE, SOFTWARE, and FACILITIES. Additionally,
certain words in sentences require communication emphasis. Therefore, some words are italicized
or CAPITALIZED for emphasis by the author as a means to enhance the readability and
communicate key points.

2.4 GRAPHICAL CONVENTIONS

System analysis and design are graphics-intensive activities. As a result a standard set of graphical
conventions is used to provide a level of continuity across a multitude of highly interdependent
topics. In general, system analysis and design employ the following types of relationships:

    1. Bounding WHAT IS/IS NOT part of a system.
    2. Abstractions of collections of entities/objects.
    3. Logical associations or relationships between entities.
    4. Iterations within an entity/object.
    5. Hierarchical decomposition of abstract entities/objects and integration or entities/
       objects that characterized by one-to-many and many-to-one entity or object
       relationships—for example, parent or sibling.
    6. Peer-to-peer entity/object relationships.
    7. Time-based, serial and concurrent sequences of workﬂow, and interactions between enti-
       ties.
    8. Identiﬁcation tags assigned to an entity/object that give it a unique identity.
There are numerous graphical methods for illustrating these relationships. The Object Management
Group’s (OMG) Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML®) provides a diverse set of graphical symbols
that enable us to express many such relationships. Therefore, diagrams employing UML symbol-
ogy are used in this book WHERE they enable us to better communicate key concepts. UML anno-
tates one-to-many (i.e., multiplicity) entity relationships with “0 . . . 1,” “1,” “1 . . .*,” and so forth.
Many of the graphics contain a signiﬁcant amount of information and allow us to forgo the multi-
plicity annotations. Remember, this text is intended to communicate concepts about system analy-
sis, design, and development; not to make you an expert in UML. Therefore, you are encouraged
to visit the UML Web site at www.omg.org for implementation speciﬁcs of the language. Currently,
SE versions of UML®, SYSML, is in the process of development.

System Block Diagram (SBD) Symbology
One of the ﬁrst tasks of system analysts and SE is to bound WHAT IS/IS NOT part of the system.
System Block Diagrams (SBDs), by virtue of their box structure, offer a convenient way to express
these relationships, as illustrated at the left side of Figure 2.2.
                                                                                       2.4 Graphical Conventions   7



          Physical Representation                          Simplified Symbolic Representation


                         Your System                                                   Your System
  External                                                      External
 System #1                A            B                       System #1                A            B



  External                C            D                        External                C            D
 System #2                                                     System #2




External System B interfaces with Entities A, B, C, and   To simplify the diagram for analysis, we employ a
D of Your System.                                         symbolic convention whereby the intersection of
                                                          External System #2 interface with the dashed line of
                                                          Your System represents Exte rnal System B interfaces
                                                          with each entity - i.e. A - D.

Figure 2.2 Symbolic Interface Representation Convention




     If we attempt to annotate each system input/output relationship with lines, the chart would
become unwieldy and difﬁcult to read. Using the left side of Figure 2.2 as an example, External
System 1 interfaces with Entity A; External System B interfaces with Entities A through D. Exter-
nal System 2 could be the natural environment—consisting of temperature, humidity, and the life—
that affects Entities A through D within your system.
     Where a system such as External System B interfaces with ALL internal entities, we simplify
the graphic with a single arrow touching the outer boundary of the system—meaning your system.
Therefore, any arrow that touches the boundary of an entity represents an interface with each item
with the entity.

Aggregation and Composition Relationships Symbology
Object-oriented and entity relationship methods recognize that hierarchical objects or entities are
comprised of lower level sibling objects or entities. Two types of relationships exist in these cases:
aggregation versus generalization. Let’s elaborate on these further.

Aggregation (Composition). Aggregation represents the collection of entities/objects that
have direct relationships with each other. Composition, as a form of aggregation, characterizes
relationships that represent strong associations between objects or entities as illustrated in Figure
2.3. Entity A consists of Entities A1, A2, A3, and A4 that have direct relationships via interfaces
that enable them to work together to provide entity A’s capabilities. Consider the following example:



 EXAMPLE 2.1
An automobile ENGINE consists of PISTONS that have direct relationships via the engine’s SHAFT.
Therefore, the ENGINE is an aggregation of all entities/objects—such as ENGINE SHAFT and
PISTONS—required to provide the ENGINE capability.
8     Chapter 2     Book Organization and Conventions

UML symbology for aggregation or composition is represented by a ﬁlled (black) diamond shape,
referred to as an aggregation indicator, attached to the aggregated object/entity as illustrated at the
left side of Figure 2.3. The diamond indicator is attached to the parent entity, System A, with link-
ages that connect the indicator to each object or entity that has a direct relationship.

Author’s Note 2.1 As a rule, UML only allows the aggregation indicator to be attached to the
aggregated entity/object on one end of the relationship (line). You will ﬁnd instances in the text
whereby some abstractions of classes of entities/objects have many-to-many relationships with each
other and employ the indicator on both ends of the line.

Generalization. Generalization represents a collection of objects or entities that have loose
associations with each other as illustrated in Figure 2.3. Entity B consists of sibling Entities B1,
B2, B3, and B4, which have not direct relationship with each other. Consider the following example:



    EXAMPLE 2.1
A VEHICLE is a generalization for classes of trucks, cars, snowmobiles, tractors, and the like, that have the
capability to maneuver under their own power.


UML® symbology for generalization is represented by an unﬁlled (white) triangular shape as illus-
trated as the right side of Figure 2.3. The triangle indicator is attached to the parent entity with
linkages that connect the indicator to each lower level object or entity that have loose associations
or relationships.




         Aggregation (Composition)                                            Generalization
Consists of sets of entities with CLOSE associations or              Consists of sets of entities with LOOSE
 interdependencies that comprise a higher level entity           associations that comprise a higher level entity

                      Entity A                                                      Entity B
                Entity        Entity                                         Entity        Entity
                 A1            A2                                             B1            B2

                Entity        Entity                                         Entity        Entity
                 A3            A4                                             B3            B4




  UML                                   = Strong Association     UML
Symbology                               = Weak Association
                                                               Symbology
                      SystemAA
                     System                                                         EntityBB
                                                                                   Entity
 Aggregation
(Composition)                                                                                         Generalization
  Indicator                                                                                             Indicator


    Entity
     Entity     Entity
                 Entity       Entity
                               Entity        Entity
                                              Entity            Entity
                                                                 Entity      Entity
                                                                              Entity       Entity
                                                                                            Entity       Entity
                                                                                                          Entity
     A1
      A1         A2
                  A2           A3
                                A3            A4
                                               A4                B1
                                                                  B1          B2
                                                                               B2           B3
                                                                                             B3           B4
                                                                                                           B4


Figure 2.3 Hierarchical Aggregation and Generalization Symbology
                                                                                                 2.4 Graphical Conventions   9

Relationship Dependencies
In general, this text employs three types of line conventions to express entity/object relationship
dependencies as illustrated in Figure 2.4.
     • Instances of a Relationship That May or May Not Exist (Panel A) Since there are instances
       that may or may not contain a speciﬁc relationship, a dashed line is used for all or a part of
       the line. Where an aggregated entity/object may or may not have all instances of siblings,
       the parent half of the line is solid and the sibling half may be dashed.
     • Electronic/Mechanical Relationships (Panel B) Some graphics express electronic relation-
       ships by solid lines and mechanical relationships by dashed lines. For example, a computer’s
       electronic data communications interface with another computer is illustrated by a solid line.
       The mechanical relationship between a disc and a computer is illustrated by a dashed line
       to infer either a mechanical or a temporary connection.
     • Logical/Physical Entity Relationships (Panels C and D) Since entities/objects have logical
       associations or indirect relationships, we employ a dashed line to indicate the relationship.

Interaction Diagrams
UML accommodates interactions between entities such as people, objects, roles, and so forth, which
are referred to as actors via interaction or sequence diagrams, as illustrated in Figure 2.5. Each
actor (object class) consists of a vertical time-based line referred to as a lifeline. Each actor’s
lifeline consists of activation boxes that represent time-based processing. When interactions occur
between actors, an event stimulates the activation box of the interfacing actor. As a result, a simple
sequence of actions will represent interchanges between actors.




                                      A                                                               B
Relationship Instances that May or May Not Exist                                       Electrical/Mechanical
                                                                                           Relationships
                           Entity A
                                                 Specific Instances of A2                    Entity        Entity
All Instances of A1
                                                  May or May Not Exist                         A             B
Exist (Solid Line)
                                                     (Dashed Line)

                                                                                                   Entity C
              Entity A1                Entity A2                               Where:
                                                                                         = Data Flow (Solid Line)
                                                                                         = Mechanical Interfaces (Dashed)


         C              Logical                                        D           Direct Physical
             Associations or Relationships                                  Associations or Relationships

                Entity A              Entity B                                Entity A             Entity B



             Logical Relationship or Association                            Physical Relationship or Association
                       (Dashed Line)                                                    (Solid Line)
Figure 2.4 Dashed Line Conventions
10    Chapter 2    Book Organization and Conventions



                                                       Entity B
                   Actor A                  Actor B1               Actor B2
                    (Class)                  (Class)                (Class)




                               1
                                                       2


      Sequence
(Author’s Convention)                                  3

                               4


                                                                                   Lifelines


                               Activation                         Events
                                  Box
Figure 2.5 UML® Sequence Diagram Symbology



Process Activity Graphics
Systems processing consists of sequential and concurrent process ﬂows and combinations of the
two. Key UML elements for representing process ﬂow consist of initial/ﬁnal states, activities, deci-
sion blocks, and synchronization bars (forks and joins), as illustrated in Figure 2.6.

Initial and Final States. To isolate on speciﬁc aspects of process ﬂow, a process requires a
beginning referred to as an INITIAL STATE and an ending we refer to as a FINAL STATE. UML
symbolizes the INITIAL STATE with a ﬁlled (black) circle and the FINAL STATE with a large
unﬁlled (white) circle encompassing a ﬁlled (black) circle.

Activities. Activities consist of operations or tasks that transform and add value to one or mode
inputs to produce an objective-based outcome within a given set of performance constraints such
as resources, controls, and time. UML graphically symbolizes activities as having a ﬂat top and
bottom with convex arcs on the left and right sides.

Decision Blocks. Process ﬂows inevitably have staging or control points that require a decision
to be made. Therefore, UML uses a diamond shape to symbolize decisions that conditionally branch
the process ﬂow to other processing activities.

Synchronization Bars. Some entity processing requires concurrent activities that require
synchronization. For these cases, synchronization bars are used and consist of two types: forks and
joins. Forks provide a means to branch condition-based processing ﬂow to speciﬁc activities. Joins
synchronize and integrate multiple branches into a single process ﬂow.

Hierarchical Decomposition Notation Conventions
Systems are composed of parent–sibling hierarchies of entities or objects. Each object or entity
within the diagram’s structural framework requires establishing a numbering convention to uniquely
                                                                                      2.5 Exercises   11

           Actor #1                            Actor #2                    Actor #3
Initial              Swimlane
                                                           Swimlane                   Swimlane
State


          Activity                            Activity
            11                                  21
                       Synchronization
                         Bar (Fork)
                                              Activity                    Activity
                                                22                          31


   Activity      Activity                                                 Activity
     12            13                                                       32

                            Synchronization                                      Decision
                              Bar (Join)                 Condition 21


          Activity                                                                   Condition 31
            14
                                                                               Condition 32
                                                   Condition 22
Final
State

Figure 2.6 UML Activity Diagram Symbology



identify each entity. In general, there are two types of conventions used in the text: decimal based
and tag based.

Decimal-Based Notation. SEs employ decimal notation to delineate levels of information with
the most signiﬁcant level being in the left most digit position as illustrated in Figure 2.7. Lower
levels are identiﬁed as extensions to the previous level such as 1.0, 1.1, 1.1.1, 1.1.1.1 and so forth.

Tag-Based Notation. In lieu of the decimal system in which the decimal point can be misplaced
or deleted, numerical tags are used without the decimal points as illustrated in the right side of
Figure 2.7. Rather than designating these lower level entities with names such as B, C, and D, we
need to explicitly identify each one based on its root traceability to its higher level parent. We do
this by designating each one of the entities as A_1, A_2, and A_3. Thus, if entity A_2 consists of
two lower level entities, we label them as A_21 and A_22. A_21 consists of A_211, A_212, and
A_213. Following this convention, entity A_212 is an element of entity A_21, which is an element
of entity A_2, which is an element of entity A.

2.5 EXERCISES

Most sections of the text consist of two types of exercises: general exercises and organizational
centric exercises.

General Exercises
General exercises are intended to test your understanding of each chapter’s topic to two types of
problems:
12    Chapter 2   Book Organization and Conventions


 Hierarchical Decomposition Relationships             Hierarchical Decomposition Relationships
         Decimal-Based Notation                                Tag-Based Notation

                                                                               Entity
      Process        Process        Process                                      A
        1.0            2.0            3.0
                                       3.0

                                                            Entity             Entity       Entity
                                                             A_1                A_2          A_3
      Process       Process         Process
        2.1           2.2             2.3

                                                                    Entity               Entity
                                                                    A_21                 A_22


      Process       Process         Process
       2.2.1         2.2.2           2.2.3                 Entity            Entity     Entity
                                                           A_211             A_212      A_213




Figure 2.7 Hierarchical Decomposition Relationship Notations




     1. What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions presented in the Introduction of each
        chapter.
     2. Progressive application of knowledge to a selected system as listed is Table 2.1.

Organizational Centric Exercises
Organizational Centric Exercises are intended for organizations that may conduct internal SE train-
ing programs. SEs work within the framework of organizational command media such as policies
and procedures and apply that knowledge to contract programs. Therefore, these exercises consists
of two types of problems: research of organizational command media concerning SE topics of inter-
est and interviewing technical leadership of contract programs to understand how they:
     1. Approached various facets of SE on their programs.
     2. What best or preferred practices were used?
     3. What lessons were learned?

2.6 TEAM DECISION MAKING

Team decision making is all about consensus. Development teams such as Integrated Product Teams
(IPTs) consist of personnel from different disciplines that bring knowledge and levels of experi-
ence; some senior level, some young, others in between. The context of the term consensus through-
out this book refers to root wisdom decision making that stands the test of time. It’s NOT about
one person, one vote; seniority; dominating personalities; or compromise. It’s not about show-
casing IPTs to customers while continuing to do business the OLD way.
                                                        2.7 Warnings and Cautionary Disclaimers   13

Table 2.1 Sample systems for application to General Exercises

Individual Project Suggestions                          Team-Based Project Suggestions

 1. Mechanical pencil                               1. Exercise room treadmill
 2. Desktop stapler                                 2. Snowmobile
 3. Disposable camera                               3. Automobile
 4. Personal digital assistant (PDA)                4. Word processor
 5. Cellular phone                                  5. Voice mail system
 6. Desktop or laptop computer                      6. Sports utility vehicle (SUV)
 7. Computer mouse                                  7. Doctor’s ofﬁce
 8. Computer scanner                                8. Automatic car wash
 9. Computer printer                                9. Fast food restaurant with drive—through window
10. Computer display monitor                       10. Store (video, grocery, bookstore, etc.)
11. CD/DVD player                                  11. Shopping mall
12. TV/CD/DVD remote control device                12. Hospital
13. Television                                     13. School
14. MP3 player                                     14. Fire department
15. Home                                           15. Overnight package delivery
16. Residential mailbox                            16. Restaurant
17. Lawn mower                                     17. Garbage collection system
18. Lawn edger                                     18. Recyclable materials station
19. Hand-held calculator                           19. Community landﬁll
20. Ceiling fan                                    20. Emergency response system (ERS)
21. Web site                                       21. City rapid transit system or an element
22. Fast food restaurant drive through             22. Professional sports stadium
23. Airport check-in kiosk                         23. Organization within an enterprise
24. Voice mail system                              24. Fighter aircraft
                                                   25. Commercial jet aircraft
                                                   26. NASA Space Shuttle
                                                   27. International Space Station (ISS)




      Team decision making involves eliciting and integrating team member knowledge and expe-
rience to make choices that clearly represent a path to success and avoid a path to failure. It may
require smart, informed assessments of risk and reward decision making. The bottom line is that
it’s about making technical decisions everyone can and will proactively support.


2.7 WARNINGS AND CAUTIONARY DISCLAIMERS

As a professional, you and your organization are solely responsible and accountable for the appli-
cation and implementation of the concepts, principles, processes, and practices discussed in this
book, the quality of work products produced, and the impact of those actions on society, colleagues,
and the environment. As a practitioner’s book, the discussions reﬂect experiences that may or may
not be relevant to you, your organization, or program.
     You are advised to supplement this information with personal study, education, research, and
experience to enhance your competency skills to the level of performance required and expected
by your organization, contract, profession, and applicable laws and regulations. Where specialized
expertise is required, employ the services of highly qualiﬁed and competent subject matter expert
(SME) professionals.
     Part I

     System Analysis
     Concepts
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The foundation of any discipline resides in its concepts and guiding principles. Part 1 is structured
around ﬁve thematic concepts that are fundamental to understanding systems—WHAT a system is;
WHO its users and stakeholders are; WHY it exists and HOW it beneﬁts its users and stakehold-
ers; HOW it is structured; and HOW it operates, is supported, and disposed. Chapters 3–22 are
grouped and presented in a sequence that supports the ﬁve concepts listed below:
     • System Entity Concepts
     • System Architecture Concepts
     • System Mission Concepts
     • System Operations Concepts
     • System Capability Concepts
     These basic concepts serve as the foundation for understanding Part II System Design and
Development Practices. This foundation ﬁlls the void for people and organizations that restrict their
education and training to the philosophy of SE and attempt to make a quantum leap from speciﬁ-
cations to point design solutions due to a lack of understanding of these fundamental concepts.
     To better understand what each of these concepts entails, let’s explore a brief introductory
synopsis of each one.

System Entity Concepts
Our ﬁrst series of discussions focus on a simple concept, the system as an entity. The System Entity
Concepts consist of Chapters 3–7. These discussions: deﬁne what a system is; identify attributes,
properties, and characteristics common to most systems; address organizational systems roles and
stakeholders; identify key factors that impact user acceptability of a system, and deﬁne a model for
the system/product lifecycle.
     Given an understanding of the System Entity Concepts, our next discussions shift to under-
standing HOW systems and their operating environments are organized and structured.

System Architecture Concepts
Most people think of a system and its operating environment in physical terms; however, some
systems may be virtual such as those centered around political or cultural systems. Regardless of

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
16   Part I   System Analysis Concepts

whether a system is physical or virtual, we can characterize them in terms of form, ﬁt, and func-
tion using their structural framework as the point of reference.
     Our second series, System Architecture Concepts, decomposes the system into its constituent
parts via its architectural framework. Chapters 8–12 establish a high level analytical framework
for analyzing how a system interacts with itself and its operating environment. Analyses and obser-
vations of these interactions reveal that we can characterize a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
and its operating environment via system elements—EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, MISSION
RESOURCES, PROCEDURAL DATA, and FACILITIES. Our discussions include establishment
of a semantics convention to minimize confusion relating to how developers communicate about
multi-level components within a system and relate to higher-level systems.
     Based on an understanding of the System Architecture Concepts, we are ready to explore WHY
a system exists and how an organization employs it as an asset via the System Mission Concepts.

System Mission Concepts
Every system has a mission or a reason for its existence as envisioned by its acquirer, users, and
stakeholders who expect the system to provide purposeful value and a return on investment (ROI).
The System Mission Concepts series consisting of Chapters 13–17 describe HOW systems are
employed by organizations and assigned performance-based outcome missions to fulﬁll speciﬁc
aspects of organizational objectives.
     Our discussions trace the origins of a system from an organization’s operational need to HOW
users envision operating and supporting the system to perform missions that satisfy that need. We
investigate how systems interact with their operating environment during missions, how missions
are planned, and explore how the user(s) expect the system to perform speciﬁc actions related to
achieving mission objectives.
     The System Mission Concepts, which deﬁne WHAT a system is to accomplish and HOW WELL
from an organizational perspective, provide the foundation for our next topic, the System Opera-
tions Concepts.

System Operations Concepts
System missions require timely execution of a series of performance-based operations and tasks.
The System Operations Concepts series consisting of Chapters 18–20 explore how users prepare
and conﬁgure a system for a mission, conduct the mission, and perform most-mission follow-up.
Analysis and observations of systems reveals that we can create a tailorable System Operations
Model that serves as a basic construct to facilitate identiﬁcation of phase-based operations common
to all human-made systems. We employ the model’s framework to illustrate how system interac-
tions with its operating environment are modeled for various types of single use and multi-use
applications.
     The System Operations Concepts, which structure a system mission into speciﬁc operations
and tasks, serve as a framework for identifying system capabilities to be provided by the system
to accomplish mission objectives. This brings us to the ﬁnal topic of Part I, System Capability
Concepts.

System Capability Concepts
The System Capability Concepts series consist of Chapters 21 and 22. We explore HOW to derive
and allocate mission operational capabilities to integrated sets of system elements. Whereas most
people believe a capability is an end in itself, our discussions reveal that a capability has a common
construct that can be universally applied to specifying and implementing all types of capabilities.
Chapter              3

     What Is a System?

3.1 INTRODUCTION

Analysis, design, and development systems, products, or services requires answering several fun-
damental questions:
     1. WHAT is a system?
     2. What is included within a system’s boundaries?
     3. WHAT role does a system perform within the User’s organization?
     4. What mission applications does the system perform?
     5. WHAT results-oriented outcomes does the system produce?
These fundamental questions are often difﬁcult to answer. If you are unable to clearly and con-
cisely delineate WHAT the system is, you have a major challenge.
     Now add the element of complexity in bringing groups of people working on same problem
to convergence and consensus on the answers. This is a common problem shared by Users,
Acquirers, and System Developers, even within their own organizations.
     This chapter serves as a cornerstone for this text. It answers the ﬁrst question, What is a system?
We begin by deﬁning what a system is and explain the meaning of structural phrases within the
deﬁnition. Based on the deﬁnition, we introduce various categories of systems and describe the dif-
ferences between systems, products, and tools. We introduce the concept of precedented and
unprecedented systems. Finally, we conclude by presenting an analytical and graphical represen-
tation of a system.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     • What is a system?
     • What are some examples of types of systems?
     • What are the differences between systems, products, and tools?
     • What is the difference between a precedented system and an unprecedented system?
     • How do we analytically represent a system?




System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                     17
18    Chapter 3   What Is a System?

3.2 DEFINITION OF A SYSTEM

The term “system” originates from the Greek term systēma, which means to “place together.” Mul-
tiple business and engineering domains have deﬁnitions of a system. This text deﬁnes a system as:
     • System An integrated set of interoperable elements, each with explicitly speciﬁed and
       bounded capabilities, working synergistically to perform value-added processing to enable
       a User to satisfy mission-oriented operational needs in a prescribed operating environment
       with a speciﬁed outcome and probability of success.
     To help you understand the rationale for this deﬁnition, let’s examine each part in detail.


System Deﬁnition Rationale
The deﬁnition above captures a number of key discussion points about systems. Let’s examine the
basis for each phrase in the deﬁnition.
     • By “an integrated set,” we mean that a system, by deﬁnition, is composed of hierarchical
       levels of physical elements, entities, or components.
     • By “interoperable elements,” we mean that elements within the system’s structure must be
       compatible with each other in form, ﬁt, and function, for example. System elements include
       equipment (e.g., hardware and software, personnel, facilities, operating constraints, support),
       maintenance, supplies, spares, training, resources, procedural data, external systems, and
       anything else that supports mission accomplishment.

Author’s Note 3.2 One is tempted to expand this phrase to state “interoperable and comple-
mentary.” In general, system elements should have complementary missions and objectives with
nonoverlapping capabilities. However, redundant systems may require duplication of capabilities
across several system elements. Additionally, some systems, such as networks, have multiple
instances of the same components.
     • By each element having “explicitly speciﬁed and bounded capabilities,” we mean that every
       element should work to accomplish some higher level goal or purposeful mission. System
       element contributions to the overall system performance must be explicitly speciﬁed. This
       requires that operational and functional performance capabilities for each system element
       be identiﬁed and explicitly bounded to a level of speciﬁcity that allows the element to be
       analyzed, designed, developed, tested, veriﬁed, and validated—either on a stand-alone basis
       or as part of the integrated system.
     • By “working in synergistically,” we mean that the purpose of integrating the set of elements
       is to leverage the capabilities of individual element capabilities to accomplish a higher level
       capability that cannot be achieved as stand-alone elements.
     • By “value-added processing,” we mean that factors such operational cost, utility, suitability,
       availability, and efﬁciency demand that each system operation and task add value to its inputs
       availability, and produce outputs that contribute to achievement of the overall system mission
       outcome and performance objectives.
     • By “enable a user to predictably satisfy mission-oriented operational needs,” we mean that
       every system has a purpose (i.e., a reason for existence) and a value to the user(s). Its value
       may be a return on investment (ROI) relative to satisfying operational needs or to satisfy
       system missions and objectives.
                                                                    3.2   Deﬁnition of a System   19

    • By “in a prescribed operating environment,” we mean that for economic, outcome, and
      survival reasons, every system must have a prescribed—that is, bounded—operating
      environment.
    • By “with a speciﬁed outcome,” we mean that system stakeholders (Users, shareholders,
      owners, etc.) expect systems to produce results. The observed behavior, products, by-
      products, or services, for example, must be outcome-oriented, quantiﬁable, measurable, and
      veriﬁable.
    • By “and probability of success,” we mean that accomplishment of a speciﬁc outcome
      involves a degree of uncertainty or risk. Thus, the degree of success is determined by various
      performance factors such as reliability, dependability, availability, maintainability, sustain-
      ability, lethality, and survivability.

Author’s Note 3.1 Based on the author’s experiences, you need at least four types of agree-
ment on working level deﬁnitions of a system: 1) a personal understanding, 2) a program team
consensus, 3) an organizational (e.g., System Developer) consensus, and 4) most important, a con-
tractual consensus with your customer. Why?
     Of particular importance is that you, your program team, and your customer (i.e., a User or
an Acquirer as the User’s technical representative) have a mutually clear and concise under-
standing of the term. Organizationally you need a consensus of agreement among the System Devel-
oper team members. The intent is to establish continuity across contract and organizations as
personnel transition between programs.

Other Deﬁnitions of a System
National and international standards organizations as well as different authors have their own def-
initions of a system. If you analyze these, you will ﬁnd a diversity of viewpoints, all tempered by
their personal knowledge and experiences. Moreover, achievement of a “one size ﬁts all” conver-
gence and consensus by standards organizations often results in wording that is so diluted that many
believe it to be insufﬁcient and inadequate. Examples of organizations having standard deﬁnitions
include:
    • International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE)
    • Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE)
    • American National Standards Institute (ANSI)/Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA)
    • International Standards Organization (ISO)
    • US Department of Defense (DoD)
    • US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
    • US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
You are encouraged to broaden your knowledge and explore deﬁnitions by these organizations.
You should then select one that best ﬁts your business application. Depending on your personal
viewpoints and needs, the deﬁnition stated in this text should prove to be the most descriptive
characterization.

Closing Point
When people develop deﬁnitions, they attempt to create content and grammar simultaneously.
People typically spend a disproportionate amount of time on grammar and spend very little time
on substantive content. We see this in speciﬁcations and plans, for example. Grammar is impor-
20   Chapter 3   What Is a System?

tant, since it is the root of our language and communications. However, wordsmithed grammar has
no value if it lacks substantive content.
     You will be surprised how animated and energized people become over wording exercises.
Subsequently, they throw up their hands and walk away. For highly diverse terms such as a system,
a good deﬁnition may sometimes be simply a bulleted list of descriptors concerning what a term
is or, perhaps, is not. So, if you or your team attempts to create your own deﬁnition, perform one
step at a time. Obtain consensus on the key elements of substantive content. Then, structure the
statement in a logical sequence and translate the structure into grammar.

3.3 LEARNING TO RECOGNIZE TYPES OF SYSTEMS

Systems occur in a number of forms and vary in composition, hierarchical structure, and behavior.
Consider the next high-level examples.


 EXAMPLE 3.1

• Economic systems                               • Communications systems
• Educational systems                            • Entertainment systems
• Financial systems                              • Government systems
• Environmental systems                              Legislative systems
• Medical systems                                    Judicial systems
• Corporate systems                                  Revenue systems
• Insurance systems                                  Taxation systems
• Religious systems                                  Licensing systems
• Social systems                                     Military systems
• Psychological systems                              Welfare systems
• Cultural systems                                   Public safety systems
• Food distribution systems                          Parks and recreation systems
• Transportation systems                             Environmental systems

If we analyze these systems, we ﬁnd that they produce combinations of products, by-products, or
services. Further analysis reveals most of these fall into one or more classes such as individual
versus organizational; formal versus informal; ground-based, sea-based, air-based, space-based, or
hybrid; human-in-the-loop (HITL) systems, open loop versus closed loop; and ﬁxed, mobile, and
transportable systems.

3.4 DELINEATING SYSTEMS, PRODUCTS, AND TOOLS

People often confuse the concepts of systems, products, and tools. To facilitate our discussion, let’s
examine each of these terms in detail.

System Context
We deﬁned the term system earlier in this section. A system may consist of two or more integrated
elements whose combined—synergistic—purpose is to achieve mission objectives that may not be
effectively or efﬁciently accomplished by each element on an individual basis. These systems typ-
ically include humans, products, and tools to varying degrees. In general, human-made systems
require some level of human resources for planning, operation, intervention, or support.
                                                        3.5 Precedented Versus Unprecedented Systems          21

Product Context
Some systems are created as a work product by other systems. Let’s deﬁne the context of product:
a product, as an ENABLING element of a larger system, is typically a physical device or entity
that has a speciﬁc capability—form, ﬁt, and function—with a speciﬁed level of performance.
     Products generally lack the ability—meaning intelligence—to self-apply themselves without
human assistance. Nor can products achieve the higher level system mission objectives without
human intervention in some form. In simple terms, we often relate to equipment-based products as
items you can procure from a vendor via a catalog order number. Contextually, however, a product
may actually be a vendor’s “system” that is integrated into a User’s higher-level system. Effectively,
you create a system of systems (SoS).


 EXAMPLE 3.1
A hammer, as a procurable product has form, ﬁt, and function but lacks the ability to apply its self to ham-
mering or removing nails.



 EXAMPLE 3.2
A jet aircraft, as a system and procurable vendor product, is integrated into an airline’s system and may possess
the capability, when programmed and activated by the pilot under certain conditions, to ﬂy.


Tool Context
Some systems or products are employed as tools by higher level systems. Let’s deﬁne what we
mean by a tool. A tool is a supporting product that enables a user or system to leverage its own
capabilities and performance to more effectively or efﬁciently achieve mission objectives that
exceed the individual capabilities of the User or system.


 EXAMPLE 3.3
A simple fulcrum and pivot, as tools, enable a human to leverage their own physical strength to displace a
rock that otherwise could not be moved easily by one human.



 EXAMPLE 3.4
A statistical software application, as a support tool, enables a statistician to efﬁciently analyze large amounts
of data and variances in a short period of time.


3.5 PRECEDENTED VERSUS UNPRECEDENTED SYSTEMS

Most human-made systems evolve over time. Each new evolution of a system extends and expands
the capabilities of the previous system by leveraging new or advanced technologies, methods, tools,
techniques, and so forth. There are, however, instances where system operating environments or
needs pose new challenges that are unprecedented. We refer to these as precedented and unprece-
dented systems. Although we tend to think in terms of the legal system and its precedents, there
are also precedents in physical systems, products, and services.
22    Chapter 3   What Is a System?

3.6 ANALYTICAL REPRESENTATION OF A SYSTEM

As an abstraction we symbolically represent a system as a simple entity by using a rectangular box
as shown in Figure 3.1. In general, inputs such as stimuli and cues are fed into a system that
processes the inputs and produces an output. As a construct, this symbolism is acceptable; however,
the words need to more explicitly identify WHAT the system performs. That is, the system must
add value to the input in producing an output.
     We refer to the transformational processing that adds value to inputs and produces an output
as a capability. You will often hear people refer to this as the system’s functionality; this is par-
tially correct. Functionality only represents the ACTION to be accomplished; not HOW WELL as
characterized by performance. This text employs capability as the operative term that encompasses
both the functionality and performance attributes of a system.
     The simple diagram presented in Figure 3.1 represents a system. However, from an analytical
perspective, the diagram is missing critical information that relates to how the system operates and
performs within its operating environment. Therefore, we expand the diagram to identify these
missing elements. The result is shown in Figure 3.2. The attributes of the construct—which include
desirable/undesirable inputs, stakeholders, and desirable/undesirable outputs—serve as a key
checklist to ensure that all contributory factors are duly considered when specifying, designing, and
developing a system.




Input(s)                     System Entity                         Output Response(s)
                                 Processing
 · Stimuli                                                           · Products
 · Cues                                                              · By-Products
                                                                     · Services
Figure 3.1 Basic System Entity Construct



                                Roles,
                              Missions, &       Resources
     Stakeholders             Objectives
                                                        Controls



                               System Entity                    Acceptable Outputs
 Acceptable Inputs
                           (Any Level of Abstraction)
                                                                Unacceptable Outputs
Unacceptable Inputs      • Attributes       • Products
                         • Capabilities     • By-Products
                         • Performance      • Services




                      Opportunities Threats        Physical
                                                  Constraints
Figure 3.2 Analytical System Entity Construct
                                                            3.7 Systems That Require Engineering    23

3.7 SYSTEMS THAT REQUIRE ENGINEERING

Earlier we listed examples of various types of systems. Some of these systems are workﬂow-based
systems that produce systems, products, or services such as schools, hospitals, banking systems,
and manufacturers. As such, they require insightful, efﬁcient, and effective organizational structures,
supporting assets, and collaborative interactions.
     Some systems require the analysis, design, and development of specialized structures, complex
interactions, and performance monitoring that may have an impact on the safety, health, and well-
being of the public as well as the environment, engineering of systems may be required. As you
investigate WHAT is required to analyze, design, and develop both types of systems, you will ﬁnd
that they both share a common set concepts, principles, and practices. Business systems, for
example, may require application of various analytical and mathematical principles to develop busi-
ness models and performance models to determine proﬁtability and return on investment (ROI) and
statistical theory for optimal waiting line or weather conditions, for example. In the case of highly
complex systems, analytical, mathematical, and scientiﬁc principles may have to be applied. We
refer to this as the engineering of systems, which may require a mixture of engineering disciplines
such as system engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, and software engi-
neering. These disciplines may only be required at various stages during the analysis, design, and
development of a system, product, or service.
     This text provides the concepts, principles, and practices that apply to the analysis, design, and
development of both types of systems. On the surface these two categories imply a clear distinc-
tion between those that require engineering and those that do not. So, how do you know when the
engineering of systems is required?
     Actually these two categories represent a continuum of systems, products, or services that range
from making a piece of paper, which can be complex, to developing a system as complex as an
aircraft carrier or NASA’s International Space Station (ISS). Perhaps the best way to address the
question: What is system engineering?

What Is System Engineering?
Explicitly SE is the multidisciplinary engineering of systems. However, as with any deﬁnition, the
response should eliminate the need for additional clarifying questions. Instead, the engineering of
a system response evokes two additional questions: What is engineering? What is a system? Pur-
suing this line of thought, let’s explore these questions further.

Deﬁning Key Terms
Engineering students often graduate without being introduced to the root term that provides the
basis for their formal education. The term, engineering originates from the Latin word ingenerare,
which means “to create.” Today, the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET),
which accredits engineering schools in the United States, deﬁnes the term as follows:
    • Engineering “[T]he profession in which knowledge of the mathematical and natural sci-
      ences gained by study, experience, and practice is applied with judgment to develop ways
      to utilize economically the materials and forces of nature for the beneﬁt of mankind.”
      (Source: Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology [ABET])
There are a number of ways to deﬁne SE, each dependent on an individual’s or organization’s per-
spectives, experiences, and the like. System engineering means different things to different people.
You will discover that even your own views of SE will evolve over time. So, if you have a diver-
24    Chapter 3   What Is a System?

sity of perspectives and deﬁnitions, what should you do? What is important is that you, program
teams, or your organization:
     1. Establish a consensus deﬁnition.
     2. Document the deﬁnition in organizational or program command media to serve as a guide
        for all.
     For those who prefer a brief, high-level deﬁnition that encompasses the key aspects of SE, con-
sider the following deﬁnition:
     • System Engineering (SE) The multidisciplinary application of analytical, mathematical,
       and scientiﬁc principles to formulating, selecting, and developing a solution that has accept-
       able risk, satisﬁes user operational need(s), and minimizes development and life cycle costs
       while balancing stakeholder interests.
This deﬁnition can be summarized in a key SE principle:

Principle 3.1 System engineering BEGINS and ENDS with the User.

SE, as we will see, is one of those terms that requires more than simply deﬁning WHAT SE does;
the deﬁnition must also identify WHO/WHAT beneﬁts from SE. The ABET deﬁnition of engi-
neering, for example, includes the central objective “to utilize, economically, the materials and
forces of nature for the beneﬁt of mankind.”
     Applying this same context to the deﬁnition of SE, the User of systems, products, and serv-
ices symbolizes humankind. However, mankind’s survival is very dependent on a living environ-
ment that supports sustainment of the species. Therefore, SE must have a broader perspective than
simply “for the beneﬁt of mankind.” SE must also ensure a balance between humankind and the
living environment without sacriﬁcing either.


3.8 SUMMARY

This concludes our discussion of what a system is. We deﬁned the term “system” and highlighted the chal-
lenges of deﬁning the term within diverse contexts. We also explored examples of types of systems; distin-
guished between precedented and unprecedented systems and considered the context of systems, products,
and tools.
     We concluded with the identiﬁcation of two categories of systems that produce other systems, products,
or services. Some of these require the engineering of systems or system engineering. Therefore, we deﬁned
engineering, which in combination with the deﬁnition of a system, leads to deﬁning system engineering.
     With this basic understanding, we are now ready to investigate the key attributes, properties, and char-
acteristics that make each system unique.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Create your own deﬁnition of a system. Based on the “system” deﬁnitions provided in this chapter:
   (a) Identify your viewpoint of shortcomings in the deﬁnitions.
   (b) Provide rationale as to why you believe that your deﬁnition overcomes those shortcomings.
   (c) From an historical perspective, identify three precedented systems that were replaced by unprecedented
       systems.
                                                                                        Additional Reading       25

ORGANIZATION CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. How do you and your organization deﬁne a “system”?
2. Do you and your work team have a deﬁnition for a “system”? If not, ask members to independently develop
   their deﬁnition of what a system is. Summarize the results and present individual viewpoints to the team.
   Discuss the results and formulate a consensus deﬁnition. Report the results to your class. What diversity
   of opinions did you observe? What concept or semantic obstacles did the team have to overcome to get to
   consensus?
3. Research the deﬁnitions for system engineering provided in the list below. Compare and contrast these def-
   initions and determine which one best ﬁts your beliefs and experiences?
   (a) AFSCM 375-1
   (b) Former FM 770-1
   (c) Former MIL-STD-499A
   (d) EIA/IS-731.1
   (e) Defense Systems Management College (DSMC)
   (f) International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE)
   (g) International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
4. For the system, product, or service your organization produces, identify constituent products and tools (e.g.,
   external systems) required to create or support it.
5. Identify the paradigms you observe in your: (a) organization, (b) customers, and (c) business domain that
   inﬂuence system or product design. For each paradigm, what are the characteristic phrases stakeholders
   use that make the paradigm self-evident.
6. How does your organization view and deﬁne SE?
7. How does the author’s deﬁnition of SE compare with your experiences?
8. What challenges and paradigms does your organization or program face in deﬁning SE?



REFERENCE

Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET). Baltimore, MD. URL: www.abet.org



ADDITIONAL READING

ANSI/EIA 632-1999 Standard. 1999. Processes for Engi-         10th ed. Defense Acquisition University Press. Ft.
  neering Systems. Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA).      Belvoir, VA.
  Arlington, VA.                                           International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE).
Blanchard, B.S. 1998. System Engineering Management.          1993. Identiﬁcation of Pragmatic Principles—Final
  New York: Wiley.                                            Report. SE Practice Working Group, Subgroup on Prag-
Blanchard, B.S., and W.J. Fabrycky. 1990. Systems Engi-       matic Principles. Seattle, WA.
  neering and Analysis, 2d ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:       IEEE 1220-1998. 1998. IEEE Standard for Application and
  Prentice-Hall.                                              Management of the Systems Engineering Process. Insti-
Buede, Dennis M. 2000. The Engineering Design of              tute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New
  Systems: Models and Methods. New York: Wiley.               York, NY.
FM 770-78. 1979. System Engineering Field Manual.          MIL-STD-498 (canceled). 1994. Software Development
  Washington, DC: Headquarters of Department of the           and Documentation. Washington, DC: Department of
  Army.                                                       Defense.
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.           MIL-STD-499B (canceled draft). Systems Engineering.
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms,           Washington, DC: Department of Defense. 1994.
26    Chapter 3    What Is a System?

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASD-100 Architec-   Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.
   ture and System Engineering. 2003. National Air Space     Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Defense Acquisition
   System—Systems Engineering Manual. Washington, DC.        University Press. Ft. Belvoir, VA.
International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE).     NASA SP-6105. 1995. System Engineering Handbook.
   2000. System Engineering Handbook. Version 2.0. Wash-     Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space
   ington, DC.                                               Administration.
Sage, Andrew P. 1995. Systems Management for Infor-
   mation Technology and Software Engineering. New York:
   Wiley.
Chapter              4

     System Attributes, Properties,
     and Characteristics

4.1 INTRODUCTION

System engineering requires development of a strong foundation in understanding how to charac-
terize a system, product, or service in terms of its attributes, properties, and performance.
     This Chapter introduces system attributes that are common across most natural and human-
made systems. Our discussions address these attributes in terms of a framework that Acquirers
can use as a checklist for system speciﬁcations and System Developers/Service Providers can use
to assess the adequacy of those speciﬁcations. The intent is to enable you to learn how to: 1) THINK
about, 2) ORGANIZE, and 3) CHARACTERIZE systems. This knowledge equips SEs and
system analysts in two ways. First, when you analyze and evaluate speciﬁcations, checklists of
commonly used attributes, properties, and characteristics enable us to perform a reality check
and identify any “holes” in speciﬁcation requirements. Second, when we develop speciﬁcations, it
provides a reference checklist for organizing and specifying key capabilities and their levels of
performance.
     Based on this Introduction, let’s identify what you should learn from the chapter’s discussions.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What is a system attribute?
     2. What is a system property?
     3. What is a system characteristic?
     4. What makes a system, product, or service unique?
     5. Understanding categories of system, product, or service performance
     6. What are some types of system characteristics?
     7. What constitutes a system’s state of equilibrium?

Deﬁnition of Key Terms
     • Capability An explicit, inherent feature activated or excited by an external stimulus to
       perform a function (action) at a speciﬁed level of performance until terminated by external
       commands, timed completion, or resource depletion.



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                  27
28    Chapter 4   System Attributes, Properties, and Characteristics

     • Fit An item’s compatibility to interface with another item within a prescribed set of limits
       with ease and without interference.
     • Form An item’s prescribed shape intended to support one or more interface boundary
       objectives.
     • Form, Fit, and Function “In conﬁguration management, that conﬁguration comprising the
       physical and functional characteristics of an item as an entity, but not including any charac-
       teristics of the elements making up the item.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
     • Function An operation, activity, process, or action performed by a system element to
       achieve a speciﬁc objective within a prescribed set of performance limits. Functions involve
       work—such as to move a force through a distance, analyze and process information, trans-
       form energy or physical properties, make decisions, conduct communications, and inter-
       operate with other OPERATING ENVIRONMENT systems.
     • Functional Attributes “Measurable performance parameters including reliability, main-
       tainability, and safety.” (Source: ANSI/EIA-649-1998, para. 3.0, p. 5)
     • Level of Performance An objective, measurable parameter that serves to bound the ability
       of a system to perform a function based on a set of scenario assumptions, initial conditions,
       and operating conditions. Examples include system effectiveness, PERSONNEL Element
       proﬁciency, and system efﬁciency.
     • Performance “A quantitative measure characterizing a physical or functional attribute relat-
       ing to the execution of an operation or function.” (ANSI/IEEE 649-1998, para. 3.0, p.5)
          “Performance attributes include: quantity (how many or how much), quality (how well),
       coverage (how much area, how far), timeliness (how responsive, how frequent), and readi-
       ness (availability, mission/operational readiness).” (ANSI/IEEE 649-1998, para. 3.0, p. 5)
     • Physical Attributes “Quantitative and qualitative expressions of material features, such as
       composition, dimensions, ﬁnishes, form, ﬁt, and their respective tolerances.” (Source: ANSI/
       EIA-649-1998, Section 3.0, p. 6)


4.2 OVERVIEW OF ATTRIBUTES, PROPERTIES,
AND CHARACTERISTICS

You will often hear people refer to a system’s attributes, properties, and characteristics. To the
casual observer who researches the deﬁnitions of these terms, most dictionaries deﬁne these terms
by referencing the other. For purposes of our discussions, we will employ the following as a means
of delineating the differences between the terms.

Attributes
The term attributes classiﬁes functional or physical features of a system. Examples include gender;
unit cost; nationality, state, and city of residence; type of sport; organizational position manager;
and ﬁxed wing aircraft versus rotor.

Properties
The term, properties, refers to the mass properties of a system. Examples include composition;
weight; density; and size such as length, width, or height.
                                                           4.4 Understanding System Performance     29

Characteristics
The term characteristics refers to the behavioral and physical qualities that uniquely identify each
system. Behavioral characteristics examples include predictability and responsivity. Physical char-
acteristics examples include equipment warm-up and stabilization proﬁles; equipment thermal sig-
natures; aircraft radar crosssections; vehicle acceleration to cruise speed, handling, or stopping; and
whale ﬂuke markings.
     The sum of a system’s attributes, properties, and characteristics uniquely identiﬁes and dis-
tinguishes a system, product, or service from others of the same classiﬁcation. To illustrate this
uniqueness, let’s explore a few aspects that are common to most systems.


4.3 EVERY SYSTEM HAS ITS OWN UNIQUE IDENTITY

All natural and human-made systems have their own attributes (traits) that uniquely characterize,
for example, their roles, behavioral patterns, temperament, and appearance, even within the same
species. In general, key attributes of uniqueness include the following items, which are described
in Table 4.1.


4.4 UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM PERFORMANCE

In general, system performance is the main factor that determines the ultimate level of success of
a system. System functionality is often viewed as the “qualifying criterion” for systems perform-
ance. From the user’s perspective, will the system be operationally effective in accomplishing its
mission and objectives? Let’s begin our discussion by deﬁning “performance.”

Categories of Performance
When you investigate systems, you soon discover two basic categories of performance: 1) objec-
tive performance and 2) subjective performance. Let’s deﬁne these terms:
    • Objective Performance Performance that produces measurable physical evidence of
      system effectiveness based on pre-deﬁned criteria. For example, the temperature of the water
      is 108°F.
    • Subjective Performance Performance indicated by a subjective quality that varies by indi-
      vidual sensory values, interpretations, or perspectives. For example, is the water “warm or
      hot”?
Given these deﬁnitions, let’s examine each performance category in greater detail.

Objective Performance
From an SE perspective, especially in writing speciﬁcations, a system’s capabilities and expected
levels of performance must be speciﬁed with clear, unambiguous, quantiﬁable, measurable, testable,
and veriﬁable parameters without the inﬂuence of subjective interpretations. Examples of objective
performance include:
30    Chapter 4    System Attributes, Properties, and Characteristics

Table 4.1 Descriptions of system attributes, properties, and characteristics

ID        Attribute                                       Description

1    System                Every system has at least one or more benefactors such as owners,
     benefactors           administrators, operators, and maintainers, who beneﬁt from its behavior,
                           products, by-products, or services.
2    System life           Every system, product, and service has a life cycle that depicts its level of
     cycle                 maturity.
3    System                Every system has an operating domain or “sphere of inﬂuence” that bounds its
     operating             area of coverage, operations, and effectiveness. Humans have learned to extend
     domain                the area of coverage by employing other assets that enable a speciﬁc system to
                           “amplify” its range.
                           EXAMPLE 4.1 An aircraft has a speciﬁc range under speciﬁc operating
                           conditions such as fuel, payload, and weather. Deploying refueling sources—
                           airborne tankers—and maintenance facilities along its mission ﬂight path can
                           extend the range.
4    System frame of       Every system at any point in time has a frame of reference that serves as the
     reference             permanent or temporary:
                           1. Base of operations for its operating domain.
                           2. Basis for navigation.
                           EXAMPLE 4.2 An aircraft may be assigned to a permanent home base that
                           serves as the center of its operations. The aircraft may be ordered to perform
                           special (temporary) assignments from a base in Europe. The Apollo Space
                           Program used the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) and the Earth as its frame of
                           reference.
5    Higher order          Every system:
     systems               1. Operates as part of a higher order system that may govern, direct, constrain,
                              or control its operation and performance.
                           2. Provides resources for missions.
6    Purpose-based         Viewing the universe as a “system of systems (SOS),” every natural and man-
     role                  made system has a beneﬁcial role based on a reason for its existence as
                           envisioned by its original Acquirer or System Owner.
7    System missions       Every system performs missions in fulﬁllment of its purpose to achieve outcome-
                           based performance objectives established by its owner and Users.
8    Mission goals         Each system and mission must be characterized by a set of goals and
     and                   objectives, preferably documented. Goals and objectives provide the
     performance           fundamental basis for resource expenditures by the system owner and
     objectives            shareholders based on a planned set of multifaceted accomplishments and an
                           expected return on investment(ROI). Each goal must be supported by one or
                           more speciﬁc objectives that are quantiﬁable, measurable, testable, and
                           veriﬁable.
9    System                Every system, in execution of its mission, is subjected to a set of
     operating             operating constraints and conditions controlled by higher order
     constraints and       systems.
     conditions
10   System utility        Every system must provide a physical, psychological, sociological, ﬁnancial, and
                           economic value-added utility to its User. System utility includes ease of use,
                           usefulness, etc.

                                                                                                   (continued)
                                                           4.4 Understanding System Performance            31

Table 4.1 continued

ID       Attribute                                   Description

11   System           Every system has a level of operational suitability to the User in terms of suiting
     suitability      its planned application and integration into the users organizational system.
                      EXAMPLE 4.3 A gas-powered lawn edger is suitable for cutting grass around
                      trees and ﬂower gardens; they are not, however, suitable for mowing lawns
                      unless you do not own a lawn mower.
12   System success   Each system and mission requires a set of success criteria that the system owner
     criteria         and shareholders agree represent WHAT objective criteria constitute successful
                      accomplishment of a mission via goals and results-oriented objectives. Ultimate
                      success resides in User acceptance and level of satisfaction.
13   Mission          Every system is characterized by a probability of success in accomplishing
     reliability      mission objectives for a speciﬁed mission duration and set of operating
                      environment conditions and scenarios.
14   System           Every system has some level of cost and technical effectiveness related to
     effectiveness    accomplishing the system’s mission with an anticipated probability of success
                      per unit of cost.
                      EXAMPLE 4.4 Consider the system effectiveness of an educational system or a
                      health care system. The challenge is: Effectiveness from WHAT stakeholder’s
                      perspective?
15   System           Every system has a degree of efﬁciency in processing raw materials, information,
     efﬁciency        stimuli, cues, etc. As engineers, we assign an efﬁciency metric that provides a
                      ratio of the quantity of output produced for a known quantity on input.
16   System           Every system has a level of integrity in its ability to deliver systems, products,
     integrity        and services as required despite operating constraints and conditions.
17   System           To ensure success in accomplishing its mission, every system, product, or service
     sustainment      requires resources such as personnel, funding, consumables, expendables;
                      corrective and preventive maintenance; and support such as spares, supplies, and
                      training.
18   System           Some systems, namely businesses, promote their systems in anticipation of sales
     promotion        via demonstrations, advertising, etc. The promotion activities may require
                      protection and security.
                      EXAMPLE 4.5 A publisher plans to release a new book in a series on a speciﬁc
                      day and time, promote the book via advertising, and impose sale constraints and
                      conditions on bookstore owners. The bookstore owners must keep the book
                      under lock and key (protection) with 24 hour surveillance (security) until the
                      ofﬁcial release.
19   System threats   Every system and its missions may be threatened by competitors or adversaries
                      in its operating environment that may exhibit friendly, benign, or hostile
                      intentions or actions.
20   System           Because of vulnerabilities or the need for the element of surprise, some systems
     concealment      require camouﬂage or concealment to shield or alter their identity.
21   System           Every system must have some level of protection to minimize its vulnerability to
     protection       external threats.

                                                                                               (continued)
32   Chapter 4      System Attributes, Properties, and Characteristics

Table 4.1 continued

ID       Attribute                                         Description

22   System                 Man-made systems may maintain a level of security such as physical security
     security               (PHYSEC), communications security (COMSEC), operational security (OPSEC),
                            and information security (INFOSEC).
23   System                 Every system consists of a multi-level, logical (functional) and physical structure
     architecture           or architecture that provides the framework for its form, ﬁt, and function.
24   System                 Every system, by deﬁnition, has inherent capabilities such as processing,
     capabilities           strengths, transfer functions that enable it to process inputs such as raw
                            materials, information, and stimuli and to provide a response in the form of
                            behavior patterns, products, and by-products.
                            System capabilities, like operating domains, can be extended using tools or
                            other systems.
25   System concept         Every system has a Concept of Operations (ConOps) as envisioned by its system
     of operations          owner, system developer, and/or system maintainer. The ConOps provides the
     (Con Ops)              basis for bounding the operating space, system capabilities, interfaces, and
                            operating environment.
26   System phases,         For each system/product life cycle phase, every system, product, or service
     modes, and states      evolves through a series of phases, modes, and state of operation that may be
     of operation           cyclical or nonrecurring (single use).
27   Operating              Every system employs a set of operating norms, standards, and conventions that
     norms,                 governs its operations, morals, ethics, and tolerances.
     standards, and
     conventions
28   System                 Every system should have a system description that characterizes the system
     description            architecture, its elements, interfaces, etc. Each of these characteristics is
                            represented by system capabilities and engineering performance parameters that
                            must be captured and articulated as requirements in the System Performance
                            Speciﬁcation (SPS).
29   System                 Every system has operating constraints and conditions that may be physical
     operating              (capabilities), imposed by higher order authority—international, governmental,
     constraints and        environmental, social, economic, ﬁnancial, psychological, etc.
     conditions
30   System sensors         Every natural and human-made system possesses some form of sensor that
                            enables it to detect external stimuli and cues.
31   System behavior        Every system is characterized by patterns of behavior.
     patterns
32   System                 Every system possesses performance-based behavioral characteristics, such as
     responsiveness         throughput, that characterize its ability to process raw materials or stimuli and
     and sensitivity        provide a response. We refer to the quickness as its responsivity.
                            EXAMPLE 4.8 Accelerator boards enable computer processors to improve
                            responsiveness.
33   System                 Every system has internal and external interfaces that enable it to interact within
     interfaces             itself and its operating environment.
34   System pedigree        Every system has a pedigree derived from predecessor system designs,
                            technologies, and improvements to those designs to correct for ﬂaws, defects,
                            deﬁciencies, errors, etc.

                                                                                                    (continued)
                                                              4.4 Understanding System Performance          33

Table 4.1 continued

ID       Attribute                                      Description

35   Mission             Every system requires inputs such as tasking, expendables, consumables, and
     resources           operator actions that can be transformed into speciﬁc actions required to
     (system inputs)     stimulate motivate, maneuver, process, and output behavioral and physical
                         responses.
36   System              Every system produces:
     products,           1. Value-added products and/or performs services that beneﬁt its stakeholders
     services, and       2. By-products that may impact system performance and/or its operating
     by-products            environment.
                         EXAMPLE 4.9 By-products include heat, waste products—trash, exhaust,
                         thermal signatures, and colorations.
37   Procedural data     Every human-made system requires procedural data that describe safe operating
                         procedures related to equipment, services, and operator interfaces and
                         interfaces with external systems.
38   System lethality    Some defensive and offensive systems are characterized by their lethality—their
                         potential to destroy or inﬂict damage, disable, neutralize, or otherwise cause
                         harm to a threat or target.
39   System              Every system has some form vulnerability that exposes uncertainties or
     vulnerability       shortcomings in its behavioral and physical characteristics. Vulnerability
                         includes physical, psychological, social, economic, security, privacy, and other
                         factors.
                         EXAMPLE 4.10 Military tanks have additional layers of protection to
                         minimize the impacts of direct hits. Internet sites have vulnerabilities to
                         computer “hackers.”
40   System              Every system has degrees of fault tolerance that enable it to perform missions
     survivability       and achieve mission objectives while operating at a degraded level of
                         performance for a given set of internal or external induced or malfunctions.
41   System              The state of a system’s operational readiness to perform a mission on-demand.
     availability        Availability is a function of the system’s reliability and maintainability.
42   System              Every system possesses psychological or appearance characteristics that appeal
     aesthetics          to the senses or are aesthetically pleasing to its stakeholders.
43   System              Every system is unique in its development. This includes design ﬂaws and
     blemishes           errors, work quality and material defects, imperfections, etc., that may impact
                         system performance or cosmetically diminish its value based on appearance.
44   Risk                Every system, product, or service has an element of risk related to mission
                         operations and its operating environment that include:
                         1. Probability of occurrence.
                         2. Consequence(s) of failure.
45   System              Every human-made system, at various stages of the system/product life cycle,
     environmental,      may pose environmental, safety, or health risks to system personnel—operators
     safety, and         and maintainers, private and public property, the environment, etc.
     health (ES&H)
46   System health       Every system has an operational health status that represents its current state of
     status              readiness to perform or support User missions.
47   System total cost   Every human-made system has a total ownership cost (TOC) over its life cycle
     of ownership        that includes nonrecurring and recurring development operational costs.
34    Chapter 4   System Attributes, Properties, and Characteristics

     • Time                              • Angle                         • Maintainability
     • Distance                          • Displacement                  • Reliability
     • Size                              • Velocity                      • Productivity
     • Length                            • Acceleration                  • Effectiveness
     • Depth                             • Thrust                        • Efﬁciency
     • Thickness                         • Hardness                      • Temperature
     • Weight                            • Softness                      • Pressure
     • Volume                            • Horsepower                    • Humidity
     • Density                           • Viscosity                     • Number of errors
     • Physical state                    • Frequency                     • Field of view
     • Cost                              • Intensity                     • Resolution
     • Voltage                           • Wavelength                    • Defects
     • Amperage



These are just a few examples of objective performance parameters. Now let’s investigate the other
type, subjective performance.

Subjective Performance
Subjective performance is more difﬁcult to characterize and quantify. Interestingly, we can assign
arbitrary quantities to subjective performance parameters that are measurable, testable, and veriﬁ-
able via surveys and interviews, tests. However, when the survey or interview participants are asked
to indicate their degree of preference, agreement, and like/dislike with the measurable statement,
the response still requires interpretation, value judgment, opinion, and so on. Thus, the response
may be aliased based on past experience and lessons learned. Subjective performance examples
include:
     • Quality—clarity, appearance, and color
     • Afﬁnity
     • Likeability
     • Opinion
     • Smoothness
     • Satisfaction—enjoyment and taste


4.5 SYSTEM CHARACTERISTICS

When we characterize systems, especially for marketing or analysis, there are four basic types
of characteristics we consider: 1) general characteristics, 2) operating or behavioral characteristics,
3) physical characteristics, and 4) system aesthetics.

General Characteristics
The high-level features of a system are its general characteristics. We often see general charac-
teristics stated in marketing brochures where key features are emphasized to capture a client or cus-
                                                                           4.5 System Characteristics     35

tomer’s interest. General characteristics often have some commonality across multiple instances or
models of a system. Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 4.12
• Automobile General Characteristics Available in two-door or four-door models; convertible or sedan; air-
  conditioned comfort; independent suspension; tinted windows, 22mpg city, 30mpg highway.
• Aircraft General Characteristics Fanjet, 50-passenger, 2000 nautical mile range, IFR capabilities.
• Enterprise or Organization General Characteristics 200 employees; staff with 20 PhD, 50 Master, and
  30 BS degrees; annual sales of $500 M per annum.
• Network General Characteristics Client-server architecture, PC and Unix platforms, ﬁrewall security, remote
  dial-up access, Ethernet backbone, network ﬁle structure (NFS).


Operating or Behavioral Characteristics
At a level of detail below the general characteristics, systems have operating characteristics that
describe system features related to usability, survivability, and performance for a prescribed oper-
ating environment. Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 4.17
• Automobile Operating Characteristics Maneuverability, turn radius of 18 ft, 0 to 60 mph in 6 seconds, etc.
• Aircraft Operating Characteristics All-weather application, speed, etc.
• Network Operating Characteristics Authorization, access time, latency, etc.


Physical Characteristics
Every system is described by physical characteristics that relate to nonfunctional attributes such
as size, weight, color, capacity, and interface attributes. Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 4.13
• Automobile Physical Characteristics 2000 lbs, curb weight 14.0 cu ft of cargo volume, 43.1 of inches
  (max). of front leg room, 17.1 gals fuel capacity, 240 horsepower engine at 6250 rpm, turbo, available in
  10 colors.
• Enterprise or Organization Physical Characteristics 5000 sq ft of ofﬁce space, 15 networked computers,
  100,000 sq ft warehouse.
• Network Physical Characteristics 1.0 Mb Ethernet backbone, topography, routers, gateways.


System Aesthetic Characteristics
General, operating, and physical characteristics are objective performance parameters. However,
what about subjective characteristics? We refer to these as system aesthetic characteristics because
they relate to the “look and feel” of a system. Obviously, this includes psychological, sociological,
and cultural perspectives that relate to appealing to the User’s, Acquirer’s, or System Owner’s pref-
erences. Thus, some buyers make independent decisions, while others are inﬂuenced by external
systems (i.e., other buyers) in matters relating to community or corporate status, image, and the
like.
36    Chapter 4   System Attributes, Properties, and Characteristics

4.6 THE SYSTEM’S STATE OF EQUILIBRIUM

Every natural and human-made system exists in a state of equilibrium relative to its operating envi-
ronment. In general, we refer to this as the “balance of power.” The state of equilibrium depends
on how a system exists through its own: 1) level of dominance or 2) subordination by other systems.
At any instance of time, a system is typically described by an INITIAL STATE—with conditions,
statics, dynamics, strengths, weaknesses, or stabilization—and a FINAL STATE—with behavior,
product, by-product, or service-oriented result controlled by the balance of power.

Prerequisite Conditions
System stability, integrity, and consistency of performance require that transitions between system
phases, operations, and tasks have clean unambiguous transitions with no ramiﬁcations. Thus,
systems are assumed by designers to have pre-requisite or initial conditions or criteria that must
be accomplished prior to entering the next phase, operation, or task. By deﬁnition, since a system
is composed of a set of integrated elements, this is important to ensure that all elements of the
system are synchronized and harmonized.

Initial Operating Conditions and State
A system’s initial operating conditions consist of the physical and operational states of the system
and its surrounding operating environment at the beginning of a system mission phase, operation,
or task. Since analyses often require the establishment of basic assumptions for investigating some
facet of system phases, operations, or task, initial conditions serve as a “snapshot” or starting point
that captures the assumptions. To illustrate this concept, consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 4.14
The aircraft took off in a crosswind of 35 knots; the early morning rush hour began as a blizzard with 30 mph
windgusts moved through the area.

Statics
When we analyze systems, a key basis for the analysis is often the physical state of the system at
a given “snapshot of time.” Statics are used to characterize a system’s current orientation, such as
state vector or orientation within a larger system. From an overall system perspective, an aircraft
sitting in a hanger, an automobile in a driveway, a network computer system with no message trafﬁc,
and a lighting system in the ON or OFF state, all represent a system in its static state. In contrast,
lower level system components may have a static condition while the system as a whole is in a
dynamic condition.

Mission Dynamics
Every natural and man-made system conducts missions in its operating environment in some form
of dynamic, physical state. Dynamics are a time-based characterization of system statics over a
deﬁned timeframe within its operating environment. The dynamics may range from slow changes—
rock anchored on a hillside—to moderate changes—temperature variations—to violent, sudden
changes—earthquakes or volcanoes.
     Dynamics occur as inconsistencies, perturbations, and instabilities in the balance of power in
the local or global environment. Mankind has always been intrigued by the study of dynamics and
                                                                                       General Exercises      37

their effect on behavior patterns—of the Earth, weather, oceans, stock market, and people—espe-
cially when its comes to predicting dynamic behavior that can have devastating economic or safety
impacts. Thus, predicting the advancement of the state of the practice and technology is big busi-
ness. Why? We need to be able to conﬁdently predict how a system will behave and perform under
speciﬁed—dynamic—operating conditions.

System Stabilization
All natural and man-made systems must maintain a level of stability to ensure their longevity.
Otherwise, the system can easily become unstable and potentially become a threat to itself and
surrounding systems. Therefore, systems should have inherent design characteristics that enable
them to stabilize and control their responses to dynamic, external stimuli.
     Stabilization is ultimately dependent on having some form of calibrated reference that is stable,
dependent, and reliable. For man-made systems, stabilization is achieved by employing devices
such as inertial navigation gyroscopes, global positioning satellites (GPS), quartz crystals for
electronic watches, and reference diodes for voltage regulators. In each of these cases, the system
stabilization is accomplished by sensing current free body dynamics; comparing them with a
known, calibrated reference source; and initiating system feedback control actions to correct any
variations.

The Balance of Power
Taking all of these elements into account, system existence and survival are determined by its ability
to: 1) cope with the statics and dynamics of its operating environment and 2) sustain a level of
capability and stabilization that harmonizes with its adjacent systems—the balance of power or
state of equilibrium.


4.7 SUMMARY

Our discussion in this chapter introduced the concept of system attributes, properties, and characteristics. Top-
ically, this information provides the foundation for: 1) characterizing an existing system’s capabilities and
2) serves as an initial checklist for developing or assessing speciﬁcations.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Identify the following:
   (a) Examples of the selected system’s unique identity via system mission, goals, and objectives.
   (b) Types of mission operations attributes.
   (c) General, operating, physical, and system aesthetic attributes.
3. What is the frame of reference and operating domain for your: (a) business organization and (b) systems,
   products, or the services it provides?
4. Using any system, product, or service your organization provides, identify the human system roles for the
   product.
38    Chapter 4    System Attributes, Properties, and Characteristics

REFERENCES

IEEE Std 610.12–1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of       ANSI/IEEE 649-1998. 1998. National Consensus Standard
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-    for Conﬁguration Management. Electronic Industries
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) New York, NY.       Alliance.
Chapter              5

     System Roles and Stakeholders

5.1 INTRODUCTION

Every system within the universe has a purpose or mission. In other words, every system has a
reason for its existence relative to other systems. Most human-made systems are directed toward
contributing to and achieving the “owner” organization’s roles, missions, and objectives. Each
system performs a role within the owner system’s overall role. This section introduces the concept
of system roles and stakeholders. We explore the roles of organizations that employ systems, prod-
ucts, and services and how physical systems—namely assets—are acquired to perform in support
of organizational roles, missions, and objectives.
     The success of man-made systems in achieving success within an organization is determined
by HOW WELL the system is speciﬁed, designed, developed, integrated, veriﬁed, validated, oper-
ated, and supported. This requires that humans, either directly or indirectly, that a vested interest
in the operational effectiveness of the mission results, performance achieved, and outcome of the
system’s mission and objectives. We refer to these individuals as the system stakeholders. We con-
clude this chapter by identifying the primary system stakeholder roles and their contributions, some-
times positive—sometimes negative—to system mission performance and outcomes.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     • What is a system role?
     • What is a MISSION SYSTEM?
     • What is a SUPPORT SYSTEM?
     • Who is a stakeholder?
     • Who are the various stakeholders?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
     • End User An individual or organization that beneﬁts directly from the outcome or results
       of a system, product, or service.
     • Stakeholder An individual or organization that has a vested interest (e.g., friendly, compet-
       itive, or adversarial) in the outcome produced by a system in performing its assigned mission.
     • System User An individual or organization that employs a system, product, or service or
       their by-products for purposes of accomplishing a mission-oriented objective or task. For
       example, a city transportation system employs bus drivers and buses to transport people from
       one location to another. The bus drivers and passengers are categorized as users.

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                  39
40    Chapter 5   System Roles and Stakeholders

5.2 ORGANIZATIONAL SYSTEM ROLES

Organizational systems perform roles that reﬂect their chartered missions and objectives within
their business domains. Table 5.1 provides examples of system roles and missions.


5.3 SYSTEM ROLE CONTEXT

Every man-made system performs mission-oriented operations and tasks intended to accomplish
speciﬁc performance-based objectives and outcomes to support their customers, the Users and
stakeholders. The conduct of these missions requires two types of operational roles: mission system
and support system.

SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) Entities
If you analyze human-made systems, you discover that EVERY system performs two simultane-
ous, contextual roles: 1) a MISSION SYSTEM role and 2) a SUPPORT SYSTEM role. Let’s deﬁne
each of these roles.

MISSION SYSTEM Role. MISSION SYSTEM roles are performed by systems that are assigned
speciﬁc tasks to deliver products and services that achieve performance-based outcome objectives.
Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 5.1
NASA’s Space Shuttle performs space-based missions to accomplish various scientiﬁc objectives.

Author’s Note 5.1 We should note here that the User may or may not own the MISSION
SYSTEM. In some cases, they do; in other cases, they may contract to other organizations to lease
systems. A trucking company, for example, may lease additional vehicles to perform organizational
missions during a business surge.

SUPPORT SYSTEM Role. SUPPORT SYSTEM roles are performed by systems to ensure that
another MISSION SYSTEM(s) is (are) operationally ready to conduct and support assigned tasks
and to perform subsequent maintenance and training. Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 5.2
An airline’s MISSION SYSTEM consists of the aircraft and crew with an objective to safely and comfortably
transport passengers and cargo between cities. The aircraft’s SUPPORT SYSTEM consists of baggage han-
dlers, mechanics, facilities, ground support equipment (GSE), and others that function in their own MISSION
SYSTEM roles to prepare the aircraft for a safe ﬂight, replenish expendables and consumables, and load/unload
cargo and passenger luggage.



 EXAMPLE 5.3
NASA’s Space Shuttle performs a MISSION SYSTEM role to conduct space-based missions to accomplish
science objectives such as payload bay experiments. As a SUPPORT SYSTEM to the International Space
                                                                              5.3 System Role Context       41

Table 5.1 Example system roles and missions

System Role                                            Role-Based Mission

Legislative           Establish societal compliance guidance and constraints in the form of laws, statutes,
                      regulations, ordinances, policies, etc. that govern other individuals, organizations, or
                      or governmental entities such as cities or states.
Judicial              Adjudicate individual, organizational, or enterprise compliance with established laws,
                      statutes, regulations, ordinances, policies, etc.
Military              Perform cooperative, emergency, peacekeeping, deterrence, and wartime roles that
                      ensure the survival of a country and protect its constitution, security, and sovereignty.
Transportation        Provide transportation services that enable customers and products to move safely
                      and efﬁciently from one location to another by land, sea, air, or space or
                      combinations of these.
Civic                 Perform public services that further the goals and objectives of an organization.
Educational           Provide educational opportunities for people to gain specialized knowledge and
                      enhance their skills to prepare them for becoming contributing members of society.
Resource              Provide resources—time, money, fuel, electricity, etc.—commensurate with
                      performance and risk to support the missions, goals, and objectives of an
                      individual, organization, or enterprise with an expectation of a return on the
                      investment (ROI).
Monitor and           Monitor the performance of other systems, evaluate the performance against
control               established standards, record objective evidence, and control the performance or the
                      other systems.
Research and          Investigate the research and development, productization, or application of new
development           technologies for systems.
Producer              Produce large or mass quantities of a system design in accordance with requirements
                      and standards for the marketplace.
Construction          Provide construction services that enable system developers to implement facilities,
                      sites, etc., that enable Users to deploy, operate, support, train, anddispose of systems.
Agricultural          Provide nutritional food and agricultural by-products to the marketplace that are safe
                      for human and animal consumption and safe for the environment.
Retail or wholesale   Supply consumer products and services to the marketplace.
business
Medical               Provide medical consultation and treatment services.



Station (ISS), the Space Shuttle ferries astronauts and cargo back and forth between the Kennedy Space Center
(KSC) and the ISS.

Referral For more detailed information about the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM
roles, refer to Chapter 13 Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications.

How Do Organizational System Roles Relate to SE?
You may be asking WHY and HOW organizational roles relate to SE and the engineering of systems.
Physical systems, such as hardware, software, and courseware, exist because higher level human
42    Chapter 5   System Roles and Stakeholders

organizations, as Users, employ and leverage physical system capabilities to achieve organizational
goals, missions, and objectives within budgetary cost and schedule constraints.
     As an SE, you must fully comprehend, understand, and appreciate HOW the User intends to
deploy and employ a system in a prescribed operating environment to achieve the organization’s
goals, objectives, and missions.
     For example, How does this guidance relate to an organization’s Transportation Role? If you
are in the airline business, you provide or contract for reservation and ticketing services, check-in
and baggage handling, aircraft, gate facilities, special services, or security. All these entities require
physical systems—as well as hardware and software—to perform the organization’s role. The
organization may:
     1. Develop a system, product, or service.
     2. Procure the system, product, or service from other vendors.
     3. “Outsource” (e.g., contract, lease) for the systems or services.
In any case each system entity is allocated goals, objectives, missions, or performance requirements
that contribute to achieving the organization’s transportation role.
     When an organization, such as an airline, initiates operations, large numbers of humans must
be an integral part of the planning, implementation, and operation activities. Each stakeholder has
a vested interest or stake in the outcomes and successes of the organization’s role and its embed-
ded systems. This brings us to out next topic, understanding the role of system stakeholders.

5.4 UNDERSTANDING THE ROLE OF
SYSTEM STAKEHOLDERS

Human-made systems, from conception through disposal, require human support, both directly and
indirectly. Humans with vested interests in a system, product, or service expect to contribute to the
conceptualization, funding, procurement, design, development, integration, operation, support, and
retirement of every system. We refer to these people as stakeholders. Depending on the size and
complexity of the system, including risks and importance to the User, stakeholder roles may be per-
formed by an individual, an organization, or some higher level enterprise such as a corporation,
government, or country.
     To better understand who stakeholders are, let’s scope and bound the term’s application.

Who Is a System Stakeholder?
A stakeholder is anyone or an organization having a vested interest in a system and its outcomes.
WHO a stakeholder is depends on their role.

System Stakeholder Roles
Every human-made system is supported by human roles with different objectives and agendas that
contribute to the overall longevity and performance of the system throughout its life cycle. Con-
sider the following examples of system roles:
                                                                                    General Exercises    43


 EXAMPLE 5.4
• System advocate or proponent                         • Mission planner
• System shareholder                                   • System analyst
• System owner                                         • System support
• System user(s)                                       • System maintainer
• System architect                                     • System instructor
• System acquirer                                      • System critic
• System developer                                     • System competitor
• Services provider                                    • System adversary
• Independent Test Agency (ITA)                        • System threat
• System administrator



Let’s introduce and deﬁne each of these roles. Table 5.2 provides a brief description of each stake-
holder role.

Understanding the Multiplicity of System Stakeholder Roles
The context of stakeholder roles centers on a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI). Recognize that the
individual, organizations, or enterprises that perform these roles may be stakeholders in other
systems. In fact, stakeholder roles may vary from system to system.


 EXAMPLE 5.6
The System Advocate for your system may serve as a System Owner for numerous systems. Users may employ
several other systems to achieve their own mission goals and objectives. The System Developer may be the
developer of numerous systems and system maintainer of other systems.


5.5 SUMMARY

Our discussion covered the roles of system stakeholders. Each stakeholder has some level of interest in the
outcome and success of the system, product, or service. Based on these interests, system stakeholders become
key sources for system requirements. Stakeholder satisfaction with system performance ultimately determines
system acceptability, our next topic.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) What MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM roles does the system perform?
   (b) Who are the stakeholders for each system.
44     Chapter 5   System Roles and Stakeholders

Table 5.2 System stakeholder role deﬁnitions

Role                                                   Role Description

System             An individual, organization, or enterprise that champions the system’s cause, mission, or
advocate or        reason for existence.
proponent          System advocates may derive tangible or intangible beneﬁts from their support of the
                   system, or they may simply believe the system contributes to some higher level cause
                   that they support.
System             An individual, organization, or enterprise that “owns,” either directly or indirectly, all
shareholder        or equity shares in the system and its development, operation, products, and by-products.
System             An individual, organization, or enterprise that is legally and administratively responsible
owner              and accountable for the system, its development, operation, products, by-products, and
                   outcomes and disposal.
System             An individual, organization, or enterprise that derives direct beneﬁts from a system and/or
user(s)            its products, services, or by-products. Users may physically operate a system or provide
                   inputs—data, materials, raw materials, preprocessed materials, etc.—to the system
                   and await the results of value-added processing in the form of products, services, or
                   information. Users may directly or indirectly include the System Advocate, System
                   Owner, or other Users.
System             An individual, organization, or enterprise that visualizes, conceptualizes, and formulates
architect          the system, system concepts, missions, goals, and objectives. Since SE is viewed as
                   multidisciplined, the system architect role manifests itself via hardware architects,
                   software architects, instructional architects, etc.
System             An agent (or agency) selected by the User to serve as their technical representative to:
acquirer           1. Specify the system.
                   2. Select a System Developer or Services Provider.
                   3. Provide technical assistance.
                   4. Provide contractual oversight for the execution of the contract and delivery of a
                      veriﬁed and validated system to the User.
System             An individual, organization, or enterprise responsible for developing a veriﬁed system
developer          solution based on operational capabilities and performance bounded and speciﬁed in a
                   System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
Services           An individual, organization, or enterprise chartered or contracted to provide services to
provider           operate the system or support its operation.
Independent        An individual, organization, or enterprise responsible for verifying and/or validating that
test agent/        a system will meet the User’s documented operational mission needs for an intended and
agency (ITA)       prescribed operating environment.
System             An individual, organization, or enterprise responsible for the general operation,
administrator      conﬁguration, access, and maintenance of the system.
Mission            An individual, organization, or enterprise that:
planner            1. Translates mission objectives into detailed tactical implementation plans based on
                      situational analysis; system capabilities and performance relative to strengths,
                      weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT)
                   2. Develops a course of action, countermeasures, and required resources to achieve
                      success of the mission and its objectives.

                                                                                                    (continued)
                                                                        Organizational Centric Exercises      45

Table 5.2 continued

Role                                                    Role Description

System            An individual or organization that applies analytical methods and techniques (scientiﬁc,
analyst           mathematical, statistical, ﬁnancial, political, social, cultural, etc.) to provide meaningful
                  data to support informed decision making by mission planners, system operators, and
                  system maintainers.
System            An individual, organization, or enterprise responsible for supporting the system, its
support           capabilities, and/or performance at a sustainment level that ensures successful
                  achievement of the system’s mission and objectives. System support includes activities
                  such as maintenance, training, data, technical manuals, resources, and management.
System            An individual, organization, or enterprise accountable for ensuring that the EQUIPMENT
maintainer        System Element is properly maintained via preventive and corrective maintenance,
                  system upgrades, etc.
System            An individual or organization accountable for training all members of the PERSONNEL
instructor        System Element to achieve a level of performance standard based proﬁciency in
                  achieving the system mission and its objectives.
System critic     An individual, organization, or enterprise with competitive, adversarial, or hostile
                  motivations to publicize the shortcomings of a system to fulﬁll its assigned missions,
                  goals, and objectives in a cost effective, value-added manner and/or believes the system
                  is a threat to some other system for which the System Critic serves as a System Advocate.
System            An individual, organization, or enterprise whose missions, goals, and objectives compete
competitor        to capture similar mission outcomes.
                  EXAMPLE 5.5 Examples include market share, physical space, etc.
System            A hostile individual, organization, or enterprise whose interests, ideology, goals, and
adversary         objectives are:
                  1. Counter to another system’s missions, goals, and/or objectives.
                  2. Exhibits behavioral patterns and actions that appear to be threatening.
System            A competitive, adversarial, or hostile individual, organization, or enterprise actively
threat            planning and/or executing missions, goals, and objectives that are counter to another
                  system’s missions, goals, and/or objectives.




ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Identify a contract program within your organization. Interview the program and technical directors to iden-
   tify the system’s roles and stakeholders, using Table 5.2 as a checklist.
2. Identify a services group within your organization—such as communications, accounting, or contracts.
   Identify the role and stakeholders of the services system using Table 5.2 as a checklist.
3. Using any system, product, or service your organization provides, identify what human system roles the
   product supports.
Chapter              6

     System Acceptability

6.1 INTRODUCTION

The degree of success of any human-made system and its mission(s) ultimately depends on:
     1. Whether the marketplace is ready for introduction of the system—an operational need
        driven “window of opportunity.”
     2. The User’s perception of the system’s operational utility, suitability, and availability.
     3. The system’s ability to accomplish the User’s mission—system effectiveness.
     4. The return on investment (ROI) for the resources expended to operate and maintain the
        system—cost effectiveness.
Most people view system acceptability in a customer satisfaction context. Engineers often shrug it
off as something that can be measured by customer satisfaction surveys AFTER a system or product
has been delivered or distributed to the marketplace. Based on WHAT the organization learns from
the postdelivery surveys, they may improve the system or product if:
     1. The User awards them another contract to correct any deﬁciencies, assuming the deﬁciences
        are not covered by the contract.
     2. Longer term proﬁt projections make internal investment worthwhile.
You should understand the User’s operational needs prior to the system development rather than
from postdelivery surveys. You need to understand:
     1. HOW the User intends to use the system or product.
     2. WHAT measures of success are to be applied?
     3. The consequences and ramiﬁcations of User failure or degrees of success.

Author’s Note 6.1 This topic is seldom addressed by many texts and is typically one of the last
concepts engineers learn. Yet, it is one of the most important concepts. If system developers do not
understand the success criteria for user acceptance, the most elegant designs are worthless. There-
fore, this topic is introduced as part of the System Entity Concepts.

    The four degree of success factors listed at the start of this chapter are seldom optimum simul-
taneously. Though appearing to be equal, psychologically, the subjective measures—namely, per-
ception of operational utility, suitability, and availability (factor 2)—often obscure the objective
measures of system success—system and cost effectiveness (factors 3 and 4).


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

46
                                                                                6.1 Introduction   47

    • Subjective look, feel, and perception within the peer community or by the funding source
      factors often obscure User acceptance that a system may only be partially successful.
    • Conversely, the User for the same subjective reasons may reject an objectively successful
      system.
Ultimately, some event often brings a reality check. A decision to continue with the system may
require an upgrade to correct deﬁciencies or to phase out the system and replace it with a new
system. Operational utility, suitability, availability and effectiveness drive the need to ensure that
SE is an integral part of overall system development from conception through disposal. These
factors thrive as common buzzwords among marketers and are often very difﬁcult to quantify for
implementation. The implementation typically requires specialists that spend entire careers focused
exclusively on quantifying and presenting this information in a manner that is realistic and easily
understood by key decision makers.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
    • What factors inﬂuence system acceptability to Users?
    • Why are system introduction, feasibility, and affordability important?
    • What is meant by the operational utility of a system?
    • What is meant by the operational suitability of a system?
    • What is operational availability?
    • What is meant by the operational effectiveness of a system?
    • What is meant by the cost effectiveness of a system?
    • What is system veriﬁcation?
    • What is system validation?
    • Why are system veriﬁcation and validation important to Users, Acquirers, and System
      Developers?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Measures of Effectiveness (MOE) “A qualitative or quantitative measure of the perform-
      ance of a model or simulation or a characteristic that indicates the degree to which it per-
      forms the task or meets an operational objective or requirement under speciﬁed conditions.”
      (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, Glossary A-
      318, p. 134)
    • Measures of Performance (MOP) “Measures of lowest level of performance representing
      subsets of measures of effectiveness (MOEs). Examples are speed, payload, range, time on
      station, frequency, or other distinctly quantiﬁable performance features.” (Source: DSMC—
      Test & Evaluation Management Guide, Appendix B, Glossary of Test Terminology)
    • Measures of Suitability (MOS) Objective performance measures derived from subjective
      user criteria for assessing a system’s operational suitability to the organizational and mission
      applications.
    • Operational Effectiveness “An operational Test & Evaluation (OT&E) metric that meas-
      ures the overall degree of mission accomplishment of a system when used by representative
      personnel in the environment planned or expected (e.g., natural, electronic, threat) for oper-
      ational employment of the system considering organization, doctrine, tactics, survivability,
      vulnerability, and threat (including countermeasures, initial nuclear weapons effects, nuclear
48    Chapter 6   System Acceptability

       biological, and chemical contamination threats). The operational system that is provided to
       users from the technical effort will be evaluated for operational effectiveness by a service
       OT&E agency. Also a useful metric for operational effectiveness assessments.” (Source:
       INCOSE Handbook, Section 12, Appendix Glossary, p. 36)
     • Operational Suitability “The degree to which a system can be placed satisfactorily in ﬁeld
       use with consideration being given to availability, compatibility, transportability, inter-
       operability, reliability, ... usage rates, maintainability, safety, human factors, manpower sup-
       portability, logistic supportability, natural environmental effects and impacts, documentation,
       and training requirements.” (Source: Adated from DoD Glossary, Defense Acquisition
       Acronyms and Terms)
     • System Effectiveness “A quantitative measure of the extent to which a system can be
       expected to satisfy customer needs and requirements. System effectiveness is a function of
       suitability, dependability, (reliability, availability, maintainability), and capability.” (Source:
       INCOSE Handbook, Section 12, Appendix Glossary, p. 43)

Key Challenges in Developing Systems
Acceptable to Their Users
The success and level of acceptance of a system, product, or service is often measured by a series
of questions that are answered by analysis before a system is developed and by User feedback and
actual results after the system is implemented in the ﬁeld. The questions include:
     1. Is the timing RIGHT for the introduction of a new system? Is the marketplace “mentally
        and emotionally ready” ready for this system, product, or service as driven by operational
        needs?
     2. Is system feasibility sufﬁcient to warrant User/System Developer investments that may result
        in a return on investment (ROI) at a later date?
     3. Does the proposed system have OPERATIONALLY UTILITY to the User relative to their
        organizational missions and objectives?
     4. Is the proposed system OPERATIONALLY SUITABLE for all stakeholders relative to its
        intended application?
     5. Is the proposed system OPERATIONALLY AVAILABLE when tasked to perform missions?
     6. Is the system OPERATIONALLY EFFECTIVE, in terms of cost and technical performance,
        for its intended mission applications and objectives?
The underlying foundation for all of these questions resides in User and system stakeholder per-
ceptions of the system. An old adage states “perception is reality.” Despite the physical realities of
system success, the User and stakeholders must be technically convinced via objective, fact-based,
compelling evidence that the system does or will meet their missions and objectives.
     This chapter provides an overview of the concepts of: 1) marketplace timing, 2) system afford-
ability, 3) system operational utility, suitability, and system effectiveness; and 4) system veriﬁca-
tion and validation.


6.2 SYSTEM INTRODUCTION, FEASIBILITY,
AND AFFORDABILITY

The decision to proceed with development of new systems, products, and services involves three
basic questions:
                                            6.2 System Introduction, Feasibility, and Affordability   49

    1. Is the timing right to introduce a new system to the market/User, particularly in the com-
       mercial environment?
    2. Is it economically feasible to develop a new system with the technologies currently avail-
       able within budgetary constraints?
    3. If development is economically feasible, will the User be able to afford the operating and
       maintenance costs over the planned service life of the system?
Let’s investigate each of these questions further.

System Timing to the Marketplace
History is ﬁlled with examples of systems or products that were delivered to the marketplace pre-
maturely or too late. You can innovate and develop the best widget or electronic mouse trap.
However, if the marketplace is not mentally or skillfully ready for the device or can afford it, your
efforts and investments may be futile—timing is critical to User acceptance!
     The same is true for proposing new systems or capabilities to Users. They may WANT and
NEED a system yet lack sufﬁcient funding. In other cases their funding may be placed “on hold”
by decision authorities due to a lack of consensus regarding the maturity in system deﬁnition or
understanding the system’s requirements.
     For this reason, most organizations develop a series of decision-making “gates” that qualify the
maturity of a business opportunity and incrementally increase the level of commitment, such as
funding. The intent is to ensure that the RIGHT system/product solution is introduced at the RIGHT
time for the RIGHT price and is readily accessible when the User is ready to purchase. Therefore,
organizations must do their homework and work proactively with the Users to ensure that system
timing is right. This leads to the next point: User system/product feasibility and affordability.

System Feasibility and Affordability
If a determination is made that the timing for a system, product, or service is RIGHT, the next chal-
lenge comes in determining if the system, as currently speciﬁed, can be feasibly developed and pro-
duced with existing technologies within the planned development and life cycle budget at
acceptable risk for the User or Acquirer.
     System feasibility ultimately focuses on four key questions:
    1. WHAT does the User WANT?
    2. WHAT does the User NEED?
    3. WHAT can the User AFFORD?
    4. WHAT is the User WILLING to PAY?
As an SE, chances are you will be required to provide technical support to business development
teams working on a new system or product acquisition. If not, you may be supporting an SE who
is. From a technical perspective, the multidisciplinary SE team is expected to conceptualize, mature,
and propose technical solutions to satisfy the system feasibility questions noted above.

Author’s Note 6.2 If you choose to AVOID business development support, others within your
organization may potentially formulate a risky or undesirable solution or commitment that you
have to live with later. Conversely, if the others solicit engineering support and you choose to
IGNORE them, you may be stuck with the consequences of your own inaction. Therefore, proac-
tively support and technically inﬂuence business development activities and decision making—It’s
a win–win for all stakeholders.
50    Chapter 6   System Acceptability

6.3 OPERATIONAL UTILITY AND SUITABILITY

If you determine that the market timing is RIGHT and the Users can AFFORD the system/product,
the next challenge is managing User perceptions of operational utility and operational suitability.


Operational Utility
Users expect systems and products to have a level of operational utility that enables them to accom-
plish the organizational missions and achieve the stated goals and objectives. These are nice words,
but what does operational utility really mean? A system or product having operational utility is
one that is:
     1. The RIGHT system, product, or service for the objective to be accomplished.
     2. Does not pose any unacceptable safety, environment, or health hazards or risks to its
        operators or the public.
So, if a system satisﬁes these operational utility criteria, how do we determine operational
suitability?


Operational Suitability
Operational suitability characterizes HOW WELL a system or product is:
     1. Suited to a User’s speciﬁc application in a given operating environment.
     2. Integrates and performs within the User’s existing system.
Some systems and products may have signiﬁcant operational utility for some applications but
simply are not operationally suited to a speciﬁc User’s intended application and operating envi-
ronment. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 6.1
From a transportation perspective, vehicles such as cars may have operational utility to a User. However, if
the User plans to use the vehicle off the road in a rugged, harsh environment, only speciﬁc types of vehicles
may be operationally suitable for the application. If the User intends to carry heavy loads, only speciﬁc types
of trucks may be operationally suitable for the application.

Operational Availability
Operational availability means that the system, product, or service is ready ON DEMAND to
perform a mission WHEN tasked. Operational availability becomes a critical metric for assessing
the degree of readiness to perform missions. Availability is a function of SYSTEM reliability and
maintainability. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 6.2
911 calls to police, ﬁre departments, and emergency medical responders TEST the respective organization’s
system availability—its personnel and equipment—to respond to emergencies and disasters.
                                                                        6.4 Operational Effectiveness    51

6.4 OPERATIONAL EFFECTIVENESS

If the User deems a system or product to: 1) have operational utility, 2) be operationally suitable
for the application, and 3) operationally available to perform missions, the next challenge is deter-
mining if the system is operationally effective. Users and organizations are chartered with speciﬁc
goals, missions, and objectives. Users acquire and implement systems, products, or services specif-
ically to support achievement of those goals, missions, and objectives. If the system, product, or
service is not or is only marginally operationally effective, it is of limited or no value to the User.

The Elements of Operational Effectiveness
A system, product, or service must be capable of supporting User missions to a level of perform-
ance that makes it operationally effective in terms of accomplishing organizational goals and objec-
tives, namely outcomes, cost, schedule, and risk.


 EXAMPLE 6.3
For a military system, system effectiveness depends on environmental factors such as operator organization,
doctrine, and tactics; survivability; vulnerability; and threat characteristics. (Source: DSMC, System Engi-
neering Fundamentals, Chapter 14, Measures of Effectiveness and Suitability, p. 125)

If you analyze operational effectiveness, two key elements emerge:
    1. HOW WELL the system accomplishes its mission objectives—operational effectiveness.
    2. HOW WELL the system integrates and performs missions within the User’s organizational
       structure and operating environment—operational suitability.
Therefore, we need to establish metrics that enable us to analyze, predict, and measure mission
operational outcomes. We do this with two key metrics measures of effectiveness (MOEs) and meas-
ures of suitability (MOSs).

Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs)
MOEs enable us to evaluate the ﬁrst objective—HOW WELL the system accomplished its mission
objectives. MOEs are objective measures that represent the most critical measures—performance
effecters—that contribute to mission outcome success. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 6.4
Did we meet our ﬁnancial target? How far did we miss the target? Did we meet our production goals? Did
we ﬁnish the production run on schedule?

MOEs are used as the basis for deriving measures of performance (MOP) parameters stated as
requirements in system performance and item development speciﬁcations.

Measures of Suitability (MOSs)
MOSs enable us to evaluate the second objective—HOW WELL the system integrates into the
User’s organizational structure, mission applications, and operating environment. MOSs represent
integrated measures that objectively quantify issues such as supportability, human interface com-
patibility, and maintainability.
52   Chapter 6   System Acceptability


 EXAMPLE 6.5
         1. What anthropometrics, skills, tools, and equipment are required to operate and maintain the
            system to a speciﬁc level of performance?
         2. Do the control panels incorporate ergonomic designs and devices that minimize operator fatigue?

MOSs are characterized measures of performance (MOP) parameters stated as requirements in
system speciﬁcations.


6.5 COST EFFECTIVENESS

The objective measure of system success ultimately depends on its cost effectiveness. From an orga-
nizational perspective: Does the system produce outcome-based performance and results that
provide a return on investment (ROI) that justiﬁes continued use?
     Engineers, by virtue of their technical backgrounds, often have difﬁculty in relating to the
concept of cost effectiveness; they tend to focus on system effectiveness instead. The reality is:
system life cycle operational costs and the proﬁts derived from system applications DRIVE orga-
nizational decision making. You can innovate the best system, product, or service with outstand-
ing system effectiveness. However, if the recurring operating and support costs are unaffordable
for its Users, the system may “dead on arrival” at system delivery, especially in commercial
environments.
     Cost effectiveness, as a metric, is computed from two elements: 1) life cycle cost and 2) system
effectiveness.

System Effectiveness
As an objective factor, system effectiveness represents the physical reality of outcome-based per-
formance and results.
    Outcome-based performance and results occur in two basic forms: planned and actual per-
formance. When system development is initiated, the System Developer is dependent on analyses,
models, and simulations to provide technical insights that will reveal how a system is projected to
perform. These data are used to:
     1. Bound and specify the system or one of its items.
     2. Compare actual versus planned performance or expected results.
Various techniques, such as rapid prototypes, proof of concept prototypes, and technology demon-
strations, are employed to validate models and simulations as predictors of system performance
ands reduce risk. The intent is to collect objective, empirical evidence “early on” to gain a level of
conﬁdence that the system, or portions thereof, perform as expected. The net result is to verify and
validate the predictions.
     When the actual system is ready for ﬁeld-testing, actual performance data are collected to:
     1. Verify accomplishment of the requirements.
     2. Validate models that the system successfully performs according to the User’s intended
        use.
System effectiveness requires understanding the contributory factors such as reliability, maintain-
ability, and performance.
                                                                                6.6 Reality Check    53

Quantifying System Effectiveness
Although the concepts of cost effectiveness and system effectiveness are intriguing, the challenge
is being able to translate concepts into simple, physical reality that people can easily understand.
We make the translation by establishing metrics that enable us to analytically and objectively quan-
tify system effectiveness and the level of performance required to achieve the effectiveness. System
effectiveness metrics include: MOEs and MOSs supported by MOPs. MOPs are stated as technical
performance parameters (TPPs) in speciﬁcations.
      MOEs and MOSs are outcome-based measures of operational effectiveness. Operational effec-
tiveness is further deﬁned as “the overall degree of a system’s capability to achieve mission success
considering the total operational environment” (Source: DSMC, Systems Engineering Fundamen-
tals, Dec. 2000, para. 14.1, p. 125). MOEs and MOSs “identify the most critical performance
requirements to meet system-level mission objectives, and will reﬂect key operational needs in the
operational requirements document” (Source: DSMC, Systems Engineering Fundamentals, Dec.
2000, para. 14.1, p. 125).

6.6 REALITY CHECK

All of this discussion sounds ﬁne, but how does it apply to the real world? Traditionally, organi-
zations have developed procurement packages and employed cost models to provide a rough order
of magnitude (ROM) estimate for system development. In effect, Acquirers solicited a point solu-
tion for a speciﬁed capability.
     Although the cost model estimates were generally accurate, surprises did occur. If the cost
proposals exceeded the original estimate that had been budgeted, the Acquirer and User were con-
fronted with recompeting the contract. Generally, negotiations took place to arrive at a contract
price for a system that was affordable but often with lesser capabilities.
     WHAT Acquirers and Users wanted to hear was “Give us a proposal that describes the range
and mix of capabilities and levels of performance—the system/cost effectiveness—that can be pro-
cured for a speciﬁc set of system objectives or requirements.”
     In concept, this approach focuses on cost effectiveness—namely how much system effective-
ness can we acquire per unit of life cycle cost. A more formal term, cost as an independent vari-
able (CAIV), is applied to the concept. As a result, System Developer proposals may be required
to submit graphical analyses that plot system performance options along the horizontal axis and
cost on the vertical axis. Figure 6.1 provides an example view.
     One ﬁnal point. Today’s society is continually innovating new contracting approaches to assist
organizations that have sporadic funding. Due to the cost of acquiring, developing, operating, and
supporting new system, organizations often shift the investment cost burden of system develop-
ment to contractors. The intent is to procure on a fee for service basis to meet budgetary needs. As
a result, contracts between these organizations incorporate system availability clauses that require
the system to be operationally available on-demand when the User needs the system. The bottom
line is that if the system is not operationally available, the contractor is not paid. Therefore, system
availability becomes a prime measure of success criteria for system acceptability—meaning User
willingness or desire to employ your systems, products, and services to achieve individual or orga-
nizational goals and objectives.
     Are cost effectiveness and system effectiveness analyses easy to perform? No. In fact both are
often very difﬁcult to quantify and measure. Implementation of these details varies by organization
and program. Military organizations employ subject matter experts (SMEs) with specialized skills
in these areas to assess survival in battleﬁeld operations. If you fail to plan for system effective-
ness and all the factors that contribute to its success, you place organizational and mission objec-
54      Chapter 6       System Acceptability


                                           Minimum
                   Normalized             Acceptable
                  Cost Per Unit          Performance
                                                                                   Solution 4 is Non-Compliant
                                                                                         with MAXIMUM
                                1.3                                          4        Cost Per Unit Criteria

                                                    Cost Per Unit Ceiling         Design-to-Cost (DTC)
                                1.0                                                       Level
                                0.8                                    3
                                0.5                          2

                                0.3     1



Solution 1 is Technically              0.8    1.0            1.4      1.8   2.0
  Non-Compliant with
       MINIMUM                        Normalized Technical Performance
 Performance Criteria

                                             Where: X     = Candidate Solutions

Figure 6.1 Cost as an Independent Variable (CAIV) plot for making cost-capability decisions


tives at risk. Are these concepts important to retailer companies doing business on the World Wide
Web? You, bet! Especially from a User interface, security, and billing perspective. Is system effec-
tiveness important in educational and training systems? A resounding Yes!


6.7 SYSTEM VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION (V&V)

The subject of system acceptability is often abstract and is OPEN to INTERPRETATION to dif-
ferent people. WHAT constitutes acceptability to one User may not be acceptable to another User.
Our discussion of system operational utility, suitability, and effectiveness ultimately inﬂuences the
User’s decision as to whether the system satisﬁes their operational needs. The degree of satisfac-
tion for a given system application establishes user perceptions concerning whether they procured
the RIGHT system. We refer to this as system validation.
     System validation draws yet another question: If the Users have a vision of WHAT they WANT,
HOW do they:
      1. Translate the vision into a speciﬁcation to produce the visionary system?
      2. Have a level of conﬁdence that the system, product, or service delivered will be that RIGHT
         system?
      3. Be able to reproduce multiple copies of the system?
The ﬁrst question requires the “engineering of the system.”
     The second question requires building integrity into the evolving “engineering of the system”
to ensure that the source requirements manifest themselves in the design of the deliverable system,
product, or service and can be demonstrated at system delivery to be satisﬁed. We refer to this as
system veriﬁcation.
     The third question requires that the “engineering of the system” establish high-quality docu-
mentation and process standards that enable skilled workers to reliably and predictably reproduce
each copy of the system, product, or service within speciﬁed performance constraints.
     Let’s focus our attention brieﬂy on the concepts of system validation and system veriﬁcation.
Figure 6.2 provides an illustration of system veriﬁcation and system validation that helps in better
understanding these concepts.
                                                            6.7 System Veriﬁcation and Validation (V&V)   55



                                               SystemValidation
                                              System Validation
   Operational                          Did  WeAcquire
                                         DidWe          theRight
                                                Acquirethe  RightProduct?
                                                                  Product?
     Need

                          Are We
                       Specifying the                                 • Acquirer
                                                                      • User
                       Right System?                                  • System Developer
                                                                      • Services Provider



       Multi-Level
      Specifications
                                            SystemVerification
                                           System Verification                           Highly
                                         DidWe
                                        Did     Buildthe
                                             WeBuild      ProductRight?
                                                      theProduct  Right?                Iterative


                           Highly Iterative




                               SystemAnalysis,
                              System           Design,&&Development
                                     Analysis,Design,   Development

Figure 6.2 Veriﬁcation & Validation (V&V) Concept Overview


Operational Need
Beginning in the upper left corner of the ﬁgure, Users have operational needs related to their
assigned organizational and system missions. Later we will discuss the context of this operational
need in terms of a problem space or and solution space. To satisfy this operational need, the User
must translate the operational need requirements into a speciﬁcation that is legally sufﬁcient for
procurement. Since the creation of the speciﬁcation requires specialized expertise provided by
subject matter expert (SME) SEs, the User’s organization may lack this capability. Where this is
the case, the User may employ the services of an Acquirer organization to serve as their technical
and contractual representatives.

System Veriﬁcation
Throughout the development of the multi-level speciﬁcations, the Acquirer and User must answer
the question: Are we specifying the RIGHT system that will satisfy the User’s operational need?
This is an Acquirer-User process that is highly iterative until the requirements reach a state of matu-
rity sufﬁcient for initiating a procurement action. Once the procurement action begins, the formal
Request for Proposal (RFP) solicitation process for a system provides additional insights, such as
from proposals by System Developer candidates concerning the RIGHT system from an objective,
technical perspective. The formal RFP solicitation process culminates in the award of a system
development or procurement contract.
     Once the contract is awarded, the challenge becomes: HOW do we ensure that the system will
be built RIGHT—that is, correctly — in accordance with the contract speciﬁcation? The Acquirer,
User, and System Developer must answer this question mainly through a series of technical reviews,
technical demonstrations, and risk assessments that occur throughout the system development con-
tract. As a result, the teams must continually assess compliance of the evolving system design solu-
tion relative to the speciﬁcation requirements. We refer to the evolving system design solution as
the Developmental Conﬁguration and the test activities during system development as the Devel-
opmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E).
56   Chapter 6   System Acceptability

     Ultimately, when system or product development is complete, those responsible and account-
able for system acceptance must answer the question: Did we build the system RIGHT—that is,
in accordance with speciﬁcation requirements? This question is typically answered with a System
Veriﬁcation Test (SVT) that documents test results for each speciﬁcation requirement based on
prescribed veriﬁcation methods.


System Validation
Once the system has been veriﬁed as meeting its speciﬁcation requirements, the next question that
the Acquirer and User must answer is: Did we procure the RIGHT system? This is the ultimate test
of HOW WELL the Acquirer, in collaboration with the User, performed the up-front process of
partitioning the operational need—meaning the problem space—into a solution space that can be
bounded and technically described via a procurement speciﬁcation.

Author’s Note 6.3 For introductory overview purposes, the scope of the following discussion
focuses on system validation of the completed system. System validation occurs throughout system
development from Contract Award through formal system acceptance. Contextually, system veriﬁ-
cation and validation apply to each step along the supply chain (e.g., customer-supplier) involv-
ing the User, Acquirer, System Developer, Subcontractor, and vendor organizations as well as
individuals within those organizations.

     During system validation the User or an Independent Test Agency (ITA) subject the system,
product, or service to actual operating ﬁeld conditions, using trained system operators and main-
tainers. Actual devices or surrogate representations of the operational need are employed to for-
mally evaluate the overall system responsiveness and effectiveness, including operator and
maintainer actions, to satisfy the operational need. We refer to this phase of system development
as Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E). Depending on contract requirements, results of
OT&E are incorporated as corrective actions into the Developmental Conﬁguration of the design
solution.
     Depending on contract requirements, on completion of the OT&E activities, the Acquirer and
System Developer conduct a functional conﬁguration audit (FCA) and a physical conﬁguration
audit (PCA). The FCA veriﬁes that SVT results fully comply with speciﬁcation requirements.
The PCA veriﬁes that the physical components of the “As Veriﬁed” and “As Validated” system
identically match the “As Designed” requirements (drawings, wiring diagrams, etc.). Results of the
FCA and PCA are certiﬁed at a System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR) prior to system delivery and
acceptance. As part of the SVR, the Product Baseline is established as a precursor for system
production.
     Due the expense of producing production items and the need to avoid rework, the Product Base-
line is crucial for reproducing production quantities of the system. The Product Baseline represents
the physical state of the Developmental Conﬁguration. This does not mean necessarily that the
design has achieved a low cost suitable for production. Additional design reﬁnements may be
required to REDUCE recurring production costs. Once the design solution has matured, a Produc-
tion Baseline can be established.

Author’s Note 6.4 Operational needs and intended usage must be documented BEFORE system
development, rather than AFTER the system is delivered for system validation. Documenting these
needs AFTER system development invalidates the speciﬁcation process intended to document
system requirements derived from validated User operational needs. The User certainly has the
prerogative to change their minds about their intended needs at any time during the system devel-
                                                                                                6.9 Summary       57

opment process. However, this means modifying the contract requirements, which were based on
the original needs, via an engineering change proposal (ECP).

     One of the challenges of SE is being able to translate User operational needs into speciﬁca-
tion requirements, especially if you have a customer who says “We don’t know WHAT we WANT,
but we will KNOW it WHEN we see it!” You MUST be able to validate, document, and bound
WHAT they WANT—up front! Otherwise, your contracts organization should work with the
Acquirer to establish a cost plus contract vehicle—that allows further exploration, deﬁnition, and
reﬁnement of these needs until the User identiﬁes WHAT they WANT.

Author’s Note 6.5 System validation may be performed formally as part of contract require-
ments or informally by the System Developer prior to system delivery or by the User(s) after con-
tract system delivery. System validation is sometimes speciﬁed in contracts that may involve
development of systems planned for large production quantities. As an Acquirer or User, you DO
NOT want to invest large sums of money to procure systems in large quantities that DO NOT satisfy
User needs. Even in smaller quantities, there may be instances where the system requires valida-
tion of human systems integration (HSI).


6.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system acceptability.

Principle 6.1 System acceptability is determined user satisfaction; user satisfaction is deter-
mined by ﬁve User criteria:
     1. Provide value—meaning operational utility.
     2. Fit within the user’s system and mission applications—meaning operational suitability.
     3. Be available to conduct missions—meaning operational availability.
     4. Accomplish performance objectives—meaning operational effectiveness.
     5. Be affordable—meaning cost effectiveness.

Principle 6.2 Despite the most technically innovative and elegant SE design solutions, Users’
perceptions of a system, product, or service constitute reality.


6.9 SUMMARY

In our discussion of system acceptability, we have identiﬁed, deﬁned, and provided examples of the factors
that contribute to this goal: 1) system introduction, 2) system affordability, 3) system feasibility, 4) operational
utility, 5) operational suitability, 6) operational availability, 7) operational effectiveness, 8) cost effectiveness,
and 9) system effectiveness. Our purpose in introducing these concepts at this time is to highlight key show-
stopper drivers that determine system success but are often swept aside by most authors and SEs. Our intent
is to emphasize these concepts up front and not as notional afterthoughts determined by business development
customer satisfaction surveys AFTER a system, product, or service has been ﬁelded.
      As an SE you should visualize the system entity as a simple box whose performance and success are
measured by these criteria. Why? Some engineers are notorious for immersing themselves into math and
science details BEFORE they have an in-depth understanding of WHAT is expected from the system by the
User. These engineers lack the fundamental knowledge of system acceptability factors that help one to better
58     Chapter 6    System Acceptability

understand how the element of the system contributes to the overall system capabilities and performance.
Your challenge as an SE is to make sure system acceptability criteria are manifested in the speciﬁcations,
designs, testing, veriﬁcation, and validation of each hierarchical element of the system.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system, selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Identify acceptance criteria for the stakeholders of each system.
3. Identify three instances of systems that were deemed by Users as unacceptable, were rejected, and subse-
   quently failed in the marketplace.
4. Identify three instances of systems that were deemed by Users as acceptable and highly successful in the
   marketplace.
5. Identify three instances of systems you purchased that met your speciﬁcation requirements (e.g., veriﬁca-
   tion) but failed to satisfy your needs (e.g., validation).
6. Identify three instances of systems you use. How would you quantify their:
   (a) System effectiveness?
   (b) Cost effectiveness?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. What command media does your organization have that provides guidance related to system acceptability?
2. Contact a contract program in your organization. Interview the Program Director and Technical Director.
     (a) What success criteria has the user established?
     (b) How our these criteria documented and implemented in speciﬁcations?


REFERENCE

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) Ft. Belvoir, VA. 2001. Systems Engineering Fundamentals.


ADDITIONAL READING

Blanchard, Benjamin S. 1998. System Engineering Man-       NASA SP-6105. 1995. Systems Engineering Handbook.
  agement. New York: Wiley.                                Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) Ft.
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) Ft.                Belvoir, VA. 1998. Test and Evaluation Management
  Belvoir, VA. 2001. Glossary—Defense Acquisition            Guide, 3rd ed.
  Acronyms and Terms, 10th ed. Defense Acquisition Uni-
  versity Press.
Chapter              7

     The System/Product Life Cycle

7.1 INTRODUCTION

The system/product life cycle serves as the fundamental roadmap for understanding and commu-
nicating how natural and human-made systems evolve through a progression of sequential life cycle
phases. For human-made systems the roadmap provides a basis for assessing existing system capa-
bilities and performance relative to threats and opportunities; deﬁning, procuring, and developing
new systems to respond to the threats and opportunities; and implementing new systems to achieve
mission objectives that counter or leverage the threats and opportunities.
      This section introduces the concept of the system life cycle, the top-level life cycle framework
for human-made systems. As the ﬁnal discussion in the System Entity Series, we characterize the
concept-to-disposal evolution of a system, product, or service.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     • What is the system/product life cycle?
     • What is the System Deﬁnition Phase; when does it start, and when does it ﬁnish?
     • What is the System Procurement Phase; when does it start, and when does it ﬁnish?
     • What is the System Development Phase; when does it start, and when does it ﬁnish?
     • What is the System Production Phase; when does it start, and when does it ﬁnish?
     • What is the System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase; when does it start, and when does
       it ﬁnish?
     • What is the System Disposal Phase; when does it start, and when does it ﬁnish?
     • What are life cycles within life cycles?
     • How is a legacy system’s life cycle used to establish requirements for a new system?


7.2 SYSTEM LIFE CYCLE OVERVIEW

The evolution of any system made by or known to humankind begins at the point of conception
and ends at disposal. This process is referred to as the system life cycle. The system life cycle
serves structurally as the foundation for system development. Human-made systems are conceptu-
alized, planned, organized, scheduled, estimated, procured, deployed, operated and supported, and
disposed of using this structure. Natural systems follow similar constructs with life phases.



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                   59
60      Chapter 7        The System/Product Life Cycle

                                       System & Product Life Cycle
  System             System         System      System Production Phase*                       System
                                                                            System
 Definition        Procurement    Development                                                  Disposal
                                                                  Operations & Support Phase
   Phase              Phase          Phase                                                      Phase


     * = If applicable

Figure 7.1 The System/Product Life Cycle



     The life cycle for any system, product, or service consists of a series of phases starting with
system conception and continuing through ﬁnal disposal. For human-made systems the beginning
and ending of each phase is marked by a signiﬁcant control point or staging event such as a key
decision at a technical review or a ﬁeld event that authorizes progression to the next phase.

Author’s Note 7.1 There are a number of ways to deﬁne a system life cycle. Ten people will
have 10 different versions of this graphic. You and your organization should choose one that best
reﬂects your organization and industry’s perspective of the life cycle.

    The typical system life cycle is composed of a series of phases as shown in Figure 7.1. The
phases are:
      • System Deﬁnition Phase
      • System Procurement Phase
      • System Development Phase
      • System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase
      • System Production Phase
      • System Disposal Phase
This chapter presents the system/product life cycle as a top-level framework of embedded phases
required to evolve a User operational need for a system, product, or service from conceptual
“vision” through disposal. Each of the phases represents a collection of activities that focus on spe-
ciﬁc program objectives and work products. As you will soon discover, some of these phases have
well-deﬁned endings marked by key milestones while other phases overlap and transition from one
to another.


7.3 SYSTEM LIFE CYCLE PHASE SYNOPSIS

The System Deﬁnition Phase
The System Deﬁnition Phase begins with recognition by the User that a new system or upgrade to
an existing system, product, or service is required to satisfy an operational need. The operational
need may be derived from: 1) mission opportunities, 2) threats, or 3) projected system capability
and performance “gaps” or deﬁciencies.
     On determination to initiate deﬁnition of a new system, the User analyzes existing system oper-
ational needs and deﬁnes requirements for a new system, product, or service. In some instances the
User may enlist the services of an Acquirer to procure and develop the system and serve as the
User’s technical and contract representative.
     The Acquirer assists the User in analyzing the opportunity or problem space that created the
need. The Acquirer, in collaboration with the User, bounds the solution space in the form of a set
of system requirements to serve as the basis for a system development contract.
                                                         7.3 System Life Cycle Phase Synopsis   61

    When the System Deﬁnition Phase has reached sufﬁcient maturity, the Acquirer initiates the
System Procurement Phase.

The System Procurement Phase
The System Procurement Phase consists of those activities required to procure the new system or
upgrades to the existing system. These activities include:
    1. Qualifying capable system, product, or service vendors.
    2. Soliciting proposals from qualiﬁed vendors (offerors).
    3. Selecting a preferred vendor (offeror).
    4. Contracting with the vendor to develop the system, product, or service.
    The selected vendor (offeror) becomes the System Developer or Services Provider.

The System Development Phase
The System Development Phase consists of those activities required to translate the contract system
speciﬁcations into a physical system solution. Key System Development Phase activities include:
    1. System Engineering Design
    2. Component Procurement and Development
    3. System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE)
    4. Authenticate System Baselines
    5. Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E)
     Throughout the phase, the multi-level system design solution evolves through a progression
of maturity stages. Each stage of maturity typically consists of a major technical design review
with entry and exit criteria supported by analyses, prototypes, and technology demonstrations. The
reviews culminate in design baselines that capture snapshots of the evolving Developmental Con-
ﬁguration. When the system engineering design is formally approved, the Developmental Conﬁg-
uration provides the basis for component acquisition and development. We refer to the initial
system(s) as the ﬁrst article of the Developmental Conﬁguration.
     Acquired and developed components are inspected, integrated, and veriﬁed against the respec-
tive design requirements and performance speciﬁcations at various levels of integration. The intent
of veriﬁcation is to answer the question: Did we develop the system CORRECTLY?—in accordance
with the speciﬁcation requirements. The integration culminates in a System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT)
that proves the system, product, or service fully complies with the contract System Performance
Speciﬁcation (SPS). Since the System Development Phase focuses on the creation of the system,
product, or service from Contract Award through SVT, we refer to this as Developmental Test and
Evaluation (DT&E).
     When the ﬁrst article system(s) of the Developmental Conﬁguration has been veriﬁed as
meeting the SPS requirements, one of two options may occur, depending on contract requirements.
The system may deployed to:
    1. Another location for validation testing by the User or an Independent Test Agency (ITA)
       representing the User’s interests.
    2. The User’s designated ﬁeld site for installation, checkout, and ﬁnal acceptance.
Validation testing, which is referred to as Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E), enables Users
to determine if they speciﬁed and procured the right SYSTEM to meet their operational needs. Any
deﬁciencies are resolved in accordance with the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract.
62   Chapter 7   The System/Product Life Cycle

     After an initial period of system operational use in the ﬁeld to correct deﬁciencies and defects
and collect ﬁeld data to validate system operations, a decision is made to begin the System Pro-
duction Phase, if applicable. If the User does not intend to place the system or product in produc-
tion, the Acquirer and User formally accepts system delivery, thereby initiating the System
Operations and Support (O&S) Phase.

The System Production Phase
The System Production Phase consists of those activities required to produce small to large quan-
tities of the system. The initial production typically consists of a Low-Rate Initial Production (LRIP)
to verify and validate that:
     1. Production documentation and manufacturing processes are mature.
     2. Latent defects such as design errors, design ﬂaws, or poor workmanship are eliminated.
When the production process has been veriﬁed and validated based on ﬁeld tests of system pro-
duction samples, large-scale production, if applicable, may be initiated. Since the system and pro-
duction engineering designs have already been veriﬁed, each production system is:
     1. Inspected.
     2. Veriﬁed against key System Performance Speciﬁcation requirements.
     3. Deployed to the User’s designated ﬁeld site(s) for implementation (i.e., operations and
        support).

The System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase
The System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase consists of User activities required to operate,
maintain, and support the system including training for system users to perform the system’s oper-
ational mission. If the system is directed to change physical or geographic locations in preparation
for the next mission, the system is redeployed. On deployment, the system, product, or service
begins active duty.
     Throughout the system’s operational life, reﬁnement and enhancement upgrades may be pro-
cured and installed to improve system capabilities and performance in support of organizational
missions. The system conﬁguration at initial delivery and acceptance represents the Initial Oper-
ational Capability (IOC). System upgrades, referred to as incremental builds, are released and
incorporated into the ﬁelded system or product until the system reaches a planned level of matu-
rity referred to as Full Operational Capability (FOC).
     Although most systems have a planned operational service life, the expense of maintaining a
system via upgrades and ability to upgrade the existing system with new technologies is not always
cost effective. As a result, the User may be forced to procure a new system, product, or service to
replace the existing system. Where this is the case, a new system life cycle is initiated while the
existing system is still in active duty.
     As the ﬁrst articles of the new system are placed into active duty, a transition period occurs
whereby the legacy (i.e., existing) system and the new system are in operation simultaneously in
the ﬁeld. Ultimately, a decision will be made to deactivate and phase out the legacy system from
active duty. When system phase-out occurs, the legacy system’s disposal phase begins.

The System Disposal Phase
The System Disposal Phase consists of those activities required to phase out an existing or legacy
system from active duty. Each system or the lot of systems may be dispositioned for sale, lease,
                                                                  7.4 Life Cycles Within Life Cycles   63

storage or disposal. Disposal alternatives include mothballing for future recommissioned use, dis-
assembly, destruction, burning, and burial. System disposal may also require environmental reme-
diation and reclamation to restore the system’s ﬁeld site or disposal area to its natural state.


7.4 LIFE CYCLES WITHIN LIFE CYCLES

Now that we have a basic understanding of the system life cycle we can shift our attention to under-
standing how a system’s life cycle ﬁts within an organization’s context.

Understanding the Organizational Aspects of
System Life Cycles
Each system, product, or service is an asset of a higher level organization (i.e., system) that also
has a system life cycle. Those same systems and products may include lower level systems or prod-
ucts that also have system life cycles. Therefore, we have multiple levels of system life cycles
within higher level system life cycles.
     Suppose that a user has quantities of a product or system, including various versions in inven-
tory. At some point in time, the User may decide to replace a speciﬁc product or a group of products.
     For example, an airline might decide to replace a speciﬁc aircraft by tail number or replace an
entire ﬂeet of aircraft over a period of time. Each aircraft, which has its own system life cycle, is
part of a much larger system such as a ﬂeet of aircraft, which also has its own system life cycle.
To illustrate this point, Figure 7.2 provides an example.




                               Enterprise Level Life Cycles
       Organization #1 Life Cycle
                                Organization #2 Life Cycle
                                                                Organization #x Life Cycle



                              Business Entity #2 Life Cycle
     Line of Business #1 Life Cycle
                              Line of Business #2 Life Cycle
                                                               Line of Business #y Life Cycle



                              Line of Business #1 Life Cycle
      Product Model #1 Life Cycle
                               Product Model #2 Life Cycle
                                                               Product Model #z Life Cycle


                                             Time
Figure 7.2 System Life Cycles within Life Cycles
64    Chapter 7   The System/Product Life Cycle

     Assume we have a corporation that has evolved over a number of years. Historically, we can
state that the business came into existence as Organizational Entity 1. As the business entity grows,
it changes its name and becomes Organizational Entity 2, and so forth.
     If we examine the system life cycle of Organizational Entity 2, we might ﬁnd that the organ-
ization evolves through several lines of business (LOBs): LOB 1, LOB 2, and so on. Within each
LOB, the organization has a core product line that consists of Product Model 1, which evolves into
Product Model 2, and so forth. Observe the overlapping of Product 1 and Product 2 life cycles. The
evolution of this product line continues until the organization decides to terminate the product or
LOB. How is this concept applied to the real world?


Application of System Life Cycles
We can apply the concept of system life cycles within system life cycles to an example such as
small engine developer. The organization, which has a life cycle, may evolve through a number of
organizational life cycles—as small business, corporation, and so on. During Organizational Life
Cycle 2, the organization may develop several LOBs—two-cycle engines, four-cycle engines, and
so on—to support marketplace opportunities such as lawn mowers, edgers, and small tractors. The
organization’s four-cycle LOB may evolve through Product Model 1, Product Model 2, and so
forth. Each product model builds on its predecessor (i.e., precedented system) to improve capabil-
ities and performance to meet marketplace needs.
     The preceding discussion focused on a system or product suppliers system life cycles. The
same analogy applies to users of system, product, and services. Their organizations evolve through
similar life cycles. The differences occur when Product Model 1:
     1. Fails.
     2. Becomes to costly to maintain.
     3. Is predicted to be vulnerable to system threats.
     4. Lacks the speciﬁc level of capability or performance to meet predicted organizational needs.
Now, why is this relevant to SE? As a systems engineer, you need to understand what:
     1. LOB the User is engaged in.
     2. Opportunities, problems, or issues the User is chartered to address as part of its LOB.
        We refer to this as the opportunity space; speciﬁc targets as targets of opportunity
        (TOO).
     3. Missions the User performs to support the LOB. We refer to this as the solution space.
     4. Capabilities are required to support solution space missions now and in the future.
     5. Existing systems, products, or services the User employs to provide those capabilities.
     6. Deﬁciencies—or opportunities—exist in the current system, product, or service and how
        you and your organization can cost effectively eliminate those deﬁciencies with new tech-
        nologies, systems, products, or services.
Based on this knowledge and understanding, the SE’s role as a problem solver-solution developer
becomes crucial. The challenge is how do SEs work with Users and Acquirers to:
     1. Collaboratively identify and partition the opportunity space into one or more solution
        spaces,
     2. Technically bound and specify the solution space in terms of capability and performance
        requirements that are legally sufﬁcient to procure systems, products, and services,
                                            7.5 System Transition Strategy and Sequencing Overview         65

    3. Verify that the new system complies with those requirements,
    4. Validate that the system developed satisﬁes the User’s original operational needs?
The remainder of this book is intended to answer this question.

Evolutionary Life Cycles
Although the preceding discussion appears straightforward, it can become very complicated, espe-
cially with highly complex, precedented systems even when the requirements are reasonably well
known. The question is: What happens when the requirements are not well known?
     In this case the system, product, or service requirements evolve over a series of iterative system
development cycles that may include TEST markets. A planned product system life cycle may have
a System Development Phase that may include several prototype or technology demonstration life
cycles. Consider the following example.


 EXAMPLE 7.1
An organization may award a series of sequential contracts to develop analyses, prototypes, and technology
demonstrators of a system. The key work product of each contract may be to mature and reﬁne the system,
product, or service requirements of the preceding contract as a means of getting to a set of requirements that
can be used to develop the end product. This approach, which is referred to as spiral development, serves to
reduce system development risks when dealing with unprecedented or highly complex systems, new tech-
nologies, poorly deﬁned requirements, and the like.

To better understand how a User acquires a new system and phases out the current system, let’s
explore the basic strategy.


7.5 SYSTEM TRANSITION STRATEGY
AND SEQUENCING OVERVIEW

During the System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase of System 1 as shown in Figure 7.3, a
decision event (1) occurs to replace System 1. The acquisition strategy is to bring the new System
2 “on-line” or into active service as noted by the First Article Field Delivery (5) event.
     After a System Transition Period (6) for checkout and integration of System 2 into the HIGHER
ORDER SYSTEM, an Existing System Deactivation Order (7) is issued. At that time, System 2
becomes the primary system and System 1 enters the System Disposal Phase of its life cycle. At
some time period later, the disposal of System 1 is marked by the Existing System Disposal Com-
plete (8) event.
     So, how do we initiate actions to get System 2 into active service by the planned new system’s
First Article Field Delivery (5) event without disrupting organizational operations? Let’s explore
that aspect.
     When the new system Operational Need Decision (1) event is made, procurement actions (2)
are initiated to initiate System 2’s life cycle. Thus, the System Deﬁnition Phase of System 2’s life
cycle begins. System 2’s System Development Phase must be complete (4) and ready for ﬁeld inte-
gration by the New System’s First Article Field Delivery (5) event. System 2 then enters the System
Operations and Support (O&S) Phase of its life cycle.
     By the time the Existing System Deactivation Order (7) event is issued, System 2 must be “on-
line” and in active service. As a result, System 1 completes its life cycle at the Existing System Dis-
posal Complete (8) event thereby completing the transition.
66    Chapter 7        The System/Product Life Cycle

                          New System             5    New System
                  1     Operational Need              First Article             Existing System
                         Decision Event              Field Delivery                                 7
                                                                               Deactivation Order


                            New System                                6    System
                        3                                                 Transition    Existing System
                            Acquisition
                                                                           Period      Disposal Complete   8

                                  System Life Cycle #1
                                                                          System Disposal
               System Operations & Support Phase                               Phase

                   System
               Production Phase
                                                           4                    9
                   2

                                              System #2 Life Cycle
   System           System
                                                System                System Operations &                  System Disposal
  Definition      Procurement
                                          Development Phase              Support Phase                          Phase
    Phase            Phase

Figure 7.3 The Acquisition on New Systems and Phase-out of Legacy Systems




GENERAL EXERCISE

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter points identiﬁed at the beginning of this
   chapter.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISE

1. Research system life cycle standards of the following organizations. Summarize your ﬁndings for each and
   contrast them with your own system/product domain.
   (a) Department of Defense (DoD)
   (b) NASA
   (c) IEEE 1220-1998
   (d) ANSI/EIA 632-1999
   (e) International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE)
   (f) International Organization of Standardization (ISO)
   (g) ISO/IEC 15288
   (h) Your local organization
   (i) Your customer’s life cycle


ADDITIONAL READING

ANSI/EIA 632-1999 Standard. 1999. Processes for Engi-                       tute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) New
  neering Systems. Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA)                     York, NY.
  Arlington, VA.                                                          ISO/IEC 15288: 2002. System Engineering—System Life
IEEE 1220-1998. 1998. IEEE Standard for Application and                     Cycle Processes. International Organization for Stan-
  Management of the Systems Engineering Process. Insti-                     dardization (ISO). Geneva, Switzerland.
Chapter              8

     The Architecture of Systems

8.1 INTRODUCTION

Every human-made and natural system is characterized by a structure and framework that supports
and/or enables the integrated elements of the system to provide the system’s capabilities and
perform missions. We refer to this integrated framework as the system’s architecture.
     This chapter introduces the System Architecture Concepts Series and provides an overview to
chapters that follow. We introduce the concept of the system element architecture via a construct
consisting of two key entities: 1) the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) and 2) its OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT.
     Each of these entities is decomposed into lower tier elements. The SOI is composed of one or
more MISSION SYSTEM(s) (role) and a SUPPORT SYSTEM (role). The OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT consists of: 1) HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS domain and 2) a PHYSICAL ENVI-
RONMENT domain. We conclude our discussion by introducing the conceptual “building blocks,”
referred to as the system elements, for each domain.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What systems comprise the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)?
     2. What systems comprise the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT?
     3. Identify the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM system elements?
     4. How do the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM system elements differ?
     5. Identify the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS domain elements?
     6. Identify the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT domain elements.
Before we begin, let’s deﬁne a few terms that are relevant to our discussion.

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
     • Abstraction An analytical representation of an entity for a speciﬁc purpose in which lower
       level details are suppressed. For example, a “family” is an abstraction that suppresses lower
       level entities such as father, mother, and children.
     • Entity A noun-based person, place, or virtual object that represents a logical or physical
       system entity.
     • Entity Relationships The hierarchical relationships and interactions between multi-level
       logical and physical system elements.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                 67
68    Chapter 8   The Architecture of Systems

     • Environment “The natural (weather, climate, ocean conditions, terrain, vegetation, dust,
       etc.) and induced (electromagnetic, interference, heat, vibration, etc.) conditions that con-
       strain the design for products and their life cycle processes.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet,
       System Engineering, p. 448)
     • Hierarchical Interactions Actions between authoritarian command and control systems
       that lead, direct, inﬂuence, or constrain MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM
       actions and behavior. For analytical purposes, we aggregate these systems into a single entity
       abstraction referred to as the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS domain.
     • Logical Entity Relationship A high-level, functional association that exists between two
       system entities without regard to physical implementation.
     • Object See entity.
     • Physical Entity Relationship A physical, point-to-point interface between two or more
       entities that may be unidirectional or bi-directional.
     • System Element A label applied to classes of entities that comprise the MISSION
       SYSTEM/SUPPORT SYSTEM, HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS, or PHYSICAL ENVIRON-
       MENT domains. As a convention, speciﬁc system element names are capitalized throughout
       the text to facilitate identiﬁcation and context of usage as illustrated in the descriptions below.
     • System of Interest (SOI) The system consisting of a MISSION SYSTEM and its SUP-
       PORT SYSTEM(s) assigned to perform a speciﬁc organizational mission and accomplish
       performance-based objective(s) within a speciﬁed time frame.
     • Taxonomy “A classiﬁcation system. Provides the basis for classifying objects for identiﬁ-
       cation, retrieval and research purposes” (MORS Report, October 27, 1989. (Source: DoD
       5000.59, Glossary A—Item 505, p. 163)
Based on this introduction, let’s begin our discussion with the introduction of the system architec-
ture construct.


8.2 INTRODUCING THE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE CONSTRUCT

All natural and human-made systems exist within an abstraction we refer to as the system’s OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT. Survival, for many systems within the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT,
ultimately depends on system capabilities—physical properties, characteristics, strategies, tactics,
security, timing, and luck.
     If we observe and analyze these systems and their patterns of behavior to understand how
they adapt and survive, we soon discover that they exhibit a common construct—template—that
describes a system’s relationship to their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Figure 8.1 provides a
graphical depiction of the construct. This construct establishes the foundation for all systems.
     When systems interact with their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, two types of behavior pat-
terns emerge:
     1. Systems interact with or respond to the dynamics in their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
        These interactions reﬂect peer-to-peer role-based behavioral patterns such as aggressor,
        predator, benign, and defender or combinations of these.
     2. System Responses—behavior, products, by-products, or services—and internal failures
        sometime result in adverse or catastrophic effects to the system—creating instability,
        damage, degraded performance, for example—that may place the system’s mission or sur-
        vival at risk.
                                                     8.2 Introducing the System Architecture Construct   69


                                     SYSTEM OF
  OPERATING
                                      INTEREST
 ENVIRONMENT
                                        (SOI)



Figure 8.1 Top Level System Architecture Construct


             Operating Environment
                Higher Order Systems



                                    System of Interest

                                         Mission
                                         System
       Physical
     Environment
                                         Support
                                         System


Figure 8.2 Top Level System Environment Construct


When you analyze interactions of a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) with its OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT, two fundamental types of behavior emerge:
    1. Hierarchical interactions (i.e., vertical interactions under the command and control of higher
       order systems).
    2. Peer level interactions.
When a MISSION SYSTEM interacts with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, it:
    1. Performs mission task assignments established by higher level, chain-of-command, deci-
       sion authorities.
    2. Interacts with external systems (i.e., human-made systems, natural environment, and its
       induced operating environment during mission execution environment).
We characterize SOI interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT to include two types of
entities: 1) HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS and 2) a PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT.
     The identiﬁcation of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT domains enables us to expand the
System Architecture construct shown in Figure 8.1. The result is Figure 8.2.

Author’s Note 8.1 Figure 8.2 features a subtlety that may not be readily apparent. Observe
that the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT is shown on the left and the SYSTEM OF INTEREST is placed
on the right-hand side.
     Most engineering environments establish standards and conventions for interpretive reading.
For example, graphics read from left to right and from top to bottom. The convention is that data
processing and work ﬂow progress from left to right. If we had placed the SOI on the left side and
70   Chapter 8   The Architecture of Systems

the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT on the right side, this would have created a false perception
that the SOI drives its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
     Although the SYSTEM OF INTEREST does inﬂuence and may exercise some limited control
over the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT actually stimulates the
SOI to action and invokes a behavioral response. Where practical, we will employ this left-to-right
convention throughout the book.


8.3 INTRODUCTION OF THE SYSTEM ELEMENTS

As abstractions, the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)—meaning a MISSION SYSTEM and its
SUPPORT SYSTEM(s)—interact with HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS and the PHYSICAL ENVI-
RONMENT within the SOI’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Each of these abstractions is com-
posed of analytical building blocks referred to as the System Elements. The System Elements, when
integrated into an architectural framework, form the System Architecture that serves as a key con-
struct for system analysis and design. As an introduction to the System Elements, let’s identify and
deﬁne each element as it relates to the SOI and its operating environment.
     To derive the system elements, we decompose or expand the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
and its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT into lower levels of abstraction or classes. Table 8.1 pro-
vides a listing. We will describe each of these system elements later in their respective sections.

Author’s Note 8.2 Due to the unique identities of the System Elements, this text CAPITALIZES
all instances of each term to facilitate easy recognition in our discussions.

Importance of the System Elements Concept
The System Elements concept is important for three reasons. First, the system elements enable us
to organize, classify, and bound system entity abstractions and their interactions. That is, it is a way
to differentiate what is and what is not included in the system. Second, the System Element Archi-
tecture establishes a common framework for developing the logical and physical system architec-



Table 8.1 Identiﬁcation of system element classes by domain

Domain                            System Element Classes                              Apply to

SYSTEM OF                   • PERSONNEL                                      • MISSION SYSTEM role
INTEREST (SOI)              • FACILITIES                                     • SUPPORT SYSTEM role
                            • EQUIPMENT
                            • MISSION RESOURCES
                            • PROCEDURAL DATA
                            • SYSTEM RESPONSES
OPERATING                   • ROLES and MISSIONS                             HIGHER ORDER
ENVIRONMENT                 • ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE                       SYSTEMS
                            • OPERATING CONSTRAINTS
                            • RESOURCES
                            • HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS                             PHYSICAL
                            • NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                            ENVIRONMENT
                            • INDUCED ENVIRONMENT
                                            8.4 Understanding System Element Entity Relationships      71

tures of each entity within the system hierarchy. Third, the system elements serve as an initial start-
ing point for allocations of multi-level performance speciﬁcation requirements.
     Despite strong technical and analytical skills, engineers are sometimes poor organizers of
information. Therein lies a fundamental problem for the engineering of systems. Being able to
understand and frame/structure the problem is 50% of the solution. The organizational framework
of the System Element Architecture concept provides the framework for deﬁning the system and
its boundaries.
     The challenge in analyzing and solving system development and engineering problems is being
able to identify, organize, deﬁne, and articulate the relevant elements of a problem (objectives,
initial conditions, assumptions, etc.) in an easy-to-understand, intelligible manner that enables us
to conceptualize and formulate the solution strategy. Establishing a standard analytical framework
enables us to apply “plug and chug” mathematical and scientiﬁc principles, the core strength of
engineering training, to the architecture of the system.

Problem Solving to Reduce Complexity
System analysis and engineering is deeply rooted in the concept of analytically decomposing large,
complex problems into manageable problems that can be easily solved. Unfortunately, many engi-
neers lack the training to be able to organize, structure, and analyze a system problem around its
system elements.
     In practical terms, you should ingrain this concept as a basis for organizing and structuring rel-
evant parts your problem. However, a word of caution: Avoid temptation to tailor out relevant
system elements without supporting rationale that can withstand professional scrutiny. You may
pay a penalty in overlooked system design issues.
     For now, we have one remaining system element concept to introduce—entity relationships
(ERs).


8.4 UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM ELEMENT
ENTITY RELATIONSHIPS

The architectural concept discussions that follow describe the entity relationships (ERs) between
each of the System Elements identiﬁed in Table 8.1. Before we begin these discussions, let’s intro-
duce the types of relationships that exist between these elements.
     System element interactions can be characterized by two types of relationships: logical and
physical. Perhaps the best way to think of logical and physical relationships is to focus on one topic
at a time and then integrate the two concepts.

Logical Entity Relationships
The ﬁrst step in identifying logical entity relationships is to simply recognize and acknowledge that
some form of association exists through deductive reasoning. You may not know the physical
details of the relationship—that is, how they link up—but you know a relationship does or will
exist. Graphically, we depict these relationships as simply a line between the two entities.
     The second step is to characterize the logical relationship in terms of logical functions—
that is, what interaction occurs between them—must be provided to enable the two entities to
associate with one another. When we assemble the logical entities into a framework that graphi-
cally describes their relationships, we refer to the diagram as logical architecture. To illustrate, let’s
assume we have a simple room lighting situation as shown in Figure 8.3.
72    Chapter 8   The Architecture of Systems


      “What Logical Association Exists Between Two System Entities”

                                                                   Logical
                                                                  Association
      Step 1                                                                       Light
      Identify Logical Associations                                               Source
                                                          ●   Illumination




                                                         Logical Association
                                                                                       Light
     Step 2                                                                           Source
                                                              ●    Illumination
     Identify Logical Entities
     and their Interactions
                                                ●   Light Control                          ●   Power


                                          Lighting                                    Power
                                          Control             ●   Power Control       Source

Figure 8.3 Logical Architecture Example




 EXAMPLE 8.1
Room Lighting—Logical Architecture Entity Relationships The top portion of Figure 8.3 depicts a simple
ROOM LIGHTING SYSTEM consisting of a PERSON (entity) desiring to control a room LIGHT SOURCE
(entity). As a logical representation, we draw a line between the PERSON (entity) and the LIGHT SOURCE
(entity) to acknowledge the relationship. Thus, we state that the PERSON (entity) has a logical association
or entity relationship with the LIGHT SOURCE.

Author’s Note 8.3 Observe that we are interested in simply establishing and acknowledging
the need for the logical relationship—meaning capability. The need for the capability serves as the
basis for a speciﬁcation requirement—meaning WHAT—and HOW much illumination is required.
HOW this logical entity relationship is physically implemented via design and components becomes
the basis for engineering analysis and design—with the application of mathematical and scientiﬁc
principles.

Next, we need a control mechanism for the LIGHT SOURCE (logical entity), which derives its energy from
a POWER SOURCE (logical entity). We complete the representation by connecting the PERSON (logical
entity) with the LIGHTING CONTROL (logical entity). The LIGHTING CONTROL enables the ﬂow of
current from the POWER SOURCE to the LIGHT SOURCE. When energized, the LIGHT SOURCE illumi-
nates the room and the PERSON.
     From this description you should note that we purposely avoided specifying HOW the:
1. PERSON (logical entity) interfaced with the LIGHTING CONTROL (logical entity).
2. LIGHTING CONTROL (logical entity) controlled the POWER SOURCE (logical entity).
3. POWER SOURCE (logical entity) provided current to the LIGHT SOURCE (logical entity).
4. LIGHT SOURCE (logical entity) illuminated the PERSON (logical entity).
                                              8.4 Understanding System Element Entity Relationships        73

The diagram simply documents associative relationships. Additionally, we avoided specifying what mecha-
nisms were used for the LIGHTING CONTROL, POWER SOURCE, or LIGHT SOURCE. These decisions
will be deferred to our next topic.
     Based on this logical representation, let’s investigate the physical implementation of the ROOM LIGHT-
ING SYSTEM.


Physical Entity Relationships

The physical implementation of system element interfaces requires more in-depth analysis and deci-
sion making. Why? Typically, cost, schedule, technology, support, and risk become key drivers that
must be “in balance” for the actual implementation. Since there should be a number of viable can-
didate options available for implementing an interaction, trade studies may be required to select
the best selection and conﬁguration of physical components. Graphically, we refer to the physical
implementation of an interface as a physical representation.
     As we select components (copper wire, light switches, lighting ﬁxtures, etc.), we conﬁgure
them into a system block diagram (SBD) and electrical schematics that depict the physical rela-
tionships. These diagrams become the basis for the Physical System Architecture. To illustrate a
physical architecture depicting physical entity relationships, let’s continue with our previous
example.


 EXAMPLE 8.2
Room Lighting—Physical Architecture Entity Relationships After some analysis we develop a physical
representation or physical system architecture of the ROOM LIGHTING SYSTEM. As indicated by Figure
8.4, the system consists of the following physical entities: a POWER SOURCE, WIRE 1, WIRE 2, LIGHT
SWITCH, a BUILDING STRUCTURE, a PERSON, and a LIGHT RECEPTACLE containing a LIGHT
BULB. The solid black lines represent electrical interfaces; the dashed lines represent mechanical interfaces.
In physical terms, the BUILDING STRUCTURE provides mechanical support for the LIGHT SWITCH,
WIRE 1, WIRE 2, and LIGHT FIXTURE that holds the LIGHT BULB.
      When the PERSON (physical entity) places the LIGHT SWITCH (physical entity) in the ON position,
AC current (physical entity) ﬂows from the POWER SOURCE (physical entity) through WIRE 1 (physical
entity) to the LIGHT SWITCH (physical entity). The AC current (physical entity) ﬂows from the LIGHT
SWITCH (physical entity) through WIRE 2 (physical entity) to the LIGHT RECEPTACLE (physical entity)
and into the LIGHT BULB. Visible light is then transmitted to the PERSON until the LIGHT SWITCH is
placed in the OFF position, the LIGHT BULB burns out, or the POWER SOURCE is disconnected.

Logical and Physical Architecture Approach
The partitioning and sequencing of these discussions provides a fundamental portion of the method-
ology for developing systems, products, or services. If you observe and analyze human behavior,
you will discover that humans characteristically have difﬁculty deciding WHAT decisions to make
and the strategic steps required to make those decisions. We desire lots of information but are often
unable to synthesize all of the data at the individual or team levels to arrive at an encompassing,
multi-level design solution in a single decision. As a result, the ramiﬁcations of the decision-making
process increases exponentially with the size and complexity of the system.
    Given this characteristic, humans need to incrementally progress down a decision path from
simple, high-level decisions to lower level detail decisions based on the higher level decisions. The
ﬂow from logical to physical entity relationships enables us to incrementally decompose com-
plexity. Illustrations enable us to progress from simply acknowledging the existence of a relation-
ship to detailed decisions regarding HOW the logical relationship can be physically implemented.
74    Chapter 8   The Architecture of Systems


   Logical                           Logical Entity Relationship
Representation                             (Association)                   Light
                                                                            Light
                                          · Illumination                  Source
                                                                           Source




    Physical                                                         Light
 Representation                                                      Bulb



      Power               Wire                Light                Wire                 Light
      Source               #1                 Switch                #2                Receptacle



                                       Building Structure

                                                                      Where:
                                                                               = Electrical Relationship
                                                                               = Mechanical Relationship
Figure 8.4 Logical-Physical Representations


As summarized in Figure 8.4, we evolve the logical architecture representation of the Room Light-
ing System from the abstract to the detailed physical architecture representation.
    This point is important. It provides the basis for a later discussion when we introduce the
concept of the system solution domains in Part II. The domain solutions include: 1) a Requirements
Domain Solution, 2) an Operational Domain Solution, 3) a Behavioral Domain Solution, and 4) a
Physical Domain Solution.


8.5 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern the architecture of systems.

Principle 8.1 System interact with external entities in their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and
themselves.

Principle 8.2 Every system serves at the pleasure of higher order, human and natural systems
that exercise authority over the system and its operation.

Principle 8.3 Every system is part of a larger system of systems (SoS).


8.6 SUMMARY

Our discussion in this chapter introduced the fundamental concepts that form the basis for the system archi-
tecture. We introduced the concepts of the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI),
                                                                                    Additional Reading   75

MISSION SYSTEM, and SUPPORT SYSTEM, and their interactions. We also decomposed each of these enti-
ties into classes or sets of systems elements.
      The next chapter on system architecture levels of abstraction and semantics complements the discussion
of this chapter by introducing the way system elements expand into lower level abstractions. In the two sub-
sequent chapters we will discuss the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) architecture and the OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT architecture, and identify system elements within their respective abstractions and describe
those system elements in terms of the SOI and OPERATING ENVIRONMENT architectures.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
   (a) Identify and bound the SOI’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
   (b) Identify and bound the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS, PHYSICAL SYSTEMS ENVIRONMENT,
       MISSION SYSTEM, and SUPPORT SYSTEM


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a system development program and investigate how their SOI interfaces with HIGHER ORDER
   SYSTEMS, PHYSICAL SYSTEMS ENVIRONMENT, and SUPPORT SYSTEM. How are these elements
   addressed in their system architecture diagrams? Report on your ﬁndings and observations.


REFERENCES

Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.         DoD 5000.59-M. 1998. DoD Modeling and Simulation
  Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:     (M&S) Glossary Washington, DC: Department of
  Wiley-InterScience.                                        Defense.


ADDITIONAL READING

FM 770-78. 1979. System Engineering Field Manual. Washington, DC: Headquarters—Department of the Army.
Chapter              9

     System Levels of Abstraction
     and Semantics

9.1 INTRODUCTION

Every natural and human-made system is part of a HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM. The universe, for
example, can be viewed as a hierarchy of systems. Any system within that hierarchy is composed
of lower level systems. As such, we refer to it as a system of systems (SoS). Systems within the
hierarchy range from inﬁnitely large, complex systems that exceed human comprehension and
knowledge down to the smallest instance of physical matter.
     When humans, especially system analysts and SEs, attempt to communicate about systems
within the hierarchy of systems, the context of their viewpoint and semantics becomes a critical
communications issue. Despite the breadth of the English language in terms of words, those appli-
cable to the engineering of systems are ﬁnitely limited. Thus, when we attempt to apply a limited
set of semantics to large numbers of system levels, confusion ultimately results.
     A common comment that echoes throughout engineering development organizations is Whose
system are you referring to? The question surfaces during conversations among Users, the Acquirer,
and System Developers. Engineering organizations grapple with trying to understand the context
of each person’s semantics and viewpoint of the system. The problem is exacerbated by a mixture
of SEs with varying degrees of semantics knowledge derived from: 1) on the job training (OJT),
2) personal study, 3) brochureware, and 4) formal training.
     This section introduces the concept of system levels of abstraction that form the semantics
frame of reference used in this text. We deﬁne the context of each level of abstraction. Given that
system size and complexity vary from system to system, we describe how to tailor these levels to
your SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI). We conclude with some guidelines that govern system
decomposition and integration.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     • What is an abstraction?
     • For a six-level system, what are its levels of abstraction?
     • How do you tailor the levels of abstraction to ﬁt your system?
     • Describe the scope and boundaries of a Level 0 or Tier 0 System?
     • Describe the scope and entity relationships of a Level 1 or Tier 1 System?
     • Describe the scope and entity relationships of a Level 2 or Tier 2 System?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

76
                                                 9.2 Establishing a Semantics Frame of Reference   77

    • Describe the scope and entity relationships of a Level 3 or Tier 3 System?
    • Describe the scope and entity relationships of a Level 4 or Tier 4 System?
    • Describe the scope and entity relationships of a Level 5 or Tier 5 System?
    • Describe the scope and entity relationships of a Level 6 or Tier 6 System?
    • Describe the scope and entity relationships of a Level 7 or Tier 7 System?
    • For an eight-level system, identify entity relationships between the various levels of
      abstraction
    • For an eight-level system, identify the entity relationships for system integration.

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Product Structure The hierarchical structure of a physical system that represents decom-
      positional relationships of physical entities. A top assembly drawing, speciﬁcation tree, and
      a bill of materials (BOM) are primary documents for describing a SYSTEM’s product
      structure.


9.2 ESTABLISHING A SEMANTICS FRAME OF REFERENCE

One of your ﬁrst tasks as a system analyst or SE is to establish a semantics frame of reference for
your SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI). When most people refer to systems, they communicate about
a system from their own observer’s frame of reference of everyday work tasks. When you listen to
communications between Users, the Acquirer, and System Developers, you soon discover that one
person’s SYSTEM equates to another person’s SUBSYSTEM, and so forth.

The System Context and Integration Points
When a system is speciﬁed and procured, one of the key issues is to understand the SYSTEM OF
INTEREST (SOI) or deliverable system’s context within the User’s OPERATING ENVIRON-
MENT. From a hierarchical system of systems (SoS) context, a System Developer’s contract deliv-
erable system is an entity within the User’s HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM abstraction. We refer to
the location within the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM where the deliverable system is integrated as
its Integration Point (IP).

Who Is the System’s User?
Part of the challenge in deﬁning the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) is identifying the User(s).
Some systems have both direct and indirect Users. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 9.1
A computer system may have several Users. These include:
1. The day-to-day operator of the computer system.
2. Maintenance personnel.
3. Personnel who receive work products generated by the computer system.
4. Trainers who provide hands-on instruction to the operators.
5. Electronic mail recipients.

So, when you say you are developing a system for the “User,” to which user are you referring?
78    Chapter 9   System Levels of Abstraction and Semantics

Solving the Semantics Communication Problem
One of the ways to alleviate this problem is to establish a standard set of semantics that enable SEs
from all disciplines to communicate intelligibly using a common contextual language. We need to
establish a standard semantics convention. Once the convention is established, update the appro-
priate command media—meaning the organizational policies and procedures for use in training
organizational personnel.


9.3 UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM LEVELS OF ABSTRACTION

When we address the deliverable system context, we need a standard way of communicating the
embedded levels of abstraction. Since all systems are hierarchical, the User’s system may be a sup-
porting element of HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM. Given the large number of direct and indirect
Users of the system, how can we establish a simple method of communicating these levels of
abstraction? First, let’s deﬁne the term:

Author’s Note 9.1 On the surface, you may view the discussion in this section as academic
and esoteric. The reality is you, your customer (the User, Acquirer, etc.), and vendors must reach
a common consensus as to WHAT IS and WHAT IS NOT part of the SOI or deliverable system.
Does your contract or agreement explicitly delineate boundaries of the deliverable system? Ulti-
mately, when the system is veriﬁed and validated, you do not want any contract conﬂicts as to
WHAT IS or IS NOT included in the deliverable system.
    In the contracts world, objective evidence such as a Statement of Objectives (SOOs), System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS), Contract Work Breakdown Structures (CWBSs), and Terms and
Conditions (Ts&Cs) serve as mechanisms for documenting the understanding between both parties
regarding the system’s boundaries and work to be accomplished relative to those boundaries. As
such, they provide the frame of reference for settling programmatic and technical issues. In general,
undocumented intentions and assumptions about a system’s boundaries are unacceptable.

How the term abstraction applies to systems is illustrated in Figure 9.1. Beginning in the upper
left corner, a system, product, or service consists of an initial set of loosely coupled entities such
as ideas, objectives, concepts, and parts (i.e., items A through N).
     If we analyze these entities or objects, we may determine that various groupings may share a
common set of objectives, characteristics, outcomes, etc. as illustrated in the lower left portion of
the ﬁgure. We identify several groupings of items:
     1. Entity 10 consists of Entities A and E.
     2. Entity 20 consists of Entities C, F, and I.
     3. Entity 30 consists of Entities D, J, H, and M.
     4. Entity 40 consists of Entities B, K, L, N, and O.
Each entity represents a class of object or abstraction. Abstractions or classes of objects are actu-
ally hierarchical groupings that suppress lower level details as illustrated by the right side of the
Figure 9.1. Here we have a structure that represents the hierarchical structure, or taxonomy, of a
system and each of its levels of abstraction.
     The concept of generic levels of abstraction is useful information for simple systems. However,
large, complex systems involve multiple levels of detail or abstraction. Where this is the case, How
do system analysts and SEs delineate one level of abstraction from another? They do this by estab-
                                                                            9.3 Understanding System Levels of Abstraction        79

         Initial Set of Entities
                 A                   C           M                          Hierarchical Levels of Abstraction
  L                      N

         G                       J           H                                 Level of        System
                     D                                                        Abstraction
                                     F
   I         E           B                       K



                                                                   Level of     Entity 10   Entity 20     Entity 30   Entity 40
             Abstract via Defined Criteria                        Abstraction
   Entity
    10
                         A                   F                                          A             C           D           B

                                         C           I           Entity                 E             F           J           K
                         E                                        20
Entity                                                                                                I           H           L
 30
                     J       H               B           K                               Level of                M            N
                                                 N                                      Abstraction
                     D       M                               O                                                                O
                                             L
                                                                   Entity
                                                                    40
Figure 9.1 Deﬁnition of Abstraction




lishing an observer’s frame of reference convention. In a contractual context, the contract estab-
lishes the basis.

Establishing a Frame of Reference Convention
Some organizations establish a contextual frame of reference convention for a system to facilitate
communications about speciﬁc entities within the system. The intent is to designate a reference
point for the deliverable system. One example convention employs Level 0, Level 1, Level 2, and
so forth semantics as depicted in Figure 9.2. Another convention employs Tier 0, Tier 1, and so
forth semantics. However, Levels or Tiers 0 through X are simply identiﬁers that need more explicit
nomenclature labels. Table 9.1 provides an example nomenclature naming convention and a brief,
scoping deﬁnition.
     The key point of this discussion is for you and your colleagues to establish a semantics con-
vention (Level 0/Tier 0, Level 1/Tier 1, etc.) that enables the team to communicate with a common
frame of reference relative to the User’s system—i.e. Level 0 or Tier 0. Based on an understand-
ing of the system levels of abstraction, let’s explore how we deﬁne and depict these graphically.

Relating System Levels of Abstraction and Semantics to
System Architecture
The preceding discussion describes each level and entity in terms of its hierarchical and peer
level entity relationships. These relationships provide the basic framework for deﬁning the system
logical and physical architectures discussed later in Part II on System Design and Development
Practices.
80    Chapter 9               System Levels of Abstraction and Semantics


                                                                           USER’s System
                             Level 0 or Tier 0
                                                                           Higher Order System
Higher Levels                    System



                             Level 1 or Tier 1              SYSTEM Level                         Other
                                 Systems                                                     Organizational
                                                                                                Systems
                             Level 2 or Tier 2               SEGMENTS
      Level of Abstraction




                                 Systems

                             Level 3 or Tier 3               PRODUCTS
                                 Systems
                                                                                                   Your
                             Level 4 or Tier 4              SUBSYSTEMS
                                                                                                  System
                                 Systems

                             Level 5 or Tier 5              ASSEMBLIES
                                 Systems

                             Level 6 or Tier 6            SUBASSEMBLIES
                                 Systems

Lower Levels                  Level 7 or Tier 7                PARTS


Figure 9.2 System Levels of Abstraction




Tailoring Levels of Abstraction for Your System’s Application
The preceding discussion also introduced a set of semantics for application to large, complex
systems. You and your organization may or may not have an eight-level system. Tailor the number
of system levels of abstraction to match your system’s application.
     To illustrate this point, Figure 9.3 presents a tailored application of the standard system levels.
The left side of the ﬁgure represents the standard system levels; the right side represents an orga-
nization’s tailoring of the standard system levels. In this case the organization has adopted the fol-
lowing semantics: User system, SYSTEM, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, and PART levels. As a
result reference level numbers. (Level 1, Level 2, etc.) have been sequentially applied to match the
tailoring.


9.4 SYSTEM DECOMPOSITION AND INTEGRATION
DESIGN GUIDELINES

System structures are viewed from two SE perspectives:
     1. Analytically, as a top-down, hierarchical decomposition or expansion.
     2. Physically, as bottom-up, vertically integrated sets of entities.
System composition entity relationships (ERs) enable us to analytically decompose hierarchical
systems into manageable design levels of complexity. Figure 9.4 provides a framework for the rules
stated in Table 9.2.
                                      9.4 System Decomposition and Integration Design Guidelines         81

Table 9.1 System levels of abstraction descriptions

Level      Nomenclature                                    Scoping Deﬁnition
or Tier     (Optional)

0         User’s              A level of abstraction that represents the User’s business environment with
          SYSTEM Level        your SYTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) as an embedded element. We refer to
                              this as the Level 0 or Tier 0 system.
1         SYSTEM Level        A level of abstraction that describes on the top-level representation of your
                              SOI from the organization’s (observer’s) frame of reference.
                              Architectural representations (i.e., an architectural block diagram, ABD)
                              of the SYSTEM level include the SOI boundaries, interfaces to external
                              systems in the operating environment, and embedded SEGMENT level
                              entities (if applicable) or PRODUCT level entities and their interfaces. This
                              level of abstraction is referred to as a Level 1 or Tier 1 system.
2         SEGMENT Level       Refers to system entities at the ﬁrst level of decomposition below the
          (optional)          SYSTEM level. Each instance of a SEGMENT level entity is referred to as
                              a Level 2 or Tier 2 system.
                              An architectural representation of a SEGMENT level entity includes:
                              1. Level 3 or Tier 3 PRODUCTS and lower level entities.
                              2. Their internal PRODUCT level relationships.
                              3. The SEGMENT’s relationships with external entities within the SYSTEM
                                 (i.e., with other SEGMENTS) and external systems beyond the
                                 SYSTEM’s boundaries, as applicable. Consider the following example:
                              EXAMPLE 9.2 A communications SYSTEM might consist of land-based,
                              sea-based, air-based, and space-based SEGMENTS.
3         PRODUCT Level       Refers to system entities at the ﬁrst level of decomposition below the
          (optional)          SEGMENT level. Each instance of a PRODUCT Level entity is referred to
                              as a Level 3 or Tier 3 system.
                              An architectural representation of a PRODUCT level entity includes:
                              1. Level 4 or Tier 4 SUBSYSTEMS and lower level entities.
                              2. Their internal SUBSYSTEM level entity relationships.
                              3. The PRODUCT’s relationships with external entities within the SYSTEM
                                 (i.e., with other PRODUCTS) and external systems beyond the
                                 SYSTEM’s boundaries, as applicable.
4         SUBSYSTEM           Refers to system entities at the ﬁrst level of decomposition below the
          Level               PRODUCT Level. Each instance of a SUBSYSTEM level entity is referred
                              to as a Level 4 or Tier 4 system.
                              An architectural representation of a SUBSYSTEM level entity includes:
                              1. Level 5 or Tier 5 ASSEMBLIES and lower level entities.
                              2. Their internal ASSEMBLY level entity relationships.
                              3. The SUBSYSTEM’s relationships with external entities within the
                                 SYSTEM (i.e., with other SUBSYSTEMS) or external systems beyond
                                 the SYSTEM’s boundaries, as applicable.
5         ASSEMBLY            Refers to system entities at the ﬁrst level of decomposition below the
          Level               SUBSYSTEM level. Each instance of an ASSEMBLY level entity is
                              referred to as a Level 5 or Tier 5 system.
                              An architectural representation of an ASSEMBLY level entity includes:

                                                                                                (continued)
82    Chapter 9   System Levels of Abstraction and Semantics

Table 9.1 continued

Level      Nomenclature                               Scoping Deﬁnition
or Tier     (Optional)

                              1. Level 6 or Tier 6 COMPONENTS and lower level entities.
                              2. Their internal SUBASSEMBLY level entity relationships.
                              3. The ASSEMBLY’s relationships with external entities within the
                                 SYSTEM (i.e., with other ASSEMBLIES) or external systems beyond
                                 the SYSTEM’s boundaries, as applicable.
6         SUBASSEMBLY         Refers to system entities at the ﬁrst level of decomposition below the
          Level               ASSEMBLY level. Each instance of a SUBASSEMBLY level entity is
                              referred to as a Level 6 or Tier 6 system.
                              Architectural representation of a SUBASSEMBLY Level entity includes:
                              1. Level 7 or Tier 7 PARTS.
                              2. Their internal PART level entity relationships.
                              3. The SUBASSEMBLY’s relationships with external entities within the
                                 SYSTEM (i.e., with other SUBASSEMBLIES) or external systems
                                 beyond the SYSTEM’s boundaries, as applicable.
7         PART Level          Refers to the lowest level decompositional element of a system.
                              An architectural representation of a PART includes form factor envelope
                              drawings, schematics, and models.
                              Author’s Note 9.2 Engineering drawings, which are produced at all
                              system levels of abstraction, consist of two basic types:
                              1. Dimensional drawings or schematics for internally developed or
                                 externally procured and modiﬁed internally items.
                              2. Source control drawings that bound part parameters and characteristics
                                 for externally procured parts.
                              For software systems, the PART level equates to a source line of code
                              (SLOC).


Author’s Note 9.3 Hierarchical decomposition follows the same rules as outlining a report.
Avoid having a single item subordinated to a higher level item. Good design practice suggests that
you should always have at least two or more entities at a subordinated level. In the case of systems
this does not mean that the subordinate entities must be at the same level of abstraction.
     For example, the Bill of Materials (BOM)—meaning a parts list—for a top level assembly
within a product structure may consist of at least one or more SUBSYSTEMS, one or more ASSEM-
BLIES, and at least one or more PARTS kit (e.g., nuts and bolts). If we depict the BOM as an inden-
tured list, the PARTS kit used to mechanically and electrically connect the SUBSYSTEMS and
ASSEMBLIES into an INTEGRATED SYSTEM may be at the same level of abstraction as the SUB-
SYSTEMS and ASSEMBLIES.

     As a ﬁnal note, this text treats entities at any level of abstraction as components of the system.

9.5 SUMMARY

Our discussion in this chapter has introduced the hierarchical concept of system levels of abstraction and
semantics. This hierarchical framework enables SEs to standardize analysis and communications about their
SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI). The intent of a semantics convention is to synchronize members of a System
Developer’s team, the Acquirer, and the User on a common set of terms to use in communicating complex
hierarchies.
                                                                                                                                9.5 Summary    83

 Standard System Levels                                                         Tailored System Levels

                       End User’s System                 Level 0                    End User’s System                            Level 0

                            SYSTEM Level                                             SYSTEM Level                                Level 1
                           (System of Interest)
                                                         Level 1                    (System of Interest)


                              SEGMENT Level              Level 2                    SEGMENT Level


                               PRODUCT Level             Level 3                    PRODUCT Level
                                                                     Tailored
              SUBSYSTEM Level                            Level 4                   SUBSYSTEM Level                               Level 2

                      ASSEMBLY Level                     Level 5                    ASSEMBLY Level


   COMPONENT Level                                       Level 6                   COMPONENT Level                               Level 3

                                       PART Level        Level 7                        PART Level                               Level 4
Figure 9.3 System Levels of Abstraction and Tailoring Example




                                                    SYSTEM
                                                     SYSTEM


                                                                            SEGMENTS
                                                                             SEGMENTS
   System Hierarchical Decomposition




                                                                    PRODUCTS
                                                                     PRODUCTS
                                                                                                  System Integration




                                                          SUBSYSTEMS
                                                           SUBSYSTEMS



                                                              ASSEMBLIES
                                                               ASSEMBLIES


                                                                                                                       Where:
                                                      SUBASSEMBLIES
                                                       SUBASSEMBLIES
                                                                                                                            = Composition
                                                                                                                            = Consists of
                                                                                                                            = May or may not
                                                                PARTS
                                                                 PARTS                                                        consist of

Figure 9.4 System Decomposition/Integration Rules
84    Chapter 9    System Levels of Abstraction and Semantics

Table 9.2 System entity decomposition and integration rules

Level or Tier             Entity                          Entity Decomposition/Integration rules

0                 User Level            The User’s SYSTEM is bounded by its organizational mission and
                                        consists of the system element assets required to accomplish that
                                        mission within its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
1                 SYSTEM Level          Each instance of a SYSTEM consists of at least two or more
                                        instances of SEGMENT, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY,
                                        SUBASSEMBLY, or PART level entities or combinations thereof.
2                 SEGMENT Level         If the SEGMENT level of abstraction or class is applicable, each
                                        SEGMENT level entity consists of at least two or more instances of
                                        PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, or PART
                                        level entities or combinations thereof.
3                 PRODUCT               If the PRODUCT level of abstraction or class is applicable, each
                  Level                 instance of a PRODUCT level entity consists of at least two or
                                        more instances of SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, or
                                        PART level entities or combinations thereof.
4                 SUBSYSTEM             If the SUBSYSTEM level of abstraction or class is applicable, each
                  Level                 instance of a SUBSYSTEM level entity consists of at least two or
                                        more instances of ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, or PART level
                                        entities or combinations thereof.
5                 ASSEMBLY              If the ASSEMBLY level of abstraction or class is applicable, each
                  Level                 instance of an ASSEMBLY level entity consists of at least two or
                                        more instances of SUBASSEMBLY or PART level entities or
                                        combinations thereof.
6                 SUBASSEMBLY           If the SUBASSEMBLY level of abstraction or class is applicable,
                  Level                 each instance of a SUBASSEMBLY level entity must consist of at
                                        least two or more instances of PART level entities.
7                 PART                  The PART level is the lowest decompositional element of a system.
                  Level

Note: For hierarchical decomposition, read the table top-down from Level 0 to Level 7 order; for integration, read the
table bottom-up in reverse order—from Level 7 to Level 0.



      As part of our discussion, we provided a mechanism for System Developers that allows them to bench-
mark their system in the context of the User’s larger system. This was accomplished using the Level 0 or Tier
0 convention. This convention, or whatever you and your team decide to use, must answer the central ques-
tion, Whose system are you referring to?


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
   (a) Equate system levels of abstraction to multi-level entities of the physical system selected.
   (b) Develop an entity relationships diagram that identiﬁes physical entity relationships.
                                                                      Organization Centric Exercises   85

ORGANIZATION CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a program organization and investigate what levels of abstraction and semantics are used.
2. Research your organization’s command media for guidance in identifying levels of abstraction.
   (a) What guidance, if any, is provided?
   (b) How does each program establish its own guidance?
Chapter              10

     The System of Interest Architecture

10.1 INTRODUCTION

The central focal point for the development of any system is the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
consisting of the MISSION SYSTEM(s) and its SUPPORT SYSTEM(s). Since every system within
the supply chain performs two roles—MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM—analysis
reveals that each role consists of seven classes of system elements that form its architectural
framework.
     This section introduces the concept of SOI system elements. We identify the system elements
and describe the System Element Architecture that forms the analytical basis for analyzing systems
and their interactions with their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. We describe the scope and bound
the contents of each element.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     • What is an SOI?
     • What are the key elements of an SOI?
     • Graphically depict the generalized system architecture of an SOI including its external
       interfaces.
     • What are the key elements of a MISSION SYSTEM?
     • Graphically depict the generalized system architecture of a MISSION SYSTEM including its
       external interfaces.
     • What is the scope of the PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, MISSION RESOURCES, PROCE-
       DURAL DATA, FACILITIES, and SYSTEM RESPONSES elements?
     • What are the key elements of the EQUIPMENT Element?
     • Why is the SOFTWARE Element separate from the EQUIPMENT Element?
     • What are the key elements of the SUPPORT SYSTEM?
     • Graphically depict the generalized system architecture of a SUPPORT SYSTEM including
       its external interfaces.
     • How does the MISSION SYSTEM architecture differ from the SUPPORT SYSTEM
       architecture?
     • What are the key elements of a SUPPORT SYSTEM’s EQUIPMENT Element?
     • What are CSE and PSE?



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

86
                                                                                              10.2 The System Element Architecture Construct        87


                                       System of Interest
                                             (SOI)                                              MISSION SYSTEM(s)
                                                    1                                                   Mission
                                                                                                         Mission                 6
                                                                               2                       Resources
                                                                                                        Resources
                                  16                                  15                                Element
                                                                                      3                  Element             5
            ENVIRONMENT
  OPERATINGENVIRONMENT




                                            SUPPORT
                                             SUPPORT                               Procedural
                                            SYSTEM(s)
                                             SYSTEM(s)                              Procedural
                                                                                      Data
                                                                                                           4             Personnel
                                                                                       Data                               Personnel
                                                  • •Personnel
                                                      Personnel                     Element                               Element
                                                                                     Element                               Element
                                                 • •Equipment
                                                     Equipment
                                               MissionResources
                                          • •Mission      Resources
                                                 ProceduralData
                                             • •Procedural     Data                       9                                  7
                                                  • •Facilities
 OPERATING




                                                      Facilities                                           8
                                                SystemResponses
                                          • •System      Responses
                                                                                           System
                                                                                            System                      Equipment
                                                                                                                         Equipment
                                                                                        Responses
                                                                                         Responses
                                     17                             14                                                    Element
                                                                                                                            Element
                                                                                        • •Products
                                                                                            Products            10      • •Hardware
                                                                                                                            Hardware
                                                                                     • •By-Products
                                                                                         By-Products
                                                                       13                                               • •Software
                                                                                                                            Software
                                                                                        • •Services
                                                                                            Services                     • •Manuals
                                                                                                                             Manuals
                                                                                        • •Behavior
                                                                                            Behavior           11
                                                   12


                          = Physical Interface           = Logical Interface
                                                                                    For simplicity, the SOFTWARE Element is placed under the
                                                                                    EQUIPMENT Element. Some have a separate SOFTWARE Element.   1
Figure 10.1 The System of Interest (SOI) Architecture and its System Elements


10.2 THE SYSTEM ELEMENT ARCHITECTURE CONSTRUCT

Every human-made system consists of a generalized framework we refer to as the System Element
Architecture (SEA). The SEA represents a logical arrangement of system elements that serve as gen-
eralized construct or template for systems design and analysis. Figure 10.1 provides a graphical
representation of the SEA. To promote readability and simplicity in the ﬁgure, the OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT is abstracted as a single entity.
     Every system performs MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM roles as part of its
tasking from HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS. Regardless of the system role, each system consists
of combinations of system elements with speciﬁc system and mission objectives.

Mission System and Support System Compositional Elements
Each MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM consists of a unique set of integrated system
elements that enable the system to accomplish its mission and objectives. The mission/support
system elements are PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE, MISSION RESOURCES,
PROCEDURAL DATA, and SYSTEM RESPONSES. Table 10.1 relates each of these elements to
the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM roles.

Author’s Note 10.1 MISSION SYSTEMS such as aircraft, vehicles, etc. do not have a FACIL-
ITIES Element. In contrast, a home or an ofﬁce owned by the occupants, as a MISSION SYSTEM,
does have a FACILITIES Element.

SOI Architectural System Elements
The System Element Architecture consists of analytical abstractions that represent the SYSTEM
OF INTEREST (SOI) interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. The SOI consists of
the MISSION SYSTEM as an abstraction with interfaces to the SUPPORT SYSTEM.
88   Chapter 10   The System of Interest Architecture

Table 10.1 System elements common to MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM roles

System Element                        MISSION SYSTEM Role                    SUPPORT SYSTEM Role

PERSONNEL                                         •                                    •
EQUIPMENT                                         •                                    •
MISSION RESOURCES                                 •                                    •
PROCEDURAL DATA                                   •                                    •
SYSTEM RESPONSES                                  •                                    •
FACILITIES                                                                             •




 EXAMPLE 10.1
A new automobile serves a MISSION SYSTEM (role) for the User. The transporter vehicle that delivers the
new car to the dealership where the car is purchased serves as a SUPPORT SYSTEM (role) to the MISSION
SYSTEM. To the organization that owns and operates the transporter, the transporter vehicle performs a
MISSION SYSTEM role.

The PERSONNEL System Element
The PERSONNEL element 1) consists of all human roles required to perform the system mission
operations in accordance with safe operating practices and procedures, and 2) has overall account-
ability for accomplishing mission objectives assigned by HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS.
     • MISSION SYSTEM PERSONNEL Roles Include all personnel directly required to
       operate the MISSION SYSTEM and accomplish its objectives. In general, these personnel
       are typically referred to as System Operators.
     • SUPPORT SYSTEM PERSONNEL Roles Include personnel who support the MISSION
       SYSTEM through maintenance, supply support, training, publications, security, and other
       activities.

The EQUIPMENT System Element
The EQUIPMENT system element consists of any physical, multi-level, electromechanical optical
device that represents an integration of the HARDWARE Element and the SOFTWARE Element,
if applicable. This integration of elements is:
     1. Developed and/or procured to satisfy a system entity capability and performance
        requirement.
     2. Used to operate and maintain the system.
     3. Used to generate or store energy required by the system.
     4. Used to dispose of a system.
The ultimate success of the MISSION SYSTEM requires that the EQUIPMENT Element be oper-
ationally available and fully capable of supporting the system missions and the safety of its PER-
SONNEL to ensure a level of success. As a result specialty engineering (reliability, availability,
maintainability, vulnerability, survivability, safety, human factors, etc.) becomes a key focus of the
EQUIPMENT Element. Depending on the application, EQUIPMENT may be ﬁxed, transportable,
or mobile.
                                                    10.2 The System Element Architecture Construct         89

The HARDWARE System Element
The Hardware Element represents the integrated set of multi-level, physical components—mechan-
ical, electrical/electronic, or optical less software—conﬁgured in accordance with the system archi-
tecture. Whereas the Hardware Element is common to both the MISSION SYSTEM and the
SUPPORT SYSTEM, there are difference in the classes of components. MISSION SYSTEM hard-
ware components are physically integrated to provide the capabilities required to accomplish
mission objectives. SUPPORT SYSTEM hardware components consist of tools required to main-
tain and support the MISSION SYSTEM. These tools are categorized as: 1) Common Support
Equipment (CSE) and 2) Peculiar Support Equipment (PSE).

Common Support EQUIPMENT (CSE). Common support equipment (CSE) consists of the
items required to support and maintain the system or portions of the system while not directly
engaged in the performance of its mission. CSE items are in the organization’s inventory for support
of other systems. CSE excludes:
    • Overall planning, management and task analysis functions inherent in the work breakdown
      structure element, Systems Engineering/Program Management.
    • Common support equipment, presently in the inventory or commercially available, bought
      by the User, not by the Acquirer.

Peculiar Support EQUIPMENT (PSE). MIL-HDBK-881 characterizes peculiar support
equipment (PSE) as follows:
    . . . the design, development, and production of those deliverable items and associated software
    required to support and maintain the system or portions of the system while the system is not directly
    engaged in the performance of its mission, and which are not common support equipment (CSE).
                                                                (Source: Mil-HDBK-881, Appendix H, para. 3.6).

PSE includes:
    • Vehicles, equipment, tools, etc., used to fuel, service, transport, hoist, repair, overhaul, assemble,
      disassemble, test, inspect, or otherwise maintain mission equipment.
    • Any production of duplicate or modiﬁed factory test or tooling equipment delivered to the (Acquirer)
      for use in maintaining the system. (Factory test and tooling equipment initially used by the contractor
      in the production process but subsequently delivered to the (Acquirer) will be included as cost of the
      item produced.)
    • Any additional equipment or software required to maintain or modify the software portions of the
      system.
                                                                (Source: Mil-HDBK-881, Appendix H, para. 3.6).


CSE and PCE Components
Common support equipment (CSE) and peculiar support equipment (PSE) each employ two cate-
gories of equipment that are common to both types: 1) test, measurement, and diagnostics equip-
ment (TMDE) and 2) support and handling equipment.

Test, Measurement, and Diagnostics Equipment (TMDE). MIL-HDBK-881 characterizes
test, measurement, and diagnostics equipment (TMDE) as follows:
    . . . consists of the peculiar or unique testing and measurement equipment which allows an operator
    or maintenance function to evaluate operational conditions of a system or equipment by performing
90    Chapter 10   The System of Interest Architecture

     speciﬁc diagnostics, screening or quality assurance effort at an organizational, intermediate, or depot
     level of equipment support.
          TMDE, for example, includes:
     • Test measurement and diagnostic equipment, precision measuring equipment, automatic test equipment,
       manual test equipment, automatic test systems, test program sets, appropriate interconnect devices,
       automated load modules, taps, and related software, ﬁrmware and support hardware (power supply
       equipment, etc.) used at all levels of maintenance.
     • Packages which enable line or shop replaceable units, printed circuit boards, or similar items to be
       diagnosed using automatic test equipment.
                                                               (Source: Mil-HDBK-881, Appendix H, para. 3.7.1)


Support and Handling EQUIPMENT. Support and handling EQUIPMENT consists of the
deliverable tools and handling equipment used for support of the MISSION SYSTEM. This includes
“. . . ground support equipment (GSE), vehicular support equipment, powered support equipment,
unpowered support equipment, munitions material handling equipment, materiel-handling
equipment, and software support equipment (hardware and software).” (Source: Mil-HDBK-881,
Appendix H, para. 3.7.2)


The SOFTWARE System Element
The SOFTWARE element consists of all software code (source, object, etc.) and documentation
required for installation, execution, and maintenance of the EQUIPMENT Element. You may ask
why some organizations separate the SOFTWARE Element from its EQUIPMENT element. There
are several reasons:
     1. EQUIPMENT and SOFTWARE may be developed separately or procured from different
        vendors.
     2. SOFTWARE may provide the ﬂexibility to alter system capabilities and performance
        (decision-making, behavior, etc.) without having to physically modify the EQUIPMENT,
        assuming the current EQUIPMENT design is adequate.


Author’s Note 10.2 The EQUIPMENT element consists of integrated HARDWARE and SOFT-
WARE as subordinated and supporting elements. Engineers become prematurely focused with
hardware and software details long before higher level SOI decisions have been made—namely
EQUIPMENT requirements. EQUIPMENT decisions lead to lower level HARDWARE and SOFT-
WARE use cases and decisions. These decisions subsequently lead to the question: What capabil-
ities should be implemented in HARDWARE versus those implemented in SOFTWARE?


SE logic says that HARDWARE and SOFTWARE may be separately procurable items. The under-
lying philosophy is SOFTWARE, as a system element, should be isolated to accommodate modi-
ﬁcation without necessarily having to modify the HARDWARE.
     Application speciﬁc SOFTWARE can be procured as a separate item, regardless of its posi-
tion within the system structure as long as a controlled software requirements speciﬁcation (SRS)
exists for the item’s development. As new versions of application speciﬁc SOFTWARE are released,
the User can procure the item without modifying the EQUIPMENT. There may be exceptions,
however, where SOFTWARE requirements and priorities force the User to upgrade the computer
HARDWARE capabilities and performance.
                                                                                   10.2 The System Element Architecture Construct   91

               To                         System Element




                                                               Mission Resources

                                                                                      System Responses
From




                                                  Procedural
                                      Equipment
                          Personnel




                                                                                                         Facilities
                                                  Data
 System Element

 Personnel                   1           2           3          4                          5                6

 Equipment                   7           8           9         10                        11               12

 Procedural Data           13          14           15         16                        17               18

 Mission Resources         19          20           21         22                       23                24

 System Responses          25          26           27         28                       29                30

 Facilities                31          32           33         34                        35               36

    Where: X     = entity relationships and associated capabilities
Figure 10.2 System Element Entity Relationships Matrix


The PROCEDURAL DATA System Element
The PROCEDURAL DATA element consists of all documentation that speciﬁes HOW to safely
operate, maintain, deploy, and store the EQUIPMENT Element. In general, the PROCEDURAL
DATA Element is based on operating procedures. Operating procedures document sequences of
PERSONNEL actions required to ensure the proper and safe operation of the system to achieve its
intended level of performance under speciﬁed operating conditions. The PROCEDURAL DATA
Element includes items such as reference manuals, operator guides, standard operating practices
and procedures (SOPPs), and checklists.

Author’s Note 10.3 Unfortunately, many people view checklists as bureaucratic nonsense,
especially for organizational processes. Remember, checklists incorporate lessons learned and best
practices that keep you out of trouble. Checklists are a state of mind—you can view them as
“forcing” you to do something or as a “reminder” to “think about what you may have overlooked.”
As a colleague notes, when landing an aircraft, if the checklist says to “place the landing gear in
the deployed and locked position,” you may want to consider putting the landing gear down before
you land! Bureaucratic or not, the consequences for a lack of compliance can be catastrophic!


The MISSION RESOURCES System Element
The MISSION RESOURCES element includes all data, consumables, and expendables required
on-board to support the system mission. This element consists of:
    1. Data to enable the EQUIPMENT and the PERSONNEL Elements to successfully plan and
       conduct the mission based on “informed” decisions.
    2. Consumables such as fuel and water to support the EQUIPMENT and PERSONNEL Ele-
       ments during the mission.
92    Chapter 10   The System of Interest Architecture

     3. Expendables such as personal and defensive systems and products to ensure a safe and
        secure mission.
     4. Recorded data for postmission performance analysis and assessment.
Let’s scope each of the four types of MISSION RESOURCES in detail.
     • Mission Data Resources Consist of all real-time and non-real-time data resources such as
       tactical plans, mission event timelines (METs), navigational data, weather conditions and
       data, situational assessments, telecommunications, telemetry, and synchronized time that are
       necessary for performing a mission with a speciﬁed level of success.
     • Expendable Resources Consist of physical entities that are used and discarded, deployed,
       lost, or destroyed during the course of mission operations.
     • Consumable Resources Consist of physical entities that are ingested, devoured, or input into
       a processor that transforms or converts the entity into energy to power the system and may
       involve physical state changes.

The SYSTEM RESPONSES Element
Every natural and human-made system, as a stimulus-response mechanism, responds internally or
externally to stimuli in its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. The responses may be explicit (reports,
communications, altered behavior, etc.) or implicit (mental thoughts, strategies, lessons learned,
behavioral patterns, etc.).
     SYSTEM RESPONSES occur in a variety of forms that we characterize as behavioral pat-
terns, products, services, and by-products throughout the system’s pre-mission, mission, and post-
mission phases of operation. So, what do we mean by system behavior, products, services, and
by-products?
     • System Behavior Consists of SYSTEM RESPONSES based on a plan of action or physical
       stimuli and audiovisual cues such as threats or opportunities. The stimuli and cues invoke
       system behavioral patterns or actions that may be categorized as aggressive, benign, defen-
       sive, and everywhere in between. Behavioral actions include strategic and tactical tactics and
       countermeasures.
     • System Products Include any type of physical outputs, characteristics, or behavioral
       responses to planned and unplanned events, external cues, or stimuli.
     • System By-products Include any type of physical system output or behavioral that is not
       deemed to be a system, product, or service.
     • System Services Any type of physical system behavior, excluding physical products, that
       assist another entity in the conduct of its mission.

Author’s Note 10.4 It is important to note here that abstracting “behavioral responses” via a
“box” called SYSTEM RESPONSES is simply an analytical convenience—not reality. Most system
element descriptions fail to recognize this box for what it is, expected outcome-based system per-
formance such as operational utility, suitability, availability, and effectiveness.


The SUPPORT SYSTEM Element
The SUPPORT SYSTEM consists of an integrated set of system elements depicted in Table 10.1
required to support the MISSION SYSTEM. The SUPPORT SYSTEM and its system elements
perform mission system support operations that consist of the following:
                                                  10.2 The System Element Architecture Construct    93

    • Decision support operations
    • System maintenance operations
    • Manpower and personnel operations
    • Supply support operations
    • Training and training support operations
    • Technical data operations
    • Computer resources support operations
    • Facilities operations
    • Packaging, handling, storage, and transportation (PHST) operations
    • Publications support operations
Let’s brieﬂy describe each of these types of operations.

Decision Support Operations. Mission operations often require critical and timely decisions
based on massive amounts of information that exceed the mental capabilities of the human decision
maker. Decision support operations ensure that the decision maker always has immediate access to
the most current, processed system mission information to support an informed decision.

System Maintenance Operations. System maintenance operations include system main-
tenance support concepts and requirements for manpower and personnel; supply support; support
and test equipment; technical data; training and support; facilities; and packaging, handling, storage,
transportation; computer resources support required insightful planning. Maintenance support
operations establish support for both general system operations and mission speciﬁc operations
throughout the System O&S Phase. Examples include software maintenance concepts, pre-planned
product improvements (P3I), outsourcing, and transition planning.
     Between operational missions, maintenance personnel normally perform corrective and pre-
ventative maintenance on the system. Maintenance activities may be conducted in the ﬁeld, at a
depot or maintenance facility at some central location, or at the manufacturer’s facility.
     Generally, a system may be temporarily removed from active duty during maintenance. Types
of maintenance include:
    1. System upgrades, enhancements, and reﬁnements.
    2. Replenishment and refurbishment of system resources (fuel, training, etc.).
    3. Diagnostic readiness tests.
    4. Backup of system information for archival purposes.
Maintenance may also include investigations of mission or system anomalies through duplication
of technical problem or investigations of system health and status resulting from abnormal operat-
ing conditions before, during, or after a mission. On completion of the maintenance activities, the
system may be returned to a state of operational readiness and active duty or scheduled for system
operator or readiness training.

Manpower and Personnel Operations. Manpower and Personnel operations consist of all
personnel required to manage, operate, and support the system throughout its operational life.
Manpower and personnel considerations include in-house versus contractor tasks, skill mixes,
and human-system interfaces. When designing systems, systems engineering must factor in
considerations of the skill levels of the available personnel, training costs, labor costs of operate,
94   Chapter 10   The System of Interest Architecture

and leverage technology such as built-in diagnostics, information technology, and expert systems
to provide the best life cycle cost trade-offs—given the skill levels.

Supply Support Operations. Supply support operations ensure that all equipment and spares
required to support the primary system, system support, and test equipment and the “supply lines”
for those items are established to support pre-mission, mission, and post-mission operations. Some
organizations refer to the initial support as provisioning and follow-on requirements as routine
replenishment. A key supply support objective is to minimize the number of different PARTS and
promote standardization of parts selection and usage. Key issues to be addressed include
communication transfer media, inventory management, conﬁguration management, storage,
security, and licensing.

Training and Training Support Operations. Training and training support operations ensure
that all personnel required to support the pre-mission, mission, and post-mission operations are
fully trained and supported. Personnel training consists of those activities required to prepare system
personnel such as operators, maintenance personnel, and other support personnel to conduct or
support pre-mission, mission, and postmission operations. Personnel must be trained with the
appropriate skills to perform their assigned mission objectives and tasks on speciﬁc equipment to
achieve the required level of performance and expected results.

Technical Data Operations. Pre-mission, mission, and post-mission operations require
accurate, precise, and timely technical data. Technical data operations support personnel and
computer equipment decision making to ensure that all decisions are made when scheduled or as
appropriate to achieve the mission objectives, level of performance, and expected results.

Computer Resources Support Operations. Many systems are highly dependent on
technology such as computer resources to provide information and processing of data to support
pre-mission, mission, and post-mission operations. Computer resources support operations include:
planning, procurement, upgrade, and maintenance support to ensure that system reliability,
availability, and maintainability (RAM) requirements will be achieved in a cost-effective manner.

Packaging, Handling, Storage, and Transportation (PHST) Operations. During system
deployment, redeployment, and storage, system support activities must provide the capability to
safely and securely transport and store the system and its components. Shipment and storage must
be accomplished to avoid damage or decomposition. PHST activities must have a clear
understanding of the environmental conditions and characteristics that pose risk to the system while
in transit as well as long-term shelf-life effects on materials.

Publications Support Operations. System maintenance and support personnel require
immediate access to the most current information regarding system and system support equipment
to ensure proper maintenance and usage. Publication support activities, sometimes referred to as
Tech Pubs, produce technical manuals, reference guides, and the like, that enable SUPPORT
SYSTEM personnel training activities, maintenance activities, and general operations in support of
pre-mission, mission, and post-mission operations.

The FACILITIES System Element
The FACILITIES element includes all the system entities required to support and sustain the
MISSION SYSTEM Elements and the SUPPORT SYSTEM Elements.
                                                              10.3 System Element Interactions   95

     System support for pre-mission, mission, and post-mission operations requires FACILITIES to
enable operator and support PERSONNEL to accomplish their assigned mission tasks and objec-
tives in a reasonable work environment. Depending on the type of system, these FACILITIES
support the following types of tasks:
    1. Plan, conduct, and control the mission.
    2. Provide decision support.
    3. Brief and debrief personnel.
    4. Store the physical system or product between missions.
    5. Conﬁgure, repair, maintain, refurbish, and replenish system capabilities and resources.
    6. Analyze post-mission data.
Where practical, the FACILITIES element should provide all of the necessary and sufﬁcient capa-
bilities and resources required to support MISSION SYSTEM and human activities during pre-
mission, mission, and post-mission operations objectives. FACILITIES may be owned, leased,
rented, or be provided on a limited one-time use agreement.
      In general, people tend to think of FACILITIES as enclosures that provide shelter, warmth,
and protection. This thought process is driven by human concerns for creature comfort rather than
the mission system. Rhetorically speaking, Does an aircraft ever know that it is sitting in the
rain? No, but members of the SUPPORT SYSTEM’S PERSONNEL Element are aware of the
conditions.
      Perhaps the best way to think of the FACILITY Element is to ask the question: What type of
interface is required to support the following MISSION SYSTEM Elements—namely EQUIPMENT
Element, PERSONNEL Element, MISSION DATA Element, and RESOURCES Element—during all
phases of the mission.
      The FACILITIES Element fulﬁlls a portion of the SUPPORT SYSTEM role. Depending on
the MISSION SYSTEM and its application, the FACILITIES Element may or may not be used in
that context. For example, an aircraft—which is a MISSION SYSTEM—does not require a FACIL-
ITY to perform its primary mission. However, between primary missions, FACILITIES are required
to maintain and prepare the aircraft for its next mission.


10.3 SYSTEM ELEMENT INTERACTIONS

Figure 10.1 illustrates the System Element Architecture (SEA) for a SOI. When you deﬁne your
system and identify physical instances of each system element, the next step is to characterize the
levels of interactions that occur between each interface. The Contract Work Breakdown Structure
(CWBS) should include a CWBS Dictionary that scopes and documents the physical items included
in each CWBS element such as EQUIPMENT.
     One approach to ensuring system element interactions are identiﬁed and scoped is to create a
simple matrix such as the one shown in Figure 10.2. For illustration purposes, each cell of the
system element matrix represents interactions between the row and column elements. For your
system, employ such a scheme and document the interactions in a description of the system archi-
tecture. Then, baseline and release this document to promote communications among team members
developing and making system element decisions.
96    Chapter 10   The System of Interest Architecture

10.4 SUMMARY

In our discussion of the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) architecture we introduced the concept of the system
elements, which are common to all human-made systems be they friendly, benign, or adversarial. The system
elements common to the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM consist of the following:
     • PERSONNEL Element
     • EQUIPMENT Element
     • MISSION RESOURCES Element
     • PROCEDURAL DATA Element
     • SYSTEM RESPONSES Element
     • FACILITIES Element
The FACILITIES Element is typically unique to the SUPPORT SYSTEM.
     Our discussion included the System Element Architecture and illustrated how the system elements are
integrated to establish the basic architectural framework for a MISSION SYSTEM or a SUPPORT SYSTEM.
We are now ready to examine how the system interfaces with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and its
elements.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
   (a) Equate system elements to real world components for each system.
   (b) Prepare a paper entitled “An Architectural Description of the [ﬁll in from list in Chapter 2] System.”


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a system development program within your organization. Research how the program documented
   and speciﬁed the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) architecture in the following System Element areas:
   (a) MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEMs
   (b) PERSONNEL
   (c) MISSION RESOURCES
   (d) PROCEDURAL DATA
   (e) EQUIPMENT
   (f) SYSTEM RESPONSES
   (g) FACILITIES
2. For the system development program above, what lessons learned did technical management identify that
   were overlooked.


REFERENCES

DSMC. 1997. Acquisition Logistics Guide, 3rd ed. Ft.     MIL-HDBK-881. 1998. Work Breakdown Structure. Depart-
  Belvoir, VA.                                            ment of Defense (DoD) Handbook. Washington, DC.
Chapter              11

     The Operating Environment
     Architecture

11.1 INTRODUCTION

The success of any system is ultimately determined by its ability to:
     1. Conduct its planned missions and achieve performance mission objectives.
     2. Cope with threats—namely, vulnerability and survivability—within its prescribed OPER-
        ATING ENVIRONMENT.
For a system to accomplish these objectives, SE’s face several major challenges.
     1. Understand WHAT missions the User plans for the system to accomplish.
     2. Based on the missions, speciﬁcally bound the system’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
     3. Understand the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT opportunities and threats related to those
        missions.
     4. Identify the most likely or probable OPERATING ENVIRONMENT opportunity and threat
        scenarios that inﬂuence/impact system missions.
      The OPERATING ENVIRONMENT represents the totality of natural and human-made enti-
ties that a system must be prepare to cope with during missions and throughout its lifetime. As one
of a system’s key life expectancy dependencies, the system’s ability to: 1) prepare for, 2) conduct,
and 3) complete missions successfully is inﬂuenced by its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What are the two classes of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT domains?
     2. What are the four classes of system elements of a system’s HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS
        domain?
     3. What are the three classes of system elements of a system’s PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
        domain?
     4. What are the four classes of systems that comprise the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT domain?
     5. How do you graphically depict the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT’s architecture that
        includes detail interactions of the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS and PHYSICAL ENVI-
        RONMENT domains?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                 97
98    Chapter 11   The Operating Environment Architecture

11.2 APPLICATION OF THIS CONCEPT

A signiﬁcant aspect of systems engineering (SE) is recognizing the need to fully understand,
analyze, and bound relevant portions a system’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Why? System
analysts and SEs must be capable of:
     1. Fully understanding the User’s organizational system mission, objectives, and most prob-
        able use case applications.
     2. Analytically organizing, extracting, and decomposing the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
        relative to the mission into manageable problem space(s) and solution space(s).
     3. Effectively developing a system solution that ensures mission success within the constraints
        of cost, schedule, technology, support, and risk factors.
    Engineers and analysts can academically analyze a system’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT’s
problem space forever—a condition referred to as “analysis paralysis.” However, success ultimately
depends on making informed decisions based on the key facts, working within the reality of limited
resources, drawing on seasoned system design experience, and exercising good judgment. The
challenge is that most large complex problems require large numbers of disciplinary specialists to
solve these problems. This set of people often has diverging rather than converging viewpoints of
the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
    As a system analyst or SE, your job is to facilitate a convergence and consensus of viewpoints
concerning the deﬁnition of the system’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Convergence and con-
sensus must occur in three key areas:
     1. WHAT IS/IS NOT relevant to the mission in the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT?
     2. WHAT is the degree of importance, signiﬁcance, or inﬂuence?
     3. WHAT is the probability of occurrence of those items of signiﬁcance?
So how do you facilitate a convergence of viewpoints to arrive at a consensus decision?
     As leaders, the system analyst and the SE must have a strategy and approach for quickly organ-
izing and leading the key stakeholders to a convergence and consensus about the OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT. Without a strategy, chaos and indecision can prevail. You need analytical skills
that enable you to establish a framework for OPERATING ENVIRONMENT deﬁnition decision
making.
     As a professional, you have a moral and ethical obligation to yourself, your organization, and
society to ensure the safety, health, and well-being of the User and the public when it comes to
system operations. If you and your team OVERLOOK or choose to IGNORE a key attribute of the
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT that impacts human life and property, there may be SEVERE con-
sequences and penalties. Therefore, establish common analytical models for you and your team to
use in your business applications to ensure you have thoroughly identiﬁed and considered all OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT entities and elements that impact system capabilities and performance.


11.3 OPERATING ENVIRONMENT OVERVIEW

Analytically, the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT that inﬂuences and impacts a system’s missions
can be abstracted several different ways. For discussion purposes the OPERATING ENVIRON-
MENT can be considered as consisting of two high-level domains: 1) HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS
and 2) the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT as shown in Figure 11.1. Let’s deﬁne each of these system
elements.
                                                                 11.3 Operating Environment Overview   99


                                Operating Environment
                                Higher Order Systems Domain
                                     Operating
                                      Operating             Roles&&
                                                           Roles
               Organization
                Organization                                                 Resources
                                                                              Resources
                                     Constraints
                                      Constraints          Missions
                                                           Missions
                 Element
                  Element                                                     Element
                                                                               Element
                                      Element
                                       Element             Element
                                                            Element

   2                                                                             1
           Physical Environment Domain

                      Human-MadeSystems
                     Human-Made   Systems
                        Environment                          6         System of Interest
                         Environment
                          Element
                           Element                                           (SOI)
               5            3                                                MISSION
                                                                              MISSION
                                                                             SYSTEM
                                                                              SYSTEM
                      InducedEnvironment
                     Induced  Environment                    7
                           Element
                            Element

                            4                                               SUPPORT
                                                                             SUPPORT
                                                                            SYSTEM
                                                                             SYSTEM
                      NaturalEnvironment
                     Natural  Environment                    8
                           Element
                            Element


Figure 11.1 Top Level Operating Environment Architecture Construct




HIGH ORDER SYSTEMS Domain
All natural and human-made systems function as individual SYSTEMS OF INTEREST (SOIs)
within a hierarchical system of systems. Each higher level abstraction serves as a HIGHER ORDER
SYSTEM within the system of systems hierarchy that has its own scope of authority and opera-
tional boundaries. HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS are characterized by:
    1. Organizational purpose or mission.
    2. Organizational objectives.
    3. An organizational structure.
    4. Command media such as rules, policies, and procedures of operation.
    5. Resource allocations.
    6. Operating constraints imposed on embedded system entities.
    7. Accountability and objective evidence of valued-added tasks performed.
    8. Delivery of systems, products, and services.
     For most human-made systems, we refer to the vertical HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM–
to–SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) interaction as C3I—meaning command, control, communica-
tions, and intelligence. The Information Age has added a fourth item—computers—thereby
changing the acronym to C4I—command, control, computers, communications, and intelligence.
100     Chapter 11   The Operating Environment Architecture

     If we observe the behavior of HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS and analyze their interactions, we
can derive four classes of system elements: 1) ORGANIZATION, 2) ROLES and MISSIONS,
3) OPERATING CONSTRAINTS, and 4) RESOURCES. Let’s deﬁne each of these system element
classes.
      • ORGANIZATION Element The hierarchical command and control reporting structure,
        authority, and its assigned accountability for organizational roles, missions, and objectives.
      • ROLES AND MISSIONS Element The various roles allocated to and performed by
        HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS and the missions associated with these roles and objectives
        to fulﬁll the organization’s vision. Examples include: strategic and tactical plans, roles, and
        mission goals and objectives.
      • OPERATING CONSTRAINTS Element International, federal, state, and local statutory,
        regulatory, policies, and procedures as well as physical laws and principles that govern and
        constrain PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT systems and SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
        actions and behavior. Examples include: assets, capabilities, consumables and expendables;
        weather conditions; doctrine, ethical, social and cultural considerations; and moral, spiritual,
        philosophical.
      • RESOURCES Element The natural and physical raw materials, investments, and assets
        that are allocated to the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT and SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
        to sustain missions—namely deployment, operations, support, and disposal. Examples
        include commodities such as time, money, and expertise.

Contexts of HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS. HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS have two application
contexts: 1) human-made systems, such as command and control or social structure, and 2) physical
or natural laws.
      • Human-made Systems Context Organizations and governments, exercise hierarchical
        authority, command, and control over lower tier systems via organizational “chain of
        command” structures, policies, and procedures, and mission tasking; constitutions, laws, and
        regulations, public acceptance and opinion, and so on.
      • Physical or Natural Laws Context All systems, human-made and natural, are governed by
        natural and physical laws such as life science, physical science, physics, and chemistry.
Given this structural framework of the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS domain, let’s deﬁne its coun-
terpart, the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT.

The PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT Domain
Human-made systems have some level of interaction with external systems within the PHYSICAL
ENVIRONMENT. In general, we characterize these interactions as friendly, cooperative, benign,
adversarial, or hostile.
    If we observe the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT and analyze its interactions with our system,
we can identify classes of constituent system elements: 1) NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, 2)
HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS, and 3) the INDUCED ENVIRONMENT as shown in Figure 11.1.
Let’s brieﬂy deﬁne each of these:
      • NATURAL ENVIRONMENT Element All nonhuman, living, atmospheric, and geophys-
        ical entities that comprise the Earth and celestial bodies.
      • HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS Element External organizational or fabricated systems
        created by humans that interact with your system entity at all times, during pre-mission,
        mission, and post-mission.
                                                                      11.3 Operating Environment Overview   101

     • INDUCED ENVIRONMENT Element Discontinuities, perturbations, or disturbances
       created when natural phenomenon occur or HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS interact with the
       NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. Examples include thunderstorms, wars, and oil spills.
Based on this high-level introduction and identiﬁcation of the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT ele-
ments deﬁnitions, we are now ready to establish the architecture of the OPERATING ENVIRON-
MENT. Let’s begin with the Physical Environment Domain.

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT Domain Levels of Abstraction
The PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT consists of three levels of analytical abstractions: 1) local envi-
ronment, 2) global environment, and 3) cosmospheric environment. Figure 11.2 uses an entity rela-
tionship diagram (ERD) to illustrate the composition of the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT. At a
high level of abstraction, the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT consists of the three classes of system
elements—HUMAN-MADE, INDUCED, and NATURAL environment elements. Each type of
environment consists of three levels of abstraction-Cosmospheric, Global, or Local.

Author’s Note 11.1 You may determine that some other number of system levels of abstrac-
tion is more applicable to your line of business. That’s okay. What is IMPORTANT is that you and
your team have a simple approach for abstracting the complexity of the PHYSICAL ENVIRON-
MENT domain into manageable pieces. The “pieces” must support meaningful analysis and ensure
coverage of all relevant aspects that relate to your problem and solution spaces. Remember, bound-
ing abstractions for analysis is analogous to cutting a pie into 6, 8, or 10 pieces. As long as you
account for the TOTALITY, you can create as many abstractions as are REASONABLE and PRAC-
TICAL; however, KEEP IT SIMPLE.




         1
                PhysicalEnvironment
               Physical EnvironmentDomain
                                    Domain                               Consists
                                                                           of

               Consists          6
                 of                                      System Elements
                                     7                       8                          9
                                         Human-Made
                                          Human-Made
 2                                                                 Induced
                                                                    Induced                   Natural
                                                                                               Natural
                                           Systems
                                            Systems
          Levels of                      Environment
                                                                 Environment
                                                                  Environment               Environment
                                                                                             Environment
                                          Environment              Element                    Element
         Abstraction                       Element
                                            Element
                                                                    Element                    Element
     3
         Cosmospheric
          Cosmospheric
           Systems
            Systems
         Environment                                    Consists of
          Environment
                 Consists of
     4
            Global
             Global
         Environment
          Environment                                   Consists of

                Consists of
     5
            Local
             Local
         Environment
          Environment
                                                          Consists of

                                                                               Where:
                                                                                    = Generalization

Figure 11.2 Physical Environment System Element Entity Relationships
102     Chapter 11   The Operating Environment Architecture

11.4 PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT DOMAIN SYSTEM ELEMENTS

A system’s PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT consists of three classes of system elements. These
include: 1) the HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS element, 2) the INDUCED ENVIRONMENT element,
and 3) the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT element. Let’s scope and deﬁne each of these elements.

The NATURAL ENVIRONMENT System Element
The NATURAL ENVIRONMENT System Element includes all naturally occurring entities that
are not human-made. These entities are actually environmental “systems” that coexist within a pre-
carious balance of power. In general, these systems represent geophysical and life form classes of
objects.

Cosmospheric Environment Level of Abstraction. The Cosmospheric Environment is
an abstraction that represents the totality of the Cosmos—the universe—as humankind under-
stands it. Analytically, the Cosmospheric Environment consists of an inﬁnite number of Global
Environments.
    You may ask why the Cosmospheric Environment is relevant to SE. Consider space probes that
have ﬂown beyond the boundaries of our solar system. The SEs and physicists who bounded the
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT had to identify all of the global entities that had a potential impact
on the space probe’s mission. Obviously, these global entities did not move out of the way of the
probe’s mission path. The SEs and physicists had to understand:
      1. WHAT entities they might encounter during the missions.
      2. WHAT each global entity’s performance characteristics are.
      3. HOW to navigate and maneuver among those entities throughout the mission without an
         adverse or catastrophic impact.

Global Environment Level of Abstraction. The Global Environment is an abstraction that
represents the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT surrounding a heavenly body. This includes entities
such as stars, planets, and satellites of planets. Analytically, we state that the Global Environment
of any heavenly body consists of an inﬁnite number of Local Environments.
     If you operate an airline, each aircraft is surrounded by a Local Environment within the Earth’s
global environment. In contrast, NASA launches interplanetary space probes experience an inﬁnite
number of local environments throughout the mission and global environments—namely Earth,
planets, and the planetary moons. Although the global environments may share a common set of
physical attributes and characteristics, such as gravity and the atmosphere, their values can vary
signiﬁcantly. As a result, OPERATING ENVIRONMENT requirements may require SEs to bound
ranges of worst-case parameters across the spectrum of global entities encountered.
     As humans, our observer’s frame of reference is planet Earth. Therefore, we typically relate to
the global entity environment as that of the Earth and its gaseous atmosphere—some people simply
call it the Earth’s environment. Applying the same convention to Mars, we could refer to it as the
Mars’s global environment.
     The challenge question is: Where do SEs draw the line to delineate overlapping global envi-
ronment inﬂuences. How do we bound the Earth’s and Moon’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT inﬂu-
ences? Do we arbitrarily draw a line at the midpoint? Obviously, this is not based on scientiﬁc
principles. Alternatively, do we bound the Earth’s and Moon’s environments as a region encom-
passing both bodies with a “no man’s” zone in between? How do we “bound” a varying contin-
uum such as the electromagnetic ﬁeld, the atmosphere, or gravity?
                                                    11.4 Physical Environment System Elements     103

     From an SE perspective, one approach is to delineate the two environments by asking the ques-
tion, What characteristics below some arbitrary threshold are unique or “native” to the “global”
SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)? If the boundary conditions of two or more entities overlap, the
objective would be to determine criteria for the boundary conditions.
     As a systems analyst or SE, you represent the technical side of the program-technical boundary
for the discussions that follow. Thus, you have a professional, technical OBLIGATION to ensure
that the INTEGRITY of these decisions is supported by:
    1. Objective, factual data to the extent practical and available.
    2. Valid assumptions that withstand peer and stakeholder scrutiny.
    3. Most likely or probable operational scenarios and conditions.
Remember, the analytical relevance of the decisions you make here may have a major impact on
your system’s design, cost, reliability, maintainability, vulnerability, survivability, safety, and
risk considerations. These decisions may have adverse impacts on human life, property, and
environment.
     Analytically, we can partition the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT Global and Local levels of
abstraction into ﬁve subelements:
    • Atmospheric systems environment
    • Geospheric systems environment
    • Hydrospheric systems environment
    • Biospheric systems environment


Author’s Note 11.2 A word of caution: The point of our discussion here is not to present a
view of the physical science. Our intent is to illustrate HOW SEs might approach analysis of the
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. Ultimately, you will have to bound and specify applicable portions of
this environment that are applicable to your SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI). The approach you and
your team choose to use should be ACCURATELY and PRECISELY representative of your system’s
operating domain and the relevant factors that drive system capabilities and levels of performance.
However, you should always consult subject matter experts (SMEs), who can assist you and your
team in abstracting the correct environment.

Atmospheric Systems Environment. The Atmospheric Systems Environment is an abstrac-
tion of the gaseous layer that extends from the surface of a planetary body outward to some pre-
deﬁned altitude.

Geospheric Systems Environment. The Geospheric Systems Environment consists of the
totality of the physical landmass of a star, moon, or planet. From an Earth sciences perspective, the
Earth’s Geospheric Systems Environment includes the Lithospheric Systems Environment, the rigid
or outer crust layer of the Earth. In general, the lithosphere includes the continents, islands, moun-
tains, and hills that appear predominantly at the top layer of the Earth.

Hydrospheric Systems Environment. The Hydrospheric Systems Environment consists of all
liquid and solid water systems, such as lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, waterfalls, underground
aquifers, oceans, tidal pools, and ice packs, that are not part of the gaseous atmosphere. In general,
the key abstractions within the Hydrospheric Systems Environment include: rainwater, soil waters,
seawater, surface brines, subsurface waters, and ice.
104     Chapter 11   The Operating Environment Architecture

Biospheric System Environment. The Biospheric Systems Environment is deﬁned as the
environment comprising all living organisms on the surface of the Earth. In general, the Earth’s
biosphere consists of all environments that are capable of supporting life above, on, and beneath
the Earth’s surface as well as the oceans. Thus, the biosphere overlaps a portion of the atmosphere,
a large amount of the hydrosphere, and portions of the lithosphere. Examples include: botanical,
entomological, ornithological, amphibian, and mammalian systems. In general, biospheric systems
function in terms of two metabolic processes: photosynthesis and respiration.

Local Environment Level of Abstraction. The Local Environment is an abstraction that
represents the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT encompassing a system’s current location. For
example, if you are driving your car, the Local Environment consists of the OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT conditions surrounding the vehicle. Therefore, the Local Environment includes
other vehicles and drivers, road hazards, weather, and any other conditions on the roads that
surround you and your vehicle at any instant in time. As an SE, your challenge is leading system
developers to consensus on:
      1. WHAT is the Local Environment’s frame of reference?
      2. WHAT are the local environment’s bounds (initial conditions, entities, etc.) at any point in
         time?

Author’s Note 11.3 If you are a chemist or physicist, you may want to consider adding a fourth
level molecular environment assuming it is germane to your SOI.

Author’s Note 11.4 Your “takeaway” from the preceding discussion is not to create ﬁve types
of NATURAL ENVIRONMENT abstractions and document each in detail for every system you
analyze. Instead, you should view these elements as a checklist to prompt mental consideration for
relevance and identify those PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT entities that have relevance to your
system. Then, bound and specify those entities.

HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS Environment Element
Our discussions of the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT omitted a key entity, humankind. Since SE
focuses on beneﬁting society through the development of systems, products, or services, we can
analytically isolate and abstract humans into a category referred to as the HUMAN-MADE
SYSTEMS Environment element. HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS include subelements that inﬂuence
and control human decision making and actions that affect the balance of power on the planet.
    If we observe HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS and analyze how these systems are organized,
we can identify seven types of subelements: 1) historical or heritage systems, 2) cultural systems,
3) urban systems, 4) business systems, 5) educational systems, 6) transportation systems, and
7) governmental systems. Let’s explore each of these further.

Historical or Heritage Systems. Historical or heritage systems in abstraction include all
artifacts, relics, traditions, and locations relevant to past human existence such as folklore and
historical records.
     You may ask why the historical or heritage systems are relevant to an SE. Consider the fol-
lowing example:
                                                        11.4 Physical Environment System Elements        105


 EXAMPLE 11.1
Let’s assume that we are developing a system such as a building that has a placement or impact on a land use
area that has HISTORICAL signiﬁcance. The building construction may disturb artifacts and relics from the
legacy culture, and this may inﬂuence technical decisions relating to the physical location of the system. One
perspective may be to provide physical space or a buffer area between the historical area and our system. Con-
versely, if our system is a museum relevant to an archeological discovery, the location may be an INTEGRAL
element of the building design.

From another perspective, military tactical planners may be confronted with planning a mission
and have an objective to avoid an area that has historical signiﬁcance.

Urban Systems. Urban systems include all entities that relate to how humans cluster or group
themselves into communities and interact at various levels of organization—neighborhood, city,
state, national, and international.


 EXAMPLE 11.2
Urban systems include the infrastructure that supports the business systems environment, such as transporta-
tion systems, public utilities, shopping, distribution systems, medical, telecommunications, and educational
institutions.

Systems engineering, from an urban systems perspective, raises key issues that effectively require
some form of prediction. How do systems engineers plan and design a road system within resource
constraints that provide some level of insights into the future to facilitate growth and expansion?

Cultural Systems. Cultural systems include multi-faceted attributes that describe various iden-
tities of humans and communal traits, and how humans interact, consume, reproduce, and survive.
Examples include: the performing arts of music and other entertainment, civic endeavors, and pat-
terns of behavior. As the commercial marketplace can attest, cultural systems have a major impact
on society’s acceptance of systems.

Business Systems. Business systems include of all entities related to how humans organize into
economic-based enterprises and commerce to produce products and services to sustain a livelihood.
These include research and development, manufacturing, products and services for use in the
marketplace.

Educational Systems. Educational systems include all institutions dedicated to educating and
improving society through formal and informal institutions of learning.

Financial Systems. Financial systems include banks and investment entities that support per-
sonal, commercial, and government ﬁnancial transactions.

Government Systems. Government systems include all entities related to governing humans
as a society—international, federal, state, county, municipality, etc.

Medical Systems. Medical systems include hospitals, doctors, and therapeutic entities that
administer to the healthcare needs of the public.

Transportation Systems. Transportation systems include land, sea, air, and space transporta-
tion systems that enable humans to travel safely, economically, and efﬁciently from one destination
to another.
106     Chapter 11   The Operating Environment Architecture

The INDUCED ENVIRONMENT Element
The preceding discussions isolated the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT and HUMAN-MADE
SYSTEMS as element abstractions. While these two elements enable us to analytically organize
system OPERATING ENVIRONMENT entities, they are physically interactive. In fact, HUMAN-
MADE SYSTEMS and the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT each create intrusions, disruptions, per-
turbations, and discontinuities on the other.
     Analysis of these interactions can become very complex. We can alleviate some of the com-
plexity by creating the third PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT element, the INDUCED ENVIRON-
MENT. The INDUCED ENVIRONMENT enables us to isolate entities that represent the intrusions,
disruptions, perturbations, and discontinuities until they diminish or are no longer signiﬁcant or
relevant to system operation. The degree of signiﬁcance of INDUCED ENVIRONMENT entities
may be temporary, permanent, or dampen over time.

11.5 OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
DECISION-MAKING METHODOLOGY

The OPERATING ENVIRONMENT imposes various factors and constraints on the capabilities
and levels of performance of a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI), thereby impacting missions and
survival over the planned life span. As a system analyst or SE, your responsibility is to:
      1. Identify and delineate all of the critical OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
      2. Bound and describe technical parameters that characterize the OPERATING
         ENVIRONMENT.
      3. Ensure those descriptions are incorporated into the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
         used to procure the SOI.
The process of identifying the SOI’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT requirements employs a
simple methodology as depicted in Figure 11.3. In general, the methodology implements the logic
reﬂected in the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT levels of abstraction and classes of environments
previously described.
    The methodology consists of three iterative loops:
Loop 1: Cosmospheric level requirements (1).
Loop 2: Global entity level requirements (2).
Loop 3: Local level requirements (3).
When each of these iterations is applicable to a SOI, the logic branches out to a fourth loop that
investigates which of three classes of environments—HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS (4), NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT (6), or INDUCED ENVIRONMENT (8) is applicable. For each type of envi-
ronment that is applicable, requirements associated with that type are identiﬁed—HUMAN-MADE
SYSTEMS (5), NATURAL (7), and INDUCED (9). When the third loop completes its types of
environment decision-making process, it returns to the appropriate level of abstraction and ﬁnishes
with the local level requirements (3).

11.6 ENTITY OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
FRAME OF REFERENCE

The preceding discussions address the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT from the SYSTEM’s frame
of reference. However, lower levels of abstraction within a SYSTEM are, by deﬁnition, self-
                                                                                                           11.6 Entity Operating Environment Frame of Reference                             107

                                              1                                       Cosmospheric                                   HUMAN-MADE          5
                                                                                   Requirements Relevant            4              System Requirements           Identify
                                                                                                                                                                  Identify
                                                                                                                                        Relevance             HUMAN-MADE
                                                                                                                                                               HUMAN-MADE
          Initial                                                    Cosmospheric                                                                              Environment
                                                                                                                                                                Environment
           State                                                     Requirements Defined                                      HUMAN-MADE
                                                                                                                             Systems Requirements              Requirements
                                                                                                                                                                Requirements
                                                                                                                                  Not Relevant
                                              2                                    Global Requirements
                                                                                        Relevant

                                                                                                                                          NATURAL
                                                                     Global Requirements
                                                                     Defined                                                             Environment     7
                                                                                                                     6                   Requirements           Identify
                                                                                                                                                                 Identify
                                                                                                                                          Relevance            NATURAL
                                                                                                                                                                NATURAL
                                               3                                    Local Requirements                                                        Environment
                                                                                         Relevant
                                                                                                                                                               Environment
                                                                                                                                                              Requirements
                                                                                                                                                               Requirements
                                                                                                              NATURAL
                                                                     Finished                                Environment
                             Define Local                                                                    Requirements
                             Environment                                                                     Not Relevant
                             Requirements                                Final State
                                                                                                                                           INDUCED        9
                                              10                     Finished                                            8            Environment Reqmts.        Identify
                                                                                                                                           Relevance
                                                                                                                                                                  Identify
                                                                                                                                                               INDUCED
                                                                                                                                                                INDUCED
                                                                                                                                                              Environment
                                                                                                                                                               Environment
                                                                                                                                     INDUCED                  Requirements
 Define Global Environment                                                                                                          Environment                Requirements
        Requirements                                                                                                                Not Relevant



Figure 11.3 Environment Requirements Identiﬁcation
                                                            PRODUCT OE

                                                                         SEGMENT

                                                                                       SYSTEM




                                                                                                               Higher Order Systems Domain
                                              ASSEMBLY OE




                                                                                         OE
                                ASSEMBLY OE




                                                                                                                                                                 PHYSICAL Environment
            SUBASSEMBLY OE




                                                                                                                                                    SYSTEM

                                                                                                                                          SEGMENT
PART OE




                                                                                                                                  PRODUCT
                                                                                                                                                                       Domain



                                                                                                                        SUBSYSTEM

                                                                                                              ASSEMBLY

                                                                                                         SUBASSY.

                                                                                                   PART
                                                                                                                                                                     SYSTEM
                                                                                                                                                                       OE
                                                                                                                                                          SEGMENT OE

                              Where:                                                                                                                PRODUCT Level OE
                              OE = OPERATING ENVIRONMENT                                                                                     SUBSYSTEM Level OE
                                                                                                                                          ASSEMBLY Level OE
                                                                                                                                   SUBASSEMBLY Level OE
                                                                                                                                      PART Level OE
                                                                                                                                                                                        4
Figure 11.4 OPERATING ENVIRONMENT Relative to Observer’s Levels of Abstraction


contained systems of integrated components. The OPERATING ENVIRONMENT contextually
must be established from the entity’s frame of reference as illustrated in Figure 11.4. So, WHAT
constitutes an ASSEMBLY’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT? This can be anything external to the
ASSEMBLY’s boundary, such as other ASSEMBLIES, SUBSYSTEMS, or PRODUCTS. Consider
the following example:
108    Chapter 11   The Operating Environment Architecture


 EXAMPLE 11.3
A processor board within a desktop computer chassis has an OPERATING ENVIRONMENT that consists of
the motherboard; other boards it interfaces directly with; electromagnetic radiation from power supplies;
switching devices, and so on.


11.7 CONCLUDING POINT

You may ask isn’t the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS domain part of the PHYSICAL ENVIRON-
MENT domain? You could argue this point. However, Figure 11.1 represents an analytical per-
spective with a key focus on DIRECT, peer-to-peer and command and control (C2) interactions.
From an SOI perspective, it responds to human managerial authority. Therefore, we depict the
HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS in terms of human supervisory control of the SOI. Are HIGHER
ORDER SYSTEMS (human) above the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT? No, in fact we are phys-
ically subordinated to it. Yet, as we see in phenomena such as global warming, our collective actions
can have an adverse impact on it, and in turn on our lives.

11.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern the architecture of a system’s operating environment.

Principle 11.1 A system’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT consists of two classes of domains:
HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS and a PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT.

Principle 11.2 A system’s PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT domain consists of three classes of
system elements: NATURAL, HUMAN-MADE, and INDUCED. NATURAL and HUMAN-MADE
ENVIRONMENTs systems interact; the INDUCED ENVIRONMENT represents the time-
dependent result of that interaction.

11.9 SUMMARY

Our discussion in this section provides an orientation of the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, its levels of
abstraction, and classes of environments. Based on identiﬁcation of these OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
elements, we introduced Figure 11.1 to depict relationships among PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT levels of
abstraction and its system elements.
     Next we introduced the concept of the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT architecture as a framework for
linking the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT system elements. The architectural framework of interactions pro-
vided a basis for us to deﬁne several system element interaction principles.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Identify the following:
   (a) HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS domain and its system elements
   (b) PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT domain, its system elements, and levels of abstraction.
                                                                                    Additional Reading     109

ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a system development program in your organization. Research how they analyzed their SYSTEM
   OF INTEREST (SOI), its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, and their respective system elements. How was
   this analysis reﬂected in the SOI architecture?


ADDITIONAL READING

Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.         MIL-HDBK-1908B. 1999. DoD Deﬁnitions of Human
  Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:    Factors Terms. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  Wiley-InterScience.                                       (DoD).
Chapter              12

      System Interfaces

12.1 INTRODUCTION

One of the crucial factors of system success is determined by what happens at its internal and exter-
nal interfaces. You can engineer the most elegant algorithms, equations, and decision logic, but if
the system does not perform at its interfaces, the elegance is of no value. System interface char-
acterizations range from cooperative interoperability with external friendly systems to layers of
protection to minimize vulnerability to external threats (environment, hostile adversary actions,
etc.) and structural integrity to ensure survivability.
     This chapter introduces the context of system interfaces, their purpose, objectives, attributes,
and how they are implemented. Our discussions explore the various types of interfaces and factors
that delineate success from failure. This information provides the basis for the next chapter, which
addresses interface design and control.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What is an interface?
       2. What is the purpose of an interface?
       3. What are the types of interfaces?
       4. What is a point-to-point interface?
       5. What is a logical interface?
       6. What is a physical interface?
       7. How do logical and physical interfaces interrelate?
       8. Identify seven types of physical interfaces?
       9. What are the steps of the interface deﬁnition methodology?
      10. What is a generalized interface solution?
      11. What is a specialized interface solution?
      12. How does a generalized solution relate to a specialized solution?
      13. How do generalized and specialized solutions relate to logical and physical interfaces?
      14. What are some methods of limiting access to interfaces?
      15. What constitutes an interface failure?
      16. What are some examples of interface failures?



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

110
                                                                    12.2 What Is an Interface?   111

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Human-Machine Interface “The actions, reactions, and interactions between humans and
      other system components. This also applies to a multi-station, multi-person conﬁguration
      or system. Term also deﬁnes the properties of the hardware, software or equipment which
      constitute conditions for interactions.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908, p. 21)
    • Interchangeability “The ability to interchange, without restriction, like equipments or por-
      tions thereof in manufacture, maintenance, or operation. Like products are two or more items
      that possess such functional and physical characteristics as to be equivalent in performance
      and durability, and are capable of being exchanged one for the other without alteration of
      the items themselves or of adjoining items, except for adjustment, and without selection for
      ﬁt and performance.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G, Glossary, p. G-7)
    • Interface “The functional/logical relationships and physical characteristics required to exist
      at a SYSTEM or entity boundary with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT that enable the
      entity to provide a mission capability.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC—Glossary of Terms)
    • Interface Control “The process of: (1) identifying all functional and physical characteris-
      tics relevant to the interfacing of two or more items provided by one or more organizations;
      and (2) ensuring that proposed changes to these characteristics are evaluated and approved
      prior to implementation.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-480B, para. 3.1.43)
    • Interface Device “An item which provides mechanical and electrical connections and any
      signal conditioning required between the automatic test equipment (ATE) and the unit under
      test (UUT); also known as an interface test adapter or interface adapter unit.” (Source: MIL-
      HDBK-470A, Appendix G, Glossary, p. G7)
    • Interface Ownership The assignment of accountability to an individual, team, or organi-
      zation regarding the deﬁnition, speciﬁcation, development, control, operation, and support
      of an interface.
    • Interoperability “The ability of two or more systems or components to exchange informa-
      tion and to use the information that has been exchanged.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
    • Peer level Interactions SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) interactions—namely MISSION
      SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM—with external systems in the OPERATING ENVI-
      RONMENT. For analytical purposes, we aggregate these systems into a single entity abstrac-
      tion referred to as the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT SYSTEMS domain.
    • Point-to-Point An interface conﬁguration that characterizes the physical connectivity
      between two points, typically accomplished via dedicated, direct line. For example, a light
      switch connection to a room light.
Based on this introduction, let’s begin our discussion by exploring what an interface is.


12.2 WHAT IS AN INTERFACE?

System engineering efforts often focus on:
    1. The composition of the system architecture.
    2. How those elements interact with each other and their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
You can develop the most innovative devices, computers, and algorithms. Yet, if those innovations
are unable to reliably interact and interoperate with their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT when
required, they may be of limited or no value to the entity or SYSTEM.
112    Chapter 12    System Interfaces

     Interfaces occur between combinations of two or more system elements—such as EQUIP-
MENT, PERSONNEL, and FACILITIES—or between entities within system element levels of
abstractions. However, what is the purpose of an interface?

Interface Purposes
The purpose of an interface is to associate or physically connect a SYSTEM, PRODUCT,
SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, or PART level component to other components
within its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. A component may associate or connect to several
components; however, each linkage represents a single interface. If a component has multiple
interfaces, the performance of that interface may have an inﬂuence or impact on the others.
     The purpose stated above is a very broad description of WHY an interface exists. The ques-
tion is: HOW does an interface accomplish this? An interface has at least one or more objectives,
depending on the component’s application. Typical interface objectives include the following:
Objective 1:     Physically link or bind two or more system elements or entities.
Objective 2:     Adapt one or more incompatible system elements or entities.
Objective 3:     Buffer the effects of incompatible system elements.
Objective 4:     Leverage human capabilities.
Objective 5:     Restrain system element or its usage.
Let’s explore each of the objectives further.

Objective 1: Physically Link or Bind Two or
More System Elements or Entities
Some systems link or bind two or more compatible system elements or element components to
anchor, extend, support, or connect the adjoining interface.


 EXAMPLE 12.1
A communications tower has cables at critical attach points to anchor the tower to the ground for stability.

Objective 2: Adapt One or More Incompatible System
Elements or Entities
Some system elements—such as EQUIPMENT and PERSONNEL—or entities may not have com-
patible or interoperable interfaces. However, they can be adapted to become compatible. Figure
12.1 illustrates how NASA developed an adapter for the Apollo-Soyuz Program. Software appli-
cations that employ reusable models may create a “wrapper” around the model to enable the model
to communicate with an external application, and vice versa.

Objective 3: Buffer the Effects of Incompatible
System Elements
Some systems such as automobiles are generally not intended to interact with each other. Where
the unintended interactions occur, the effects of the interaction must be minimized in the interest
of the safety and health of the Users. Consider the following two cases:
Case 1: An automobile’s impact on another can be lessened with a shock absorber bumper and
        body crumple zones.
                                                                          12.2 What Is an Interface?   113




Figure 12.1 NASA Apollo-Soyuz Spacecraft Docking System
Source: NASA History Ofﬁce Web Site—www.hq.nasa.gov/ofﬁce/pao/History/diagrams/astp/pk69.htm



Case 2: System A is required to transmit data to System B. Because of the limited speed of the
        interfacing components, System A includes a buffer area for storing data for communi-
        cation to free up the processor to perform other tasks. On the other side of the interface,
        System B may be unable to process all of the incoming data immediately. To avoid this
        scenario, a buffer area is created to store the incoming data until the processor can
        process the data.
     For this objective, SEs analyze the interface and take reasonable measures to create a “bound-
ary layer” or buffer between system elements or entities. Thus each is buffered to minimize the
effects of the impact to the system or environment and, if applicable, safety to the operators or the
public.

Objective 4: Leverage Human Capabilities
Humans employ interface capabilities to leverage our own skills and capabilities. Early humans
recognized that various tools—namely simple machines—could serve as interface devices to
expand or leverage our own physical capabilities in accomplishing difﬁcult tasks.

Objective 5: Restrain SYSTEM Element or Its Usage
Some interfaces serve as restraints to ensure a level of safety for system elements. Consider the
following example:
114    Chapter 12    System Interfaces


 EXAMPLE 12.2
A safety chain is added to a trailer hitch used by an automobile to tow a trailer. A lock is added to a power
distribution box to prevent opening by unauthorized individuals.

Each of these objectives illustrates HOW an interface is implemented to achieve a purposeful action.
Depending on a systems application, other objectives may be required.

Interoperability—The Ultimate Interface Challenge
The ultimate success of any interface resides in its capability to interact with friendly and hostile
systems in its intended OPERATING ENVIRONMENT as envisioned by the User, speciﬁed by the
Acquirer, and designed by the System Developer. We refer to this as interoperability.


12.3 INTERFACE TYPES

Interfaces exhibit three types of operation: active, passive, or active/passive.

Active Interfaces
Active interfaces interact with external systems or components in a friendly, benign, or coopera-
tive manner. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 12.3
Radio stations, as active “on the air” systems, radiate signals at a designated frequency via patterns to spe-
ciﬁc areas for coverage.

Passive Interfaces
Passive interface interactions with external components simply receive or accept data without
responding. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 12.4
A car radio, when powered ON and viewed by a radio station system, PASSIVELY receives signals over a
tuned frequency. The radio processes the information and provides an ACTIVE audio interface for the occu-
pants in the car.

Combination Active/Passive Interfaces
Active/passive interfaces perform under the control of transmitters or receivers. Consider the fol-
lowing example:


 EXAMPLE 12.5
A two-way walkie-talkie radio has an ACTIVE interface when the User presses the “Push to Talk” button to
broadcast audio information to others listening on the same frequency within a speciﬁed transmission range
and conditions. When the “Push to Talk” button is OFF, the device has a PASSIVE interface that monitors
incoming radio signals for processing and audio ampliﬁcation as controlled by the User.
                                               12.4 Understanding Logical and Physical Interfaces    115

12.4 UNDERSTANDING LOGICAL AND
PHYSICAL INTERFACES

One of the recurring themes of this book is the need to decompose complexity into one or more
manageable levels. We do this by ﬁrst identifying logical/functional interfaces that ask several
questions:
    1. WHO interacts with WHOM?
    2. WHAT is transferred and translated?
    3. WHEN does the transference or translation occur?
    4. Under WHAT conditions?
Then, we translate the logical/functional connectivity into a physical interface that represents HOW
and WHERE the interface will be implemented.
    Analytically, system interfaces provide the mechanism for point-to-point connectivity. We
characterize interface connectivity at two levels: 1) logical and 2) physical.
    • Logical interfaces Represent a direct or indirect association or relationship between two
      entities. Logical interfaces establish:
      1. WHO—Point A—communicates with WHOM—Point B.
      2. Under WHAT scenarios and conditions the communications occur.
      3. WHEN the communications occur.
      Logical interfaces are referred to as “generalized” interfaces.
    • Physical interfaces Represent physical interactions between two interfacing entities. Phys-
      ical interfaces express HOW devices or components (boxes, wires, etc.) will be conﬁgured
      to enable Point A to communicate with Point B. Physical interfaces are referred to as “spe-
      cialized” interfaces because of their dependency on speciﬁc mechanisms (electronics, optics,
      etc.) to realize the interface.
Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 12.6
The Internet provides a mechanism for a User with a device such as a computer equipped with the appropri-
ate hardware and software to communicate with an external Web site. In this context a logical interface or
association exists between the user and the Web site. When the User connects with the Web site, a physical
interface is established.

The preceding discussion highlighted two “levels” of connectivity. This is an important point, espe-
cially from a system design perspective involving humans. Engineers have a strong tendency to
jump to deﬁning the physical interface BEFORE anyone has decided WHAT the interface is to
accomplish. Therefore, you must:
    1. Identify which system elements or entities must associate or interact.
    2. Understand WHY they “need to connect.”
    3. Determine WHEN the associations or interactions occur.
116     Chapter 12   System Interfaces

12.5 INTERFACE DEFINITION METHODOLOGY

The preceding discussions enable SEs to establish a basic methodology for identifying and char-
acterizing interfaces.
Step 1:     Identify logical interfaces. When systems are designed, logical interfaces enable us to
            acknowledge that an association or relationship exists. Therefore, the interface becomes
            a logical means of expression that enables us to characterize WHAT the interface is
            required to accomplish.
Step 2:     Identify and deﬁne physical interfaces. The physical implementation of a logical or gen-
            eralized interface requires selection from a range of candidate solutions subject to tech-
            nical, technology, cost, schedule, and risk constraints. This being the case, SEs typically
            conduct one or more trade studies to select the most appropriate implementation.


12.6 PHYSICAL INTERFACE TYPES

If we analyze how interfaces are implemented in the physical domain, our analysis will reveal that
interfaces occur in mechanical, electrical, optical, acoustical, natural environment, chemical, and
biological forms, and as combinations of these forms. For all these types of physical interfaces
there are specialized solutions. To further understand the specialized nature of these interface solu-
tions, let’s explore each one.

Mechanical Interfaces
Mechanical interfaces consist of boundaries that exist between two physical objects and include
characterizations such as function, form, and ﬁt. Characterizations include:
      1. Material Properties Composition.
      2. Dimensional Properties Length, width, and depth; mass properties such as weight, density,
         and shape.
      3. Structural Integrity Properties Shock, vibration, etc.
      4. Aerodynamic Properties Drag, ﬂuid ﬂow, etc.

Electrical Interfaces
Electrical interfaces consist of direct electrical or electronic connections as well as electromagnetic
transmission in free air space. Attributes and properties include voltages, current, resistance, induc-
tance, capacitance, grounding, shielding, attenuation, and transmission delays.

Optical Interfaces
Optical interfaces consist of the transmission and/or receipt of visible and invisible wavelengths of
light. Attributes and properties include intensity, frequency, special ranges, resolution, distortion,
contrast, reﬂection, refraction, ﬁltering, modulation, attenuation, and polarization.

Acoustical Interfaces
Acoustical interfaces consist of the creation, transmission, and receipt of frequencies that may be
audible or inaudible to humans. Attributes and properties include volume, frequency, modulation,
and attenuation.
                                                               12.8 Electronic Data Interfaces   117

Natural Environment Interfaces
Natural environment interfaces consist of those elements that are natural occurrences of nature.
Attributes and properties include temperature, humidity, barometric pressure, altitude, wind, rain,
snow, and ice.

Chemical Interfaces
Chemical interfaces consist of interactions that occur when chemical substances are purposefully
introduced or mixed with other chemicals or other types of interfaces. Attributes and properties
include heat, cold, explosive, toxicity, and physical state changes.

Biological Interfaces
Biological interfaces consist of those interfaces between living organisms or other types of inter-
faces. Attributes and properties include touch, feel, smell, hearing, and sight.


12.7 STANDARDIZED VERSUS DEDICATED INTERFACES

Interfaces allow us to establish logical or physical relationships between system elements via a
common, compatible, and interoperable boundary. If you analyze the most common types of inter-
faces, you will discover two basic categories: 1) standard, modular interfaces and 2) unique, ded-
icated interfaces. Let’s deﬁne the context of each type.
    • Standard, Modular Interfaces System developers typically agree to employ a modular,
      interchangeable interface approach that complies with a “standard” such as RS-232,
      Mil-Std-1553, Ethernet, and USB (Universal Serial Bus).
    • Unique, Dedicated Interfaces Where standard interfaces may not be available or adequate
      due to the uniqueness of the interface, SE designers may elect to create a unique, dedicated
      interface design for the sole purpose limiting compatibility with other system elements or
      entities. Examples include special form factors and encryption that make the interface unique.


12.8 ELECTRONIC DATA INTERFACES

When the User’s logical interfaces are identiﬁed in the SYSTEM or entity architecture, one of the
ﬁrst decisions is to determine HOW the interface is to be implemented. Key questions include:
    1. Does each interface require discrete inputs and outputs?
    2. WHAT function does the interface perform (data entry/output, event driven interrupt, etc.)?
    3. Are the data periodic (i.e., synchronous or asynchronous)?
    4. WHAT is the quantity of data to be transmitted or received?
    5. WHAT are the time constraints for transmitting or receiving the data?
Electronic data communications mechanisms employ analog or digital techniques to communicate
information.

Analog Data Communications
Analog mechanisms include amplitude modulated (AM) microphone and speaker based I/O devices
such as telephones and modems.
118    Chapter 12   System Interfaces

Digital Data Communications
Digital mechanisms include synchronous and asynchronous bipolar signals that employ speciﬁc
transmission protocols to encapsulate encoded information content. Digital data communications
consists of three basic types of data formats: discrete, serial, or parallel.

Discrete Data Communications. Discrete data consist of dedicated, independent instances of
static ON or OFF data that enable a device such as a computer to monitor the state or status
condition(s) or initiate actions by remote devices. Digital discrete data represent electronic
representations for various conditions or states—such as ON/OFF, INITIATED, COMPLETE, and
OPEN/CLOSED.
     Discrete data communications also include event driven interrupts. In these applications a
unique, dedicated signal line is connected to an external device that senses speciﬁc conditions.
When the condition is detected, the device toggles the discrete signal line to notify the receiving
device that a conditional event has occurred.

Parallel Data Communications. Some systems require high-speed communications between
electrical devices. Where this is the case, parallel data communications mechanisms may be
employed to improve SYSTEM performance by simultaneously transmitting synchronous data
simultaneously over discrete lines. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 12.7
An output device may conﬁgured to set any one or all 8 bits of discrete binary data to turn ON/OFF individ-
ual, external devices.

Parallel data communications mechanisms may increase hardware component counts, develop-
ment and unit costs, and risks. In these cases, performance must be traded off against cost and risk.
Parallel data communications may be synchronous—meaning periodic—or asynchronous, depend-
ing on the application.

Serial Data Communications. Some systems require the transmission of data to and from
external systems at rates that can be accomplished using serial data communications bandwidths.
Where applicable, serial data communication approaches minimize parts counts, thereby affecting
PC board layouts, weight, or complexity.
     Serial data communications mechanisms may be synchronous—meaning periodic—or asyn-
chronous, depending on the application. Serial data communications typically conform to a number
of standards such as RS-232, RS-422 and Ethernet.


12.9 LIMITING ACCESS TO SYSTEM INTERFACES

Some interfaces require restricted access to only those devices accessible by authorized Users. In
general, these interfaces consist of those applications whereby the User pays a fee for access, data
security on a NEED TO KNOW basis, posting of conﬁguration data for decision making, and so
on. How is this accomplished?
    Limited access can be implemented via several mechanisms such as: 1) authorized log-on
accounts, 2) data encryption devices and methods, 3) ﬂoating access keys, 4) personal ID cards,
5) personal ID scanners, and 6) levels of need to know access.
                                        12.10 Understanding Interface Performance and Integrity   119

    • Authorized User Accounts Employed by Web sites or internal computer systems and require
      a UserID and password. If the user forgets the password, some systems allow the user to
      post a question related to the password that will serve as memory jogger. These accounts
      also must make provisions to reset the password as a contingency provided the user can
      authenticate themselves to the computers system via personal ID information.
    • Data Encryption Methods and Techniques Employed to encrypt/decrypt data during trans-
      mission to prevent unauthorized disclosure. These devices employ data “keys” to limit
      access. Encryption applications range from desktop computer communications to highly
      sophisticated banking and military implementations.
    • Floating Access Key Software applications on a network that allow simultaneous usage by
      a subset of the total number of personnel at any given point in time. Since organizations do
      not want to pay for unused licenses, ﬂoating licenses are procured based on projected peak
      demand. When a user logs onto the application, one of the license keys is locked until the
      user logs out. Since some users tend to forget to log out and thereby locking other users from
      using the key, systems may incorporate timeout features that automatically log out a user
      and make the key accessible to others.
    • Personal ID Cards Magnetically striped ID badges or credit cards assigned to personnel that
      allow access to facilities via security guards or access to closed facilities via magnetic card
      readers and passwords.
    • Personal Authentication Scanners Systems enabling limited access by authenticating the
      individual via optical scanners that scan the retina of an eye or thumbprint and match the
      scanned image against previously stored images of the actual person.
    • Levels of Need to Know Access Restricted access based on the individual’s need to know.
      Where this is the case, additional authentication may be required. This may require com-
      partmentalizing data into levels of access.


12.10 UNDERSTANDING INTERFACE PERFORMANCE
AND INTEGRITY

Interfaces, as an entry point or portal into a system, are vulnerable to threats and failures, both
internally and externally. Depending on the extent of the physical interface interaction and result-
ing damage or failure, the interface capability or performance may be limited or terminated. Our
discussion here focuses on understanding interface design performance and integrity. Let’s begin
by ﬁrst deﬁning the context of an interface failure.

What Constitutes an Interface Failure?
There are differing contexts regarding WHAT constitutes an interface failure including degrees of
failure. An interface might be considered failed if it ceases to provide the required capability at a
speciﬁed level of performance when required as part of an overall system mission. Interface fail-
ures may or may not jeopardize a system mission.

Consequences of an Interface Failure
Interface failures can result in the LOSS of system control and/or data; physical damage to system
operators, equipment, property or the environment. As a result, system interfaces that may poten-
tially impact mission success, cause damage to the system, the public, or environment; as well as
loss of life should be thoroughly analyzed. This includes understanding HOW the internal or exter-
120     Chapter 12   System Interfaces

nal interface may fail and its impact on other components. Let’s examine how interface failures
may occur.

Interface Failures
Interfaces fail in a number of ways. In general, physical interfaces can fail in at least four types of
scenarios: 1) disruption, 2) intrusion, 3) stress loading, and 4) physical destruction.
      • Disruptions can be created by acts of nature, component reliability, poor quality work,
        animals, lack of proper maintenance, and sabotage. Examples include: 1) failed components,
        2) cable disconnects; 3) loss of power, 4) poor data transmission; 5) lack of security;
        6) mechanical wear, compression, tension, friction, shock, and vibration; 7) optical attenua-
        tion and scattering; and 8) signal blocking.
      • Intrusion examples include: 1) unauthorized electromagnetic environment effects (E3);
        2) data capture through monitoring, tapping, or listening; and 3) injection of spurious signals.
        Intrusion sources include electrical storms and espionage. Intrusion presentation solutions
        include proper shielding, grounding, and encryption.
      • Stress Loading includes the installation of devices that “load,” impede, or degrade the
        quality or performance of an interface.
      • Physical Attack includes physical threat contact by accident or purposeful action by an
        external entity on the system to inﬂict physical harm, damage, or destruction to a SYSTEM,
        entity, or one of their capabilities.

Interface Vulnerabilities
Interface integrity can be compromised through inherent design defects, errors, ﬂaws, or vulnera-
bilities. Interface integrity and vulnerability issues encompass electrical, mechanical, chemical,
optical, and environmental aspects of interface design. Today most awareness to interface vulner-
ability tends to focus on secure voice and data transmissions, and network ﬁrewalls. Vulnerability
solutions include secure voice and data encryption; special, shielded facilities; armor plating; com-
partmentalization of tanks; cable routing and physical proximity; and operational tactics.

Interface Latency
Interface latency is a critical issue for some systems, especially if one interfacing element requires
a response within a speciﬁed timeframe. As an SE, you will be expected to lead the effort that deter-
mines and speciﬁes time constraints that must be placed on interface responses. If time constraints
are critical, what is the allowable time budget that ensures the overall system can meet its own time
constraints.

Interface Failure Mitigation and Prevention
When you design system interfaces, there are a number of approaches to mitigate the occurrence
of interface failures or results. In general, the set of solutions have a broad range of costs. SEs often
focus exclusively on the hardware and software aspects of the interface design. As a natural start-
ing point, hardware and software reliability, availability, and maintainability (RAM), in combina-
tion with failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA), should be investigated.
     System operation involves all of the system elements: PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, and
SUPPORT. The point is that there may be combinations of system element actions or tactics that
allow you to optimize system performance while reducing system cost.
                                                                                               References    121


 EXAMPLE 12.9
Mirrors on vehicles provide a critical interface for the vehicle operator. The mirrors “bend” the operator’s line
of sight, thereby enabling the operator to maneuver the vehicle in close proximity to other vehicles or struc-
tures. Vehicles, such as trucks, with side mirrors that extend away from the cab are especially vulnerable to
being damaged or destroyed.
     Hypothetically, one solution is to design outside mirrors with deﬂectors that protect the mirrors from
damage. However, since vehicles move forward and backward, deﬂectors on the front side of the mirror might
limit the operator’s line of sight. Additionally the cost to implement a design of this type would be expensive.
A low-cost solution is to simply train the operators on the importance of operational safety. Thus, we pre-
serve SYSTEM performance while minimizing EQUIPMENT costs.


12.11 SUMMARY

During our discussion of system interface practices we identiﬁed the key objectives of interfaces, identiﬁed
various types, and emphasized the importance of system interface integrity.
     Our discussion of logical and physical entity relationships should enable you to describe how the system
elements interact at various levels of detail. The entity relationships, in turn, should enable you to assimilate
the relationships into an architectural framework. To facilitate the decision-making process, we established
the logical entity relationships or associations between the system elements via a logical architectural repre-
sentation. Once the logical architecture was established, we progressed the decision-making process to the
physical architecture representation or physical architecture.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Identify the following:
   (a) Types of interfaces.
   (b) Speciﬁc interfaces and objectives.
   (c) Examples of generalized and specialized solutions for each types of interface.


REFERENCES

Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th ed.   MIL-STD-480B (cancelled). 1988. Conﬁguration Control—
  Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) 2001.             Engineering Changes, Deviations, and Waivers. Wash-
  Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.       ington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of        MIL-HDBK-1908B. 1999. DoD Deﬁnitions of Human
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-     Factors Terms. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) New York, NY.        (DoD).
MIL-HDBK-470A. 1997. Designing and Developing Main-
  tainable Products and Systems. Washington, DC: Depart-
  ment of Defense (DoD).
Chapter              13

      Organizational Roles, Missions,
      and System Applications

13.1 INTRODUCTION

System Owner and User organizational roles, missions, and objectives establish the driving need
for system and mission capabilities and performance requirements. Each role, mission, and objec-
tive serves as the benchmark frame of reference for scoping and bounding what is and is not rele-
vant as an organization’s mission space.
     Understanding the problem, issue, or objective the User is attempting to solve, resolve, or
achieve is key to understanding WHY a system exists and WHAT purpose it serves within the
System Owner’s organization. HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMs, such as corporate enterprise man-
agement, shareholders, and the general public, have an expectation that short- and long-term ben-
eﬁts (survival, proﬁts, return on investment (ROI), etc.) are derived by establishing an organization
that fulﬁlls marketplace needs.
     Our discussion introduces the closed loop system of organizational entity relationships that
deﬁne requirements for a system in terms of the organization’s roles, missions, and objectives. The
description centers on technical accountability and discusses how system capability and perform-
ance requirements are derived to address the organization’s assigned OPERATING ENVIRON-
MENT problem and solution spaces.


Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Paradigm An in-grained mindset or model that ﬁlters or rejects considerations to adopt or
        employ new innovations and ideas that may impact the status quo.
      • Situational Assessment An objective evaluation of current strengths, weaknesses, oppor-
        tunities, and threats (SWOTs) of a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) relative to operating con-
        ditions and outcome-based objectives. Results of a situational assessment document the
        prioritized mission operational needs for the organization.
      • Strategic Plan An outcome-based, global or business domain document that expresses the
        organizational vision, missions, and objectives of WHERE it wants to be at some point in
        time and what it wants to accomplish in the long term, typically ﬁve years or more hence.
        The challenge for most organizations is: WHAT business or line of business (LOB) are your
        currently in versus WHAT do you WANT to be in ﬁve years from now versus WHAT LOB
        you should be in?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

122
                                                                               13.2 Organizational Missions Within the Enterprise                123

         • Tactical Plan A near-term, mission-speciﬁc plan that expresses how the organization’s lead-
           ership plans to deploy, operate, and support existing assets—such as people, products,
           processes, and tools—to achieve organizational objectives allocated from the strategic plan
           within time frame and resource constraints, typically one year or less.

13.2 ORGANIZATIONAL MISSIONS WITHIN THE ENTERPRISE

While many people have the perception that organizations procure systems based on a whim or
simple need, we need to ﬁrst understand why organizations acquire systems to support strategic
and tactical objectives. The operational need is deeply rooted in understanding the organization’s
vision and mission.
     Organizationally we model the strategic and tactical planning process as illustrated in Figure
13.1. In general, the process consists of a Strategic Planning Loop (1) and a Tactical Planning Loop
(7). These two loops provide the basis for our discussion.

The Strategic Planning Loop (1)
The seed for long-term organizational growth and survival begins with an organizational vision.
Without a vision and results-oriented plan for action, the organization’s founders would be chal-
lenged to initially or continually attract and keep investors, investment capital, and the like.
     The directional heading of most organizations begins with a domain analysis of the OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT consisting of targets of opportunity (TOOs) and threat environment. The
analysis task, which is scoped by the organizational vision, produces a Market and Threat Assess-
ment Report. The report, coupled with the long-term organizational vision of what is to be accom-
plished, provides the basis for developing the organization’s strategic plan.




                        Organizational
        2
                           Vision                                                                                         4
                                                      1 Strategic Planning Loop
                                                                                                      Operating Environment
                        3                             6                                                Targets of Opportunity/
                                                           Market or          5
·   Long Term               Strategic                        Threat                                     Threat Environment
    Objectives                Plan                         Assessment             Domain
·   Expected Results
                                                            Analysis              Analysis


· Mission                                                                    · Strategic
                                                                               Market Share

· Measures
           Objectives
                                        · Feedback                           · Strategic Alliances
            of
                                        · Conflicting Objectives             ·           Direction
  Effectiveness (MOEs)
                                        · Etc. 13
                                                          Prioritized
                        8                                 Operational    Mission
                                                            Needs       Capability         12
                            Tactical                                                                                   11         User
                                                                          Gaps
                             Plans                                                            Mission
                                                                                                                              Moments of Truth
                                                                                            Gap Analysis
                                                · Problem  Space ·ONS ·ORD                                 · Deficiencies
                                                · Solution Space ·SOO ·OCD           7                     · Observations
                                                                                                           · End User Interviews
                                             · New System or Product Tactical Planning Loop                · Lessons Learned
            9                                · System Upgrades                                             · Trouble Reports (TRs)
                  System Element             · System Enhancements
                                                                                            Existing
                     Resources               · System Refinement
                · Funding   · Facilities     ·Doctrine                                 System/Product
                  Personnel · Support
                ·Equipment                   · Personnel                                 Capabilities
                ·           ·Data                        Training
                                             · Short Term Operational Tactics   10

Figure 13.1 Operational Needs Identiﬁcation Process
124     Chapter 13   Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications

     As the organization’s capstone planning document, the strategic plan deﬁnes where the organ-
ization expects to be ﬁve years or more from now. The plan identiﬁes a set of long-term objectives,
each of which should be realistic, measurable, and achievable. As with any system, strategic plan-
ning objectives are characterized by performance-based metrics that serve as benchmarks for assess-
ing planned versus actual progress.

Author’s Note 13.1 It is important to underscore the global nature of the strategic plan. The
approved document forms the frame of reference for initiating tactical plans that focus on organi-
zational LOB speciﬁc missions and objectives for their systems, products, or services.

The Tactical Planning Loop (7)
Once the strategic plan is established, the key question is: HOW do we get from WHERE we are
NOW to ﬁve years from now? The answer resides in creating and maintaining incremental, short-
range tactical plans that elaborate near-term (e.g., one year) objectives and actions required to
achieve strategic planning objectives.
     Executive management decomposes strategic objectives into tactical objectives and assigns
the objectives to various organizational elements. Performance-based metrics or measures of per-
formance (MOPs) benchmark the required performance of each tactical objective. The MOPs serve
as benchmarks for assessing planned versus actual progress in achieving the objectives.

Tactical Plans (8)
In response to the tactical objectives, each organizational element develops a tactical plan that
describes HOW the each organization’s leadership plans to achieve the objectives relative to the
MOP benchmarked. In terms of HOW, the tactical plan describes the ways the Organizational
System Elements (OSEs)—such as PERSONNEL, FACILITES, EQUIPMENT, PROCEDURAL
DATA, and MISSION RESOURCES—will be deployed, operated, and supported. Thus, each OSE
requires a speciﬁed level of capabilities and performance to support accomplishment of the tacti-
cal objectives. To illustrate an aspect of a tactical plan, consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 13.1
Assume an organization requires a ﬂeet of 10 delivery vehicles with an operational availability of 0.95 and
you only have 6 vehicles, the tactical plan describes HOW the organization plans to:
1. Acquire at least four additional vehicles.
2. Operate the vehicles to achieve organizational objectives.
3. Maintain the vehicles to achieve an operational availability of 0.95.

System Element Resources (9)
System element resources in inventory and their current conditions represent the existing system/
product capabilities. Assuming the organization has a realistically achievable strategic plan and
supporting tactical plans, these documents and supporting organizational system elements have a
shelf life. Competitive or hostile threats, as well as opportunities, evolve over time. As a result, two
types of situations occur:
      1. Threat capabilities begin to exceed your organization’s system element capabilities.
      2. As new opportunities arise, each system element asset requires a projected level of per-
         formance to defend against threats or capitalize on the opportunities.
                                                 13.2 Organizational Missions Within the Enterprise     125

Given that the organizational system elements have a shelf life, your organization may ﬁnd itself
with gaps between WHAT you currently have and WHAT you operationally NEED to survive orga-
nizational threats or capitalize on opportunities.
    As the tactical plans for achieving speciﬁc missions mature and are approved, system
elements—namely PERSONNEL, FACILITIES, DATA, and EQUIPMENT—are fully funded to
achieve the mission objectives. The updates may include:
    1. Deployment of a new system, product, or service.
    2. Upgrades, enhancements, and reﬁnements to existing systems, products, or services.
    3. Updates to organizational doctrine and command media revisions.
    4. Personnel training and skills enhancement.
    5. Revisions to operational tactics.
Depending on the level of urgency for these capabilities, a tactical plan may require several days,
weeks, months, or a year to implement and bring the organizational capabilities up to required level
of performance. Consider the following example:

 EXAMPLE 13.2
An organization ﬁelds a system or product with an Initial Operational Capability (IOC) and incrementally
upgrading via “builds” until a Full Operational Capability (FOC) is achieved.
     Additionally, until the required capabilities are ﬁrmly established, interim operational tactics may be
employed to project a perception to adversarial or competitive threats to a capability that may only exist in
virtual space. History is ﬁlled with examples of decoy systems or products that inﬂuence competitor, adver-
sary, or customer perceptions of reality until the actual system, product, or service capability is ﬁelded.

Guidepost 13.1 At this point, recognize that the organization was established to capitalize on
targets of opportunity (TOOs) in the marketplace. As the organization delivers or employs those
products or services in the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, the organization must continually assess
a system’s operational utility, suitability, availability and effectiveness via mission gap analysis.
The analysis collects and analyses data from User interviews, observations, lessons learned, trouble
reports (TRs), and deﬁciencies, for example—comprising the mission capability gaps. The bottom
line is:
    1. Here’s WHAT we set out to accomplish with our products and services.
    2. Here’s HOW they performed in the marketplace.
    3. Here’s WHAT our customers told us about their PERCEPTIONS and level of
       SATISFACTION.
    4. Here’s the SCORECARD on performance results.

Existing System/Product Capabilities (10)
Effective mission gap analysis requires a realistic, introspective assessment of the existing
system/product capabilities. Organizations, by nature and “spin control” media relations, project a
positive image outside the organization, thereby creating a “perception” that the organization may
appear to be much stronger than the existing capabilities indicate. Depending on the context, serious
business ethics may be at issue with speciﬁc consequences.
     For internal assessment purposes, the path to survival demands objective, unbiased, realistic
assessments of system, product, or service capabilities. Otherwise, the organization places itself
and its missions at risk by believing their own rhetoric. This paradigm includes a concept referred
126     Chapter 13   Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications

to as group think, whereby the organization members synergize their thought processes to a level
of belief that deﬁes fact-based reality.

User Moments of Truth (11)
Real world ﬁeld data based on User moments of truth represent a level of risk that does have an
impact on the organization, physical assets, or human life. The physical interactions may be
aggressive, defensive, or benign encounters as part of the normal course of day-to-day business
operations.
     Field engineers, User interviews and feedback, or broader-based User community surveys serve
as key collection points for moments of truth data. The interviews accumulate User experiences,
lessons learned, and best practices based on direct physical interactions with the TOOs or threat
environment.

Author’s Note 13.2 A common challenge many organizations face is having decision makers
who emphatically insist that they “know best” what the User wants. Although this may be true in
a few instances, objective evidence should reasonably substantiate the claim. Otherwise, the claim
may be nothing more than pompous chest beating, unsubstantiated observation, or assertion. Com-
petent professionals recognize this trap and avoid its pitfalls.

Mission Gap Analysis (12)
Mission gap analysis focuses more in-depth on a strengths, weaknesses, threats, and opportunities
(SWOT) or gap analysis between the organization’s existing system, product, or service capabili-
ties, operational state of readiness and targets of opportunity (TOOs) or threats. The analysis
includes conducting what if scenarios; assessment of operational strengths, deﬁnition of measures
of effectiveness (MOEs) and measures of suitability (MOSs); and leveraged capabilities. Based on
the mission gap analysis results, prioritized operational needs are documented and serve as inputs
into tactical plans.

Referral For more information about MOEs and MOSs, refer to Chapter 34 on Operational
Utility, Suitability, and Effectiveness Practices in Part II.
     It is important to note here that the gap analysis may have two types of information:
      1. The paper analysis comparison.
      2. Real world ﬁeld data based on actual physical interactions between the existing system or
         product and the TOOs or threat environment.
The paper analysis is simply an abstract analysis and comparison exercise based on documented
evidence such as “brochureware” in trade journals, customer feedback, surveys, intelligence, and
problem reports. The analysis may be supported by various validated models and simulations that
can project the virtual effects of interactions between the existing system, product, or service capa-
bilities and TOOs or threats. Though potentially lacking in physical substance and validation, the
paper analysis approach should convey a level of risk that may have an impact on the organiza-
tion, physical assets, human life, property, or the environment.

Prioritized Operational Needs (13)
The results of the mission gap analysis are documented as prioritized operational needs. Docu-
mentation mechanisms include Mission Needs Statements (MNS), Statement of Objectives (SOOs),
Operational Requirements Documents (ORDs), and Operational Concept Descriptions (OCDs).
                                               13.3 The System and Mission Capabilities Foundation         127

Obviously the nature of these documents focuses on technical capability requirements rather than
resources to implement the capabilities. Various criteria and labels are assigned to indicate the PRI-
ORITY level (numerical, phrases, etc.) such as absolutely mandatory, desired, and nice-to-have.

Guidepost 13.2 The preceding discussion provides the backdrop as to HOW organizations iden-
tify marketplace system, product, and service needs. Let’s shift our focus to understanding the tech-
nical aspect of HOW organizations employ organizational roles and missions to identify system
capability requirements.


13.3 THE SYSTEM AND MISSION CAPABILITIES FOUNDATION

Before a system is acquired or developed, SEs analyze the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and
opportunity/problem space to support system acquisition or development decision making. The
results of these analyses ultimately bound the solution space(s) within which the MISSION
SYSTEM is intended to operate. In performing this role, SEs support business development organ-
izations attempting to bound the operating environment and deﬁne the types of missions the system
must be capable of conducting.

System Objectives
Every system, product, or service is characterized by a set of operational need-based objectives that
drive the system’s missions and applications. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 13.3
An automobile manufacturer may conduct marketing analysis and identify an operational need(s) for a family
vehicle that can comfortably provide general transportation for up to four adults. Further analysis reveals that
families searching for this type of vehicle are sports oriented and need to carry bicycles, kayaks, or storage
containers over rough roads in mountainous territory in all weather conditions. Thus, a general system objec-
tive is established for a class of vehicle.

Mission Objectives
Most families, however, do not have the luxury of performing sports all week and have other family-
based missions (shopping, school carpools, etc.). Therefore, the vehicle’s system objectives must
be capable of supporting multiple mission objectives that are User-oriented and support all system
stakeholders.
    How do system and mission objectives relate to a system’s purpose? Consider the following
example.


 EXAMPLE 13.4
A retail store may target a speciﬁc market niche based on demographics, products and services, and market
environment—coupled with ﬁnancial performance to form organizational objectives. Accomplishment of the
organizational objectives requires supporting system elements of the business—such as PERSONNEL EQUIP-
MENT, and FACILITIES—on speciﬁc mission objectives—such as increasing customer awareness, boosting
sales, improving proﬁtability, and introducing new merchandise.

This leads to two key questions:
128     Chapter 13   Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications

      1. WHAT is the importance of delineating organizational mission and system objectives?
      2. WHY do we do it?
The reason is the System Owner and/or the User has organization roles and missions to fulﬁll. Roles
and missions are accomplished by the integrated set of organizational systems or assets such the
PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, and PROCEDURAL DATA elements.
    Each of these systems or assets provides system capabilities that fulﬁll a bounded solution
space subject to affordability and other constraints. System capabilities, which vary by phase of
operation, are identiﬁed, analyzed, and translated into system or item speciﬁcation requirements.

Organizational Efﬁciency and Accountability
All multi-level elements of a system must be traceable back to system objectives that deﬁne the
system’s purpose or reason for its existence. The typical proﬁt-centric business view is that each
capability must:
    1. Enable to organization to achieve both strategic and/or tactical planning objectives.
    2. Efﬁciently and effectively provide streamlined, value-added beneﬁts—such as return on
       investment (ROI)—to the organization.
Therefore, from an SE perspective, there must be some form of system accountability.
    System accountability means that all system capabilities, requirements, and “end game”
performance must be:
      1. Assigned to organizational owners—Users, Acquirer, System Developer personnel, Sub-
         contractors, etc.—or organizational accountability.
      2. Traceable back to higher level system objectives that identify and bound the opportunity
         space or solution space—or technical accountability.
Organizations establish technical accountability by a “linking” process referred to as requirements
TRACEABILITY. To better understand the requirements traceability process, let’s examine the key
entities of technical accountability.


13.4 KEY ENTITIES OF TECHNICAL ACCOUNTABILITY

The key entities of technical accountability include organizational objectives, system objectives,
and mission objectives. To see how these topics interrelate from a technical accountability per-
spective, refer to Figure 13.2.

Operating Environment (1)
The organization characterizes its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT in terms of problem/
opportunity spaces as illustrated in Figure 13.2. From an organizational perspective, each
problem/opportunity space includes a number of validated operational needs that can be partitioned
into solution spaces. Depending on the type of organization—whether military or business—the
operational need may be driven by the marketplace or by threats. In either case, targets of oppor-
tunity (TOO) may emerge.
     You may ask, how does an organization respond to its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT? Cor-
porate management assigns responsibilities to most organizations to provide systems, products, and
services to customers. To fulﬁll the corporate charter, each organization performs various roles and
conducts MISSIONS to achieve goals, be they ﬁnancial, or otherwise.
                                                                                   13.4 Key Entities of Technical Accountability                 129

1                                                               5
          Operating            3      Problem/                                     System Owner/User Operations
                                                                     6
         Environment                 Opportunity                                                                                         9
                                                                         Organization
    2                                 Space(s)                             Roles &                           8              MISSION
        PHYSICAL                    (Voids, Threats, &                                             Lessons
                                                                          Missions                                          SYSTEM
                                     Vulnerabilities)                                              Learned
        ENVIRON.                                                                                                            Objectives
        Human Systems s
         Natural Envir.        4
                                                                                        7
        Induced Envir.              Solution Space(s)                                         Rules of
                                         (Opportunities)
                                                                                            Engagement           24
                                                                                             / Conduct                     System
 10
             Mission Requirements                                                                                       Requirements
                                                                                                                   25
                                                           17                                                           System Capabilities
      11
          Mission
                                    14                                   MISSION SYSTEM
                                       Mission                      18
         Objective(s)                                                    Mission            19
                                        Event                                                                      26
                                                                                             Phases of
                                      Timeline(s)                        System                                          System
                                                                                             Operation
                                                                         Role(s)                                        Functions
      12                       15                                                       20
                                     Measuresofof
                                    Measures                    21                                                 27
            Mission                                                                                                       Measures of
                                    Effectiveness s                  States of                   Modes of
           Outcome(s)                                                                                                 Performance (MOPs)
                                      (MOEs)                         Operation                   Operation

      13                            16                                               23                            28
                                                                22                          Operational
             Measures of              Probability                   Operations                                        Technical Performance
                                                                                             Tactics &
           Suitability (MOS)          of Success                     & Tasks s                                          Parameters (TPPs)
                                                                                            Procedures
                                                                                                                                             2
Figure 13.2 Understanding the Entity Relationships of Organizational & System Roles


     At the highest level, the organization assesses the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT for threats
and targets of opportunity (TOOs), whichever is applicable. Results of the assessment and derived
strategy are documented in the organization’s strategic plan and implemented via a series of
mission-oriented tactical plans.
     In performing this corporate mission, each organization must use existing resources to procure,
implement, and upgrade a MISSION SYSTEM (17) that can perform the missions and achieve the
objectives. This, in turn, requires specifying system “solutions” that can achieve speciﬁc mission
objectives.
     To satisfy the solution space(s), System Owner/User Operations (5) and Mission Requirements
(10) are identiﬁed.

Mission Requirements (10)
Fulﬁllment of a solution space may require several types of missions to satisfy, correct, or ﬁll the
void. Each type of mission is documented by a strategic plan and supporting tactical plans. These
plans identify, deﬁne, and document speciﬁc mission requirements.

Author’s Note 13.3 In the interest of space and simplicity, we have arbitrarily abstracted the
MISSION REQUIREMENT elements as shown. Entities such as resources should also be consid-
ered. The six entities presented are intended to illustrate the technical “thought process.”

Based on an understanding of the mission requirements, let’s shift to understand HOW a MISSION
SYSTEM (17) operates to conduct its missions.

Mission System (17)
When tasked by HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS—namely by System Owners/Users—each
MISSION SYSTEM (17) must be physically conﬁgured to meet the speciﬁc mission requirements.
130     Chapter 13   Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications

These requirements include mission objectives, mission outcomes, and Mission Event Timelines—
as part of the organizational roles and missions. Additionally, the MISSION SYSTEM (17) is
selected as the “system of choice” and is linked to the Mission Requirements (10). For example,
Phases of Operation (19) and Modes of Operation (20), Mission Outcome(s) (12), and Mission
Event Timelines (14) must be linked.

Guidepost 13.3 At this point we have established the mission requirements and identiﬁed the
MISSION SYSTEM (17). The ﬁnal part of our discussion focuses on the System Requirements (24)
of the selected MISSION SYSTEM.


System Requirements (24)
MISSION SYSTEM objectives are achieved by procuring and implementing MISSION SYSTEMS
(17) designed speciﬁcally for satisfy Mission Requirements (10). In general, systems are procured
to handle a diversity of missions ranging from highly specialized to very general. The mechanism
for documenting the total set of mission requirements is the system speciﬁcation or System Per-
formance Speciﬁcation (SPS).

Author’s Note 13.4 Under System Requirements (24), there should also be entity relationships
for nonfunctional requirements. Because of space limitations, Figure 13.2 only depicts the func-
tional requirements.

As Figure 13.2 shows, System Requirements (24) specify and bound System Capabilities (25),
which consist of System Functions (26). Each system function is bounded by at least one or more
Measures of Performance (MOPs) (27). Technical Performance Parameters (TPPs) (28), which
represent areas of performance that are critical to the mission and system, are selected for special
tracking from the set of Measures of Performance (MOPs).

Referral For more information about traceability of system capabilities, please refer to Chapter
System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation.


13.5 UNDERSTANDING ORGANIZATIONAL
ROLES AND MISSIONS

MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM roles are determined by their role-based contexts
within the System of Systems (SoS). Human-made systems consist of integrated supply chains of
systems in which an organization produces systems, products, and services to support another
“downstream” system. Two key points:
      • In the system-centric context, a MISSION SYSTEM performs speciﬁc objectives deﬁned by
        contract, tasking, or personal motivation.
      • In the supply chain context, the same system serves as a SUPPORT SYSTEM to another via
        the delivery of systems, products, or services.
As a result, every system in the SoS supply chain serves in two contextual roles as:
      1. MISSION SYSTEM
      2. SUPPORT SYSTEM
                                                     13.5 Understanding Organizational Roles and Missions       131

                                          “Fitness for Use”                                “Fitness for Use”
                                            Performance                                      Performance
                                           Standards and                                    Standards and
                  Operating              Acceptance Criteria       Operating              Acceptance Criteria
                  Constraints                                      Constraints




  Mission                          System            Mission                        System
 Resources
                  System #1                         Resources
                                                                  System #2
                                  Responses                                        Responses

  Products                         Products                                         Products
  By-Products                      By-Products                                      By-Products
  Services       Organizational    Services                       Organizational    Services
                   Resources                                        Resources

                MISSION SYSTEM                                  MISSION SYSTEM
                      Role                                            Role
                                     SUPPORT SYSTEM                                  SUPPORT SYSTEM
                                          Role                                            Role
                                                 Supply Chain

Figure 13.3 Understanding the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM Roles Supply Chain




If we investigate the MISSION SYSTEM and the SUPPORT SYSTEM roles and their interactions
with the SOI’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, every system performs a function, by deﬁnition,
and produces value-added products, by-products, and services that are used by other systems. In
effect we can establish a customer–supplier relationship boundary between the system and exter-
nal systems within its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
     We can describe the SOI’s value-added processing graphically as shown in Figure 13.3. System
1 performs value-added processing to transform MISSION RESOURCES inputs—namely data and
raw materials—into SYSTEM RESPONSES outputs—namely behavior, products, by-products, and
services. The success of MISSION SYSTEM operations is subject to HIGHER ORDER Systems:
     • Operating Constraints—Command-and-control mission tasking, policies and procedures,
       contracts, etc.
     • Organizational Resources Constraints—Processes and methods, facilities, training, tools,
       personnel, etc.

“Fitness-for-Use” Criteria
Customers or Acquirers of systems, by virtue of validated operational needs, have minimum require-
ment thresholds and expectations that must be met to ensure the products, by-products, and serv-
ices they acquire are acceptable for use by their technical capability, quality, and safety and are not
detrimental to the environment and human health. Analytically, we refer to these expectations and
requirements as ﬁtness-for-use criteria. Contractually, ﬁtness-for-use criteria establish a basis for:
     1. Acquirer (role) speciﬁcation of system/entity requirements
     2. Acceptance of contract deliverables.
132     Chapter 13   Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications

System Interfaces and PRODUCER–SUPPLIER Relationships
The construct depicted in Figure 13.3 represents linkages within an overall chain of SUPPLIER
(role) to CUSTOMER (role) exchanges. We refer to the “linkages” as supplier–customer role
relationships.
     If we analyze each system within the supplier–customer chain, we discover that every system
has a mission and objectives to achieve. The missions and objectives focus on products, by-
products, and services provided by a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) to satisfy customer
operational needs and provide a return on investment (ROI) to the supplier’s organizational stake-
holders. Therefore, a system fulﬁlls two roles:
      1. A Mission Role Produce value-added products, by-products, and services.
      2. A Support Role Deliver those products, by-products, and services to other systems.
Each system in the supplier–customer chain performs MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT
SYSTEM roles relative the predecessor and successor interface systems.
     As illustrated by the ﬁgure, System 1 performs a MISSION SYSTEM role as a producer of
value-added products, by-products, and services to meet consumer marketplace or contract require-
ments. The marketplace or contract establishes ﬁtness-for-use standards and acceptance criteria
for use by System 2. As a supplier of products, by-products, and services, System 1 performs a
SUPPORT SYSTEM role to System 2.
     To illustrate HOW organizational elements perform in their MISSION SYSTEM and
SUPPORT SYSTEM roles, let’s explore the role-based interaction between a system development
program and the accounting department.


 EXAMPLE 13.5
A system development program, as a MISSION SYSTEM, designs and develops a product and provides serv-
ices to fulﬁll the requirements of a contract. The program organization, functioning in a SUPPORT SYSTEM
role to the accounting organization, provides weekly labor charges—namely mission support data.
      The accounting organization, functioning in its MISSION SYSTEM role, is tasked to collect, analyze,
and report ﬁnancial data via accounting reports (products) and services. The accounting organization, func-
tioning in its SUPPORT SYSTEM role, provides timely mission support data and services to system devel-
opment programs to assess earned value against plans that enable them to make corrective actions, if necessary,
to meet their contract performance obligations.


 EXAMPLE 13.6
During NASA Space Shuttle missions, organizations such as the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida,
Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in
Huntsville, Alabama, other NASA centers, and Vandenburg Air Force Base (VAFB) in California perform
SUPPORT SYSTEM roles that include pre-mission, mission, and/or postmission operations support.

Let’s delineate the context of the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM roles further.
      • While in its MISSION SYSTEM role, a SOI conducts assigned missions to accomplish
        mission objectives.
      • While performing its MISSION SYSTEM role, a SOI serves as a SUPPORT SYSTEM to
        the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM that assigned the task (vertical entity relationships). In so
        doing, the SOI may support other peer level systems in their respective MISSION SYSTEM
        roles (horizontal entity relationships).
                                                                            13.6 Guiding Principles      133

Table 13.1 Organizational roles and system application rules

Rule            Title                                    Role-Based System Rules

13.1     Organizational          Establish your organization’s vision, mission, and objectives in a
         vision, mission, and    strategic plan.
         objectives
13.2     Tactical planning       Based on your organization’s strategic plan’s vision, mission and
                                 objectives, establish mission driven tactical plans.
13.3     Capability gap          Conduct a gap analysis of organizational and system strengths,
         analysis                weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOTs) capabilities required to
                                 achieve the strategic and tactical plans.
13.4     Targets of              Based on your organizational vision, conduct a gap analysis of the
         opportunity and         global marketplace’s targets of opportunity (TOOs) and threat
         threat                  environments.
         environments
13.3     Strategic planning      Establish an organizational strategic plan that deﬁnes the vision for
                                 where the organization intends to be in 5 years or longer.
13.4     Producer and            Every system performs two types of supply chain roles:
         supplier roles          1. As a MISSION SYSTEM, the system is a producer of products,
                                    by-products, or services based on marketplace needs or contract
                                    requirements.
                                 2. As a SUPPORT SYSTEM, the system is a supplier of products,
                                    by-products, or services to satisfy Acquirer system needs.
13.5     Value-added             In its MISSION SYSTEM role, every system:
         producer-supplier       1. Consumes MISSION RESOURCES inputs—namely expendables and
                                    consumables such as raw or processed materials and data.
                                 2. Transforms, converts, or processes mission resources inputs to add
                                    value.
                                 3. Supplies value-added products, by-products, and services that are
                                    used by other systems.
13.6     Acquirer ﬁtness for     Each instance of system products, by-products, and services supplied to
         use criteria            an Acquirer must meet pre-deﬁned and agreed to ﬁtness for use standards
                                 and performance criteria.




Organizational Roles and System Application Rules
Based on the preceding discussion, we can establish several organizational roles and system appli-
cation development rules. Table 13.1 provides a summary of these rules.


13.6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern organizational roles, missions, and system applications concepts.

Principle 13.1 Every system performs two contextual roles: a MISSION SYSTEM role and a
SUPPORT SYSTEM role.
134    Chapter 13     Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications

Principle 13.2 As MISSION SYSTEM, a system performs task-based missions to achieve spe-
ciﬁc outcomes.

Principle 13.3 As a SUPPORT SYSTEM, a system delivers products, by-products, or services
that serve as the MISSION RESOURCES element to another system’s MISSION SYSTEM role.

Principle 13.4 A system lacking purpose and missions reﬂects organizational neglect, product
obsolescence, or both.

Principle 13.5 For a supply chain to be successful, every system input and output must meet
pre-deﬁned sets of ﬁtness for use performance criteria established with Users.

13.7 SUMMARY

During our discussion of organizational roles and system applications, we employed entity relationships to
illustrate how the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT’s opportunity and solution spaces are linked to mission
requirements, User operations, mission systems, and subsequently system requirements.
      We addressed the highly iterative strategic planning loop and tactical planning loop. Each of these loops
provide situational assessments of existing organizational systems, products, and services relative to TOOs
and threats in the operating domain and the organization’s strategic and tactical plans. When the level or
urgency triggers the need to procure a new system, product, capability, or service, work products (ONS, SOOs,
ORD, etc.) are generated to serve as inputs to the system procurement phase.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally, use Figure 13.2 as a topical framework to create a presentation for the selected
   system or product. Describe how its capabilities support the organizational mission.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Depending on the nature of your business, use Figure 13.2 as a framework to describe your organization’s
   or User’s organizational roles, missions, and system requirements.


ADDITIONAL READING

Carlzon, Jan. 1987. Moments of Truth: New Strategies for    Develop a Plan that Really Works. New York:
  Today’s Customer-Driven Economy. New York: Harper         McGraw-Hill.
  and Row.                                                 Morrisey, George L. 1996. A Guide to Strategic Thinking:
Goodstein, Leonard, Nolan, Timothy, and Pfeiffer, J.        Building Your Planning Foundation. San Francisco:
  William. 1993. Applied Strategic Planning: How to         Jossey-Bass.
Chapter              14

     Understanding the System’s
     Problem, Opportunity,
     and Solution Spaces

14.1 INTRODUCTION

The concept of identifying and bounding the problem space and the solution space is one that you
occasionally hear in buzzword vocabularies. Sounds great! Impresses bystanders! However, if you
ask the same people to differentiate the problem space from the solution space(s), you either get a
blank stare or a lot of animated arm-waving rhetoric.
     Most successful missions begin with a thorough identiﬁcation and understanding of the
problem, opportunity, and the solution space(s). One system’s problem space may be an opportu-
nity space for another that desires to capitalize on the weakness.
     This chapter introduces the concept of the problem/opportunity space and its solution space(s).
Once you understand the organization’s roles and mission, the ﬁrst step is to understand WHAT
problem the User is trying to solve. People can become experts in analyzing system requirements;
however, system analysis, design, and development success begins with understanding the User’s
problem/opportunity and solution spaces. A worst-case scenario is writing perfectly worded
requirements for the wrong problem.
     Our discussions begin with an overview of the problem space and formulation of the problem
statement. The discussion continues with an overview of the solution space and its relationship to
all or a portion of the problem space. We contrast common misperceptions of the solution space
using a geographical context. Although the solution space is capability based, we illustrate through
examples how a lesser capability can leverage the capabilities of other systems to greatly project
or expand, as a force multiplier, its sphere of inﬂuence.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What is a problem space?
     2. What is an opportunity space?
     3. What is the relationship between a problem space and an opportunity space?
     4. What is a solution space?
     5. What is the relationship between the problem/opportunity space and a solution space?
     6. How do you write a problem statement?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                135
136     Chapter 14   Understanding the System’s Problem, Opportunity, and Solution Spaces

      7. Identify three rules for writing problem statements.
      8. How do you forecast the problem/opportunity spaces?
      9. How does an organization resolve gaps between a problem space and its solution space(s)?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Opportunity Space A gap or vulnerability in a system, product, or service capability that
        represents an opportunity for: 1) a competitor or adversary to exploit or 2) supplier to offer
        solutions.
      • Problem Space An abstraction within a system’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT or
        mission space that represents an actual, perceived, or evolving gap, hazard, or threat to an
        existing capability. The potential threat is perceived either to pose some level of ﬁnancial,
        security, safety, health, or emotional, risk to the User or to have already had an adverse impact
        on the organization and its success. One or more lower level solution space systems, prod-
        ucts, or services resolve the problem space.
      • Problem Statement A brief, concise statement of fact that clearly describes an undesirable
        state or condition without identifying the source or actions required to solve the problem.
      • Situational Assessment Refer to the deﬁnition in Chapter 13 on Organizational Roles, Mis-
        sions, and System Application.
      • Solution Space A bounded abstraction that represents a capability and level of performance
        that, when implemented, is intended to satisfy all or a portion of a higher level problem
        space.

14.2 UNDERSTANDING OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT OPPORTUNITIES

HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS, from an organizational viewpoint, exploit opportunities and respond
to threats. Organizations assign missions and performance objectives—ﬁnancial, market share, and
medical—that support the founder’s or system owner’s vision of capitalizing on opportunities or
neutralizing threats.
     Survivalist opportunity and threat motives are common throughout the OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT. Depending on one’s perspective, some refer to this as the “natural ordering of systems.”
The animal kingdom that exists on the plains of Africa is an illustrative example. One animal’s
prey—or opportunity—may be viewed by the prey as a threat. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 14.1
An aggressor organization views a ﬂedgling business as an opportunity to exploit or capitalize on the ﬂedg-
ling’s weaknesses. In turn, the larger organization may be viewed by the ﬂedgling business as the threat to its
survival.

Types of System Opportunities
Opportunities generally are of two basic types:
      1. Time-based. Waiting for the right time.
      2. Location-based. Waiting for a lease to expire.
Let’s explore both of these further.
                                                        14.3 Understanding the Problem Space    137

Time-Based Opportunities. Time-based opportunities can occur randomly or predictably.
Random opportunities are sometimes viewed as “luck.” Predictable opportunities are dependent
on periodic or repeatable behavioral patterns (i.e., knowledge applied to practice) that enable an
aggressor system to capitalize on a situational weakness.

Location-Based Opportunities. Location-based opportunities, as the name implies, relate to
being in the right place at the right time. In the business world success is often said to be driven
by “Location! Location! Location!” Obviously, a good location alone does not make a business
successful. However, the location positions the business for mission success.


14.3 UNDERSTANDING THE PROBLEM SPACE

One of the ﬁrst steps in SE is to understand WHAT problem the User is attempting to solve. The
term problem space is relativistic. Consider competition in the commercial marketplace or military
adversaries. An organization may view a competitor or adversary and their operating domain as a
problem space. Hypothetically, if you were to ask the competitor or adversary if they were a
“problem,” to the other organization, they may state unequivocally “yes!” or emphatically “no!”
Therefore, the context of a problem space resides in the eyes and minds of those who perceive the
situation. Sometimes there is little doubt as evidenced by acts of aggression or hostility such as
invasion of a country’s air space or hostile business takeovers.
     The term problem has two contexts: 1) a User-Acquirer’s perspective and 2) a System Devel-
oper perspective. A problem space for the User-Acquirer represents an opportunity—solution space
for the System Developer. In turn a System Developer’s problem space of ﬁnding a design solu-
tion becomes an opportunity space for subcontractors, vendors, and consultants to offer solutions.

OPPORTUNITY Versus PROBLEM Semantics
Technically a problem does not exist until the hazard that poses a potential risk occurs. Then you
actually have a problem! The infamous “OK, Houston, we have a problem . . .” communicated by
Apollo 13 Commander Jim Lovell is one of the best illustrations of the context used here.
     In a highly competitive marketplace and adversarial, hostile world, survival for many organi-
zations requires proactive minimization of system vulnerability. Organizations that are proactive in
recognizing opportunities initiate risk mitigation actions to prevent hazards from occurring and
becoming problems—or tomorrow’s corporate headlines. In contrast, procrastinators deal with
problems by becoming reactionary “ﬁreﬁghters,” assuming that they were aware of the potential
hazard and did not mitigate it; they seem to never get ahead. Since the term problem space is com-
monly used and SE focuses on problem solving, this text uses the term problem space.

Problem Solving or Symptom Solving?
Organizations often convince themselves and their executive management they are problem solving.
In many cases the so-called problem solving is actually symptom solving. This question leads to
critical question for the User, Acquirer, and System Developers: Is this the RIGHT problem to solve
or a downstream symptom of the problem?

Dynamics of the Problem Space
For most organizational systems, problem spaces are dynamic and evolutionary. They evolve over
time in a number of ways. Some occur as instantaneous, catastrophic events, while others emerge
over several years—such as the hole in the ozone layer of Earth’s atmosphere. The root causes for
138     Chapter 14   Understanding the System’s Problem, Opportunity, and Solution Spaces

problem spaces in system capabilities and performance originates from several potential sources
such as:
      1. System neglect.
      2. Improper oversight or maintenance.
      3. Ineffective training of the User Operators.
      4. Budgetary constraints.
Organizationally, managers have an obligation to track problem spaces. The problem is that some
managers are reluctant to surface the problem spaces until it is too late. In other cases management
fails to provide the proper visibility and priority to seemingly trivial issues until they become full-
ﬂedged problem spaces—the proverbial “head in the sand.” When this happens, four potential out-
comes can occur:
      1. Operationally, the source of the problem space goes away.
      2. The organization’s management becomes distracted or enamored by other priorities.
      3. Organizational objectives change.
      4. Catastrophic (worst-case) events heighten awareness and sensitivity.
In general, people tend to think of the problem space as static. In fact, the primary issue with the
problem space is its continual dynamics, especially in trying to bound it.

Forecasting the Problem Space
The challenge for most organizations is How do we forecast a problem space in system capabili-
ties with some level of conﬁdence? The answer resides in the organizational and system level strate-
gic and tactical plans, system missions, and objectives.
     Organizational strategic and tactical plans establish the reference framework for evaluating
current capabilities versus planned capabilities. Using these objectives as the basis, situational
assessments and gap analysis are employed as tools to compare the state of existing to projected
system capabilities and performance against projected capabilities and performance of competitors
or adversaries. The results may indicate a potential GAP in capabilities and/or levels of perform-
ance. The identiﬁcation of the gap establishes the basis for organizational problem spaces. Dynam-
ically, gaps may occur rapidly or evolve slowly over time.

When Does a “Gap” Become a Problem? This is perhaps the toughest question, especially
in a forecasting sense. Obviously, you know you have a problem when it occurs such as malfunction,
emergency, or catastrophic events. One approach may be to determine whether a potential hazard
with a level of risk has outcome-based, consequences that are unacceptable. In effect, you need to
establish levels or thresholds for assessing the degree of problem signiﬁcance.

Establishing Problem Space Boundaries. Conceptually, we illustrate a problem space with
solid lines to symbolically represent its perimeter. For some systems such as a lawn, the property
boundaries are clearly deﬁned for ownership accountability. In other cases, the boundaries are
elusive and vague. Consider civil unrest and wars in countries where people take sides but look,
dress, and communicate similarly. How does one differentiate friend versus foe? On WHICH day
of the week?
     Lines drawn around abstractions such as ideology, politics, and religion are often blurry, vague,
and ill deﬁned. To see this, consider the graphic shown in Figure 14.1. The ﬁgure illustrates problem
space boundaries by gray edges. The “center of mass” is indicated by the dark area whose edges,
however, are blurry and indistinct. In some cases the problem space has tentacles that connect to
                                                               14.3 Understanding the Problem Space        139


 Abstract Opportunity/Problem Space                           Engineering Solution Space
              Domain                                                   Domain




                                           System
                                         Engineering




Figure 14.1 SE—Translating the Abstract Opportunity/Problem Space into an SE Solution Space


other problem spaces, each having an effect on the other. The blurriness may not be static but a
continuum of dynamic, evolving changes as with clouds or a thunderstorm.

Controlling the Problem Space
Depending on the source or root cause of the problem and the degree of risk to your system or its
objectives, the natural tendency of most organizations is to eliminate the problem—namely the prob-
lems within their control, resources, or sphere of inﬂuence. However, the reality is you may not be
able to eliminate the problem space. At best, you may only be able to manage and control it—that
is, keep it in balance and check. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 14.2
Weeds are a continual problem for lawns and reappear annually for a variety of reasons. There are a number
of approaches to getting rid of the weeds, some more desirable than others in terms of environmental, health,
application, and cost considerations. Since you have limited control over how the weeds get transplanted
(winds, water, birds, etc.), you have a choice: 1) coexist and control the weeds or 2) “pay the price” to hire a
contractor to eliminate the weeds.

Deﬁning the Problem Statement
Our discussion to this point focuses on the problem space in an abstract sense. The rhetorical ques-
tion that requires speciﬁcity is: WHAT problem is the User attempting to solve? Before any solu-
tion analysis can proceed, it is crucial for you and your development team, preferably in
collaboration with the User, to simply document WHAT problem the User is attempting to solve.
You need to deﬁne a problem statement. Ultimately this leads to the question: HOW should a
problem statement be written? Although there are a number of ways of developing a problem state-
ment, there are some general guidelines to apply:
     1. Avoid identifying the source or root cause of a problem.
     2. Identify the operational scenario or operating conditions under which the problem occurs.
     3. Avoid stating any explicit or implicit solutions.
140     Chapter 14   Understanding the System’s Problem, Opportunity, and Solution Spaces

Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 14.3
Viruses are corrupting desktop computers on our network.

Note that the example does not specify: WHERE the viruses originate, the source or root cause of
the problem, WHAT the impact is, or HOW to solve the problem.

Partitioning the Problem Space
As your understanding of the problem space matures, the next step is to partition it into one or more
solution spaces. Work with system stakeholders to partition the complex problem space into more
manageable solution spaces. The identiﬁcation of one or more solution spaces requires highly iter-
ative collaboration, analysis, and decision making. Consider the challenge of attempting to partition
the ambiguous problem space shown at left side of Figure 14.1. Through partitioning, our objective
is to isolate key properties and characteristics of the problem as abstractions that enable us to ulti-
mately develop solutions.

Author’s Note 14.1 Problem solving requires establishing a conceptual solution as a starting
point. This solution may evolve throughout the process and may not be recognizable at completion.
Some people are very ineffective at conceptualizing the starting point. One approach is to gather
the facts about a problem space and create DRAFT solution space boundaries. Then, as the analy-
sis progresses, adjust the boundaries until decisions about the solution space boundaries mature
or stabilize. The key point is: some problem spaces are described as “wicked” due their dynamic
nature and are effectively unsolvable. In general, you have a choice:
      1. Flounder in the abstractness, or
      2. Make a decision, move on to the next decision, and then revisit and revise the original deci-
         sion when necessary.

Problem Space Degree of Urgency
The level of risk and degree of urgency of the problem space as a whole or portions thereof may
inﬂuence or drive solution space decisions, especially, where budgets or technology are constrained.
The net result may be a decision to prioritize solution spaces and levels of capability within solu-
tion spaces.
     We meet this challenge by establishing an Initial Operational Capability (IOC) at system deliv-
ery and acceptance. Then, as budgets or technologies permit, IOC is followed by a series of incre-
mental builds that enhance the overall capability. Finally, as the system matures with the integration
of the “builds,” an overall capability, referred to as a Full Operational Capability (FOC), is achieved.
     To illustrate the partitioning of the problem space into solution spaces, consider the graphic in
Figure 14.2. Symbolically, we begin with a problem space represented by a large box. Next, we
partition the box into ﬁve solution spaces, each focused on satisfying a set of problem space capa-
bility and performance requirements allocated to the solution space. Initially we could have started
with four or six solution spaces. Through analysis, we ultimately decide there should be ﬁve solu-
tion spaces. So, HOW does this relate to system development? The large box symbolizes the total
system solution. We partition the complexity of the system solution into PRODUCT level or SUB-
SYSTEM level solution spaces. Let’s explore this point further.
                                                             14.4 Understanding the Solution Space(s)   141

  Abstract Problem Space                           Engineering Solution Space Representation
 (Analytical Representation)                                 (Entity Relationships)


   Solution         Solution                            Solution                      Solution
   Space #1         Space #2                            Space #1                      Space #2


           Solution                                                     Solution
           Space #5                                                     Space #5

   Solution         Solution
                                                        Solution                      Solution
   Space #4         Space #3
                                                        Space #4                      Space #3




Figure 14.2 Partitioning the Problem Space into an SE Solution Space Representation


Problem Space Partitioning and Decomposition
When SEs deal with problem spaces, the exercise is accomplished through a multi-level decom-
position or narrowing process as shown in Figure 14.3. We begin with the high-level problem space
shown in the upper left-hand corner of the diagram. We partition the problem space into four solu-
tion spaces, 1.0 through 4.0. Solution space 3.0 becomes problem space 3.0 for the next lower level
and is partitioned into solution spaces 3.1 through 3.4. The partitioning process continues to the
lowest level. The net result of the narrowing process is shown in the upper right-hand corner of the
ﬁgure.

Guidepost 14.1 Given a fundamental understanding of the problem space and its relationship
to the solution space, we are now ready to explore the development of the solution space.


14.4 UNDERSTANDING THE SOLUTION SPACE(S)

Solution spaces are characterized by a variety of boundary conditions:
     1. Distinct, rigid boundaries.
     2. Fuzzy, blurry boundaries.
     3. Overlapping or conﬂicting boundaries.
The degree to which the solution space is ﬁlled is determined by the capabilities required, priorities
assigned to, and resources allocated to the problem space “zone.” HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS con-
tractually and organizationally impose RESOURCE and OPERATING CONSTRAINTS system ele-
ments that may ultimately limit the degree of solution coverage. Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 14.4
Because of reduced budgets and funding, home refuse pick up and disposal service may be reduced from two
days per week to one day per week.
142        Chapter 14            Understanding the System’s Problem, Opportunity, and Solution Spaces


 Problem
  Space                                                                      Problem
             Solution        Solution                                         Space
              Space           Space                                                               Solution        Solution
               1.0             2.0                                            Starting            Space 1.0       Space 2.0
             Solution        Solution                                          Point
              Space           Space
               4.0             3.0                                                                             Solution   Solution
                                         Problem                                                                Space      Space
      Pr                                  Space                                                   Solution       3.1        3.2
        ob                                                                                        Space 4.0
           lem                             3.0 Solution           Solution
                                                                                                               Solution
                                                                                                                Space                3.3
              /S                                        Space      Space                                         3.4
                 ol
                   ut                                    3.1        3.2
                      io                                                                              End Product
                        n                              Solution   Solution
                            Sp                          Space      Space
                              ac                         3.4        3.3
                                  eD
                                    ec                                       Problem
                                        om                                    Space
                                          po
                                             sit                               3.3 Solution         Solution
                                                io                                      Space        Space
                                                   n                                    3.3.1        3.3.2
                                                                                       Solution     Solution
                                                                                        Space        Space
                                                                                        3.3.4        3.3.4

Figure 14.3 Decomposing the Problem Space into Manageable Pieces


 EXAMPLE 14.5
A solution space normally satisﬁed by airline ﬂights between two cities will be reduced from three ﬂights per
week to one ﬂight per week during the non-tourist season.

Eliminating the Problem–Solution Space Gap
When a gap is identiﬁed in a system or product capability, it generally takes a ﬁnite amount of time
to ﬁll, especially if system development is involved. If the gap is of a defensive nature, the system
or product may be vulnerable or susceptible to acts of aggression and hostilities from competitors
or adversaries. If the gap represents a deﬁciency in an offensive capability, work must be performed
to eliminate the gap by upgrading system capabilities and performance.
     Depending on the system or product’s application, operational tactics such as decoys, cam-
ouﬂage, and operational patterns may be employed to supplement the gap until a new system,
product, or service is available.

Solution Capability Force Multipliers
Most people tend to think of the solution space in a geographical boundary context. Our portrayal
in Figure 14.3 resembles real-estate plots. Remember, the problem/solution spaces are capability
based. So, what does this mean?
    Capability-based solutions represent abstractions of the strength, capacity, and reliability
required to accomplish mission objectives.
      1. Strength. Power to accept a speciﬁc type of mission challenge.
      2. Capacity to Project. Multiply that power over a deﬁned range.
      3. Reliability. A probability of completing a mission of a given duration in a speciﬁed OPER-
         ATING ENVIRONMENT.
                                                        14.5 Exposure to Problem–Solution Spaces      143

You can expand the solution capability of a system by synergistically leveraging capabilities of
other systems to dramatically change their sphere of inﬂuence. Consider the following example:

Author’s Note 14.2 Recall the shadow game children play by standing in front of a ground-
based ﬂoodlight pointed toward a nearby wall? The ﬂoodlight, in combination with body move-
ments, projects a greater than life size silhouette onto the wall, thereby creating for the child the
perception of a much larger person. So we can leverage the geometry of object position and light
to create perceptions of capabilities beyond our individual capability. The same is true for the orga-
nizational or operational tactics for creating perceptions that are virtual but not reality.

The key point is you don’t have to build an expensive aircraft to cover X square miles. What you
need to do is ﬁgure out how to build a reasonably priced aircraft and be able to “project” that capa-
bility into a 10X square mile domain by leveraging other systems and their capabilities. Consider
the following example:


 EXAMPLE 14.6
A ﬁghter aircraft has a limited engagement range due to fuel capacity. However, by leveraging the capabili-
ties of air-to-air refueling, the ﬁghter can command a much larger area of coverage.

Author’s Note 14.3 You may recall from our discussion in Chapter 4 on system attributes,
properties, and characteristics that systems have a frame of reference and an operating domain.
For example, an aircraft has a home base—or frame of reference—and has an operating range—
or domain—that is limited by fuel consumption and maintenance considerations. Employing
“tanker” aircraft to replenish fuel in-ﬂight can expand the aircraft’s effective operating range.

Selecting Candidate Solutions for the Solution Space
Each solution space is bounded by technical, technology, support, cost, and schedule constraints.
The challenge is to identify and evaluate several viable candidate solutions that satisfy the techni-
cal requirements and then recommend the preferred solution. The selection requires establishing
pre-deﬁned, objective criteria and then performing a trade study to select the recommended solu-
tion. We will elaborate on this point further in the following discussions.


14.5 EXPOSURE TO PROBLEM–SOLUTION SPACES

Every person in your organization should have exposure to and an understanding of your organi-
zation’s opportunity-solution spaces. Unfortunately, travel budgets and the User’s desire and ability
to accommodate throngs of people prevents ﬁrst hand observations of HOW the system they
develop will be deployed, operated, and supported. As with any scientiﬁc ﬁeld, observation is a
critical skill of SEs. Seeing, touching, feeling, operating, hearing, and studying existing systems
in action has a profound inﬂuence on SEs throughout system development. Consider the follow-
ing example:


 EXAMPLE 14.7
A company is contracted to design a large piece of computer equipment. Since one of the considerations is
always getting equipment through doorways, business development personnel describe the doorway and
144     Chapter 14   Understanding the System’s Problem, Opportunity, and Solution Spaces

hallway leading to the room entrance. Engineering personnel were denied the opportunity to conduct a site
survey of the facility.
     Convinced that they could develop a cabinet to ﬁt through a narrow doorway, engineering proceeded with
the design. When the system was delivered, the installation team encountered major problems. They discov-
ered that the cabinet could be moved down the narrow hallway to the door but could not make a 90-degree
turn through the door. Lesson learned: ALWAYS send an SE to accompany business development personnel
during on-site visits to understand, analyze, and document the opportunity/problem and solution spaces.

Final Thoughts
Understanding problem–solution spaces requires continual assessments due to the dynamics of the
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. SEs often erroneously believe that ﬁlling the solution space with
development of a new system, product, or service is an end all answer. As is the case of scientiﬁc
law, every action by the User can be expected to have an equal and opposite reaction by competi-
tors and adversaries. So, when you bound the solution space, the bounding process must also
consider:
      1. The potential reactions of competitors and adversaries.
      2. HOW the new system, product, or service minimizes susceptibility and vulnerability to those
         threats, at least for a reasonable period of time.


14.6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern our understanding of a system’s problem, opportunity, and solution spaces.

Principle 14.1 System analysis requires recognition and validation of three types of User oper-
ational needs: real, perceived, or projected.

Principle 14.2 One system’s problem space is an opportunity space for a competitor or adver-
sarial system.

Principle 14.3 Manage problem space complexity by decomposing it into one or more solution
spaces that are solvable.

Principle 14.4 When bounding a solution space, anticipate competitor or adversarial reactions
to counter the solution space capabilities.

Principle 14.5 There are two types of solution development activities: problem solving and
symptom solving. Recognize the difference.


14.7 SUMMARY

Our discussion of problem and solution spaces serves as an SE concept for a number of reasons.
      • Problem solving begins with bounding and understanding the problem space and its constraints.
      • The fundamental concepts discussed here serve as key element of the SE Process Model.

      Referral More information on the SE Process Model is provided in Part II in Chapter 26.
                                                                                       Additional Reading     145

     • The investigation of alternative concepts and solutions that satisfy the solution space provide the foun-
       dation for developing candidate system solutions for evaluation and decision.

     Referral More information on system solution development is provided in Chapter 23 System Analy-
sis Synthesis and Chapters 37–40 on system solution development.
     Now that we have an understanding of the problem space and the solution space concept, we are ready
to investigate HOW the User employs systems, products, and services to perform organizational and system
missions. This brings us to our next topic, system interactions with its operating environment.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Problem space(s)
   (b) Opportunity space(s)
   (c) Solution space(s)
3. Cite various solution space tools that enable a homeowner to leverage their time, resources, and skills to
   maintain their lawn.
4. Cite two examples of human-made systems and two examples of natural systems that project or expand
   their sphere of inﬂuence by leveraging the capabilities of other systems.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. For your organization, identify the following related to the systems, product, or services it provides:
   (a) Problem space(s)
   (b) Opportunity space(s)
   (c) Solution space(s)
2. Pick a contract program within your organization. From the User’s organizational mission perspective,
   equate the following for the system, product, or service deliverables the contract provides:
   (a) Problem space(s)
   (b) Opportunity space(s)
   (c) Solution space(s)


ADDITIONAL READING

Chang, Richard Y., and Kelly, P. Keith. Step-by-Step         ASD-100, Architecture and System Engineering. 2003.
  Problem Solving. Publications Division, Richard P. Chang     National Air Space System—Systems Engineering
  & Associates, 1993, Irvime, CA.                              Manual. Washington, DC: Federal Aviation Administra-
KELLEY, TOM. The Art of Innovation, Doubleday, 2001,           tion (FAA).
  New York, NY.
Chapter              15

      System Interactions with Its
      Operating Environment

15.1 INTRODUCTION

Every natural and human-made system exhibits a fundamental stimulus–response behavior pattern.
For example, systems may respond positively to good news. Conversely, a system may respond
negatively to threats and employ defensive tactics, pre-emptive, or retaliatory strikes. The response
ultimately depends on how your system is designed and trained to respond to various types of
inputs—stimuli and information, under speciﬁed types of operating conditions and constraints.
     This section builds on the system architecture concepts discussions. Each SYSTEM OF
INTEREST (SOI) coexists and interacts with external systems that comprise its OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT—namely HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS, the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT, and
the INDUCED ENVIRONMENT. System analysts, designers, and developers need an under-
standing in HOW those systems INTERACT and respond to stimuli and cues in their OPERAT-
ING ENVIRONMENT.
     Our discussion begins with the fundamentals of system behavior. We establish a basic system
behavioral model that depicts HOW a SOI interacts with and responds to its OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT. The discussion highlights key concepts such as system stimuli, transfer function,
response time, and feedback control loops.
     We introduce the concepts of strategic and tactical interactions, and system adaptation to its
operating environment. From a SE perspective, SOI interactions with its OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT require an analytical understanding of each interaction. To establish this understand-
ing, we introduce an approach for analyzing system interfaces and their outcomes. As we analyze
system interactions and responses, we investigate HOW some SOIs employ tactics, countermea-
sures, and counter-countermeasures (CCMs).
     The ﬁnal part of this section concludes with a discussion of the system’s degree of compliance
with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. All systems, whether desired or not, operate and interact
within the balance of power that exists in their respective domains of operation. The level of
society’s acceptance of a system and a key factor in its success is determined by its ability to func-
tion and comply within its prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is the purpose of the system behavioral response model?
      2. What are the key elements and interfaces of the model?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

146
                                                                          15.1 Introduction   147

            3. What is a compatible interface?
            4. What is an interoperable interface?
            5. What are examples of HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS ENVIRONMENT threat
               sources?
            6. What are examples of NATURAL ENVIRONMENT threat sources?
            7. What are examples of INDUCED ENVIRONMENT threat sources?
            8. What are system countermeasures?
            9. What are system counter-countermeasures?
           10. What is meant by a system’s compliance with its OPERATING
               ENVIRONMENT?
           11. What are the consequences of a system’s noncompliance with its OPERATING
               ENVIRONMENT?
           12. Identify two levels of system interactions.
           13. Identify and describe six types of system interactions with its OPERATING
               ENVIRONMENT.



Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Compatibility “The ability of two or more systems or components to perform their required
    functions while sharing the same hardware or software environment.” (Source: IEEE 610.
    12-1990)
  • Comply To obey in strict accordance with the provisions of a contract or agreement’s terms
    and conditions. (Ts & Cs).
  • Conform To adapt or tailor an organization’s standard methods or processes to another
    organizations request or instructions.
  • Countermeasure An operational capability or tactic employed by a system to camouﬂage
    its identity, deceive or defeat adversarial or hostile system’s capabilities, or minimize vul-
    nerability by protecting itself from unauthorized access.
  • Counter-Countermeasure (CCM) An operational capability or tactic employed by a
    system to neutralize another system’s countermeasures.
  • Engagement A single instance of a friendly, cooperative, benign, competitive, adversarial,
    or hostile interaction between two systems.
  • Strategic Threats Entities that have long-term plans to exploit opportunities that leverage
    or enhance the organization’s reputation or equity to achieve a long-term vision and upset
    the “balance of power.” For example, an organization has a long-term vision to predominate
    a software market.
  • System Adaptation The ability of a system to acclimate physically and functionally to a
    new OPERATING ENVIRONMENT with a minimal degree of degradation to capability
    performance.
  • System Threat Any type of entity that has the potential to cause or inﬂict varying degrees
    of harm on another entity and its mission, capabilities, or performance. A system threat is
    any interaction by an external system that is hostile or impedes the operation and perform-
    ance of your system in accomplishing its intended mission.
148        Chapter 15    System Interactions with Its Operating Environment

      • Tactical Threats Entities that pose a potential, short-term hazard to another organization or
        system and its mission. For example, counter a competitor’s advertising campaign.
      • Transfer Function A mathematical expression used to model the relationship between a
        system’s behavioral response to a range of inputs and constraints.


15.2 SYSTEM BEHAVIORAL RESPONSE MODEL

During our discussion of the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT architecture, Figure 11.1 served as
a high-level model to illustrate a SYSTEM OF INTEREST’s interactions with its OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT. To see how this interaction occurs, let’s investigate a simple behavioral response
model.

Modeling the SOI’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT Interfaces
If we expand the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) aspect of Figure 11.1 to the next level of detail,
the top-level system shown in Figure 15.1 emerges. The top-level system consists of the PHYSI-
CAL ENVIRONMENT (1) and the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (2), both of which are controlled by
a HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM (3).
     The HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM (3) provides an ORGANIZATION (4), allocates ROLES and
MISSIONS (5), imposes OPERATING CONSTRAINTS (6), and provides RESOURCES (7) to the
SOI.
     Elements of the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT (1)—such as HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS (8),
INDUCED ENVIRONMENT (9), and NATURAL ENVIRONMENT (10)—provide input stimuli
into the SOI as well as affect its operating capabilities and performance.




      3
          Higher Order
            Systems                                    Roles&&
                                                      Roles            Operating
                                                                        Operating
                              Organization
                               Organization                                               Resources
                                                                                           Resources
                                                      Missions
                                                       Missions        Constraints
                                                                        Constraints
            Domain

 1                                        4                 5                6               7
        Physical              2
      Environment                                   System of Interest (SOI)
        Domain                     11                 12                          13                      16
      8                                 Sensory                                        Response                 System
                                                                                                                 System
          Human-Made
           Human-Made                    Sensory            Processor                   Response               Response
                                        Receiver             Processor                 Sampler                  Response
            System(s)
             System(s)                   Receiver                                       Sampler


      9                                 External                             Internal                      Self
            Induced                                               15
             Induced                     Inputs                           Feedback Loop                Interactions
          Environment
           Environment                                14
           System(s)
            System(s)                                       Corrective
                                                             Corrective
                                                            Action(s)
                                                             Action(s)
      10
            Natural
             Natural
           System(s)
            System(s)
                                                           External Feedback Loop                         18

                                  17

Figure 15.1 System Behavioral Responses Model
                                                          15.2 System Behavioral Response Model       149

Modeling the SOI’s Behavior
Stimuli serve as inputs to the Sensory Receiver (11) capability of the SOI (2). These can be cues,
information, data, interrupts, and actions. The Sensory Receiver (11) decodes the stimuli and infor-
mation as inputs to the Processor (12). The processor adds value to the data within the boundaries
of OPERATING CONSTRAINTS (6) and RESOURCES (7) that are levied by HIGHER ORDER
SYSTEM (3).
     The Response Sampler (13) samples the results of the value-added processing and compares
those results to OPERATING CONSTRAINTS (6)—namely mission tasking—established by a
HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM (3). Based on the results of the Comparison, Corrective Actions (14)
are initiated as feedback to the Processor (12).
     The clockwise workﬂow of steps (12) through (14) form an Internal Feedback Loop (15). When
the processing is deemed acceptable relative to the OPERATING CONSTRAINTS (6), the System
Response (16) is produced. The System Response (16) is then fed back (17) to the OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT (1) thereby completing the External Feedback Loop (18).

Understanding the Model’s Behavioral Transfer Function
In terms of the system control model introduced in Figure 15.1, the SOI’s transfer or response func-
tion is dependent on the planned behavior of the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) relative to its
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Consider HOW this model relates to an organization.


 EXAMPLE 15.1
An organization’s executive management formulates a strategic plan based on its vision and analysis of the
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT—in threats and opportunities—as well as tactical plans (refer to Figure
13.1). The vision, philosophy, missions, and mission objectives conveyed in these documents, as well as its
command media—its policies and procedures—establishes how the organization and elements of the organi-
zation are to respond to the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT.


Several Key Points
Figure 15.1 illustrates several key points regarding system interactions with its OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT.
    • System Interactions Stimuli or data (8)(9)(10)—composed of cues, information, and behav-
      ior—as well as the system response (16) to its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT (1) form a
      closed loop (18) of system interactions.
    • Input Data Occurrence External stimuli or data (8)(9)(10) may occur as a “triggering
      event”—as communications data, an observation, or transfer of information—or as “trend
      data” over time.
    • Measured or Conditioned System Response Steps (11) through (14) form an internal control
      loop (15) that results in measured response appropriate for the stimuli and information (8).
    • System Transfer Function Steps (11), (12), (13), and (14) collectively form a system trans-
      fer function that shapes the system response (16).
    • System Responsiveness The time required from the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (2) to respond
      to external stimuli (8), (9), and (10) and information until a system response (16) is pro-
      duced is referred to as system responsiveness, system response time, or system throughput.
150     Chapter 15   System Interactions with Its Operating Environment

15.3 SYSTEM BEHAVIORAL RESPONSES

Most people tend to think of a system’s responses to its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT in terms
of products, by-products, and services. However, system behavioral responses such as body lan-
guage, communications (degree of bluntness, etc.) intentionally or unintentionally communicate
the true message that may or may not correlate with the verbal message.
     Systems generally respond to external stimuli and information as aggressors, neutral, or as
defenders. The system response may be aggressive (i.e., proactive) or defensive (i.e., reactive). Let’s
consider some examples of system behavior.
      • Police In a potentially hostile protest demonstration, strategically placed police in riot gear
        stand prepared to respond on command to acts of violence or public disturbances.
      • Paramedics On receipt of an emergency call, paramedics respond with medical attention.
      • Education Corrective action based on test results is taken to eliminate a deﬁciency in student
        skill levels in mathematics.

System Interaction Compatibility and Interoperability
When two or more systems interact, we refer to the interaction as an engagement or encounter.
Engagements can be characterized with a number of terms. Examples include friendly, coopera-
tive, neutral, adversarial, and hostile. The effects or results of the engagement can be described as
positive, benign, negative, damaging, or catastrophic, depending on the system roles, missions, and
objectives. Generally, the effects or outcomes can be condensed into a key question. Was the engage-
ment compatible and interoperable from each system’s perspective? Let’s explore both the context
of both of these terms.

Differentiating Compatibility and Interoperability
Compatibility often has different contextual meanings. We use the term in the context of physical
form, ﬁt, and function capability. Notice that we used the operative term capability. Having the
capability does not mean the engagement or interface is interoperable or enabled.
    To illustrate the application of the terms compatibility and interoperability, consider the fol-
lowing examples.


 EXAMPLE 15.2
Two people from different countries speaking different languages may attempt to communicate—an interac-
tion or engagement between system entities. We could say their voice communications are compatible—trans-
mitting and receiving. However, they are unable to decode, process, assimilate, or “connect” what information
is being communicated—interoperability.



 EXAMPLE 15.3
You can have an RS-232 data communications interface between two systems that use a standard cable and
connectors for transmitting and receiving data. Thus, the interface is physically compatible. However, the data
port may not be enabled or the receiving system’s software capable of decoding and interpreting the infor-
mation—interoperability.
                                              15.4 Understanding The System Threat Environment       151

15.4 UNDERSTANDING THE SYSTEM THREAT ENVIRONMENT

The exploitation of opportunities may be viewed by some organizations as threatening to the sus-
tainment and survival of the organization. Whether the scenario involves increasing market share,
defending national borders, or developing a secure Internet Web site, you must ensure that your
system is capable of sustaining itself and its long-term survival.
     Long-term survival hinges on having a thorough and complete understanding of the potential
threat environment and having the system capabilities to counter the threat that serve as obstacles
to mission success. So, how does this relate to SE? When you specify requirements for your system,
system requirements must include considerations of what capabilities and levels of performance
are required to counter threat actions.

Sources of Threats
System threats range from the known to the unknown. One approach to identifying potential system
threats can be derived from the PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT elements—NATURAL ENVI-
RONMENT, HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS, and the INDUCED ENVIRONMENT.

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT Threat Sources. NATURAL ENVIRONMENT threat sources,
depending on perspective, include lightning, hail, wind, rodents, and disease.

HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS Threat Sources. External HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS threat
sources include primarily PERSONNEL and EQUIPMENT elements. The motives and actions of
the external systems delineate friendly, competitive, adversarial, or hostile intent.

INDUCED ENVIRONMENT Threat Sources. INDUCED ENVIRONMENT threat sources
include contaminated landﬁlls, electromagnetic interference (EMI), space debris, ship wakes, and
aircraft vortices.

Types of System Threats
System threats occur in a number of forms, depending on the environment—HUMAN-MADE
SYSTEMS, INDUCED ENVIRONMENT, and NATURAL ENVIRONMENTs.

HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS and NATURAL SYSTEMS ENVIRONMENT Aggressor
Threats. Generally, most HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS and NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
aggressor threats fall into the categories of strategic threats or tactical threats related to the balance
of power, motives, and objectives.

Other NATURAL ENVIRONMENT Threats. Other natural environment threats are attributes
of the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT that impact a system’s inherent capabilities and performance.
Examples include temperature, humidity, wind, lightning, light rays, and rodents. Although
these entities do not reﬂect premeditated aggressor characteristics, their mere existence in the
environment, seemingly benign or otherwise, can adversely impact system capabilities and
performance.

Threat Alliances. Sometimes threats emerge from a variety of sources that form strategic
alliances. Examples include businesses, nations, and individuals.
152   Chapter 15   System Interactions with Its Operating Environment

Threat Behavioral Characteristics, Actions, and Reactions
Threats exhibit characteristics and actions that may be described as adversarial, competitive,
hostile, and benign. Some threats may be viewed as aggressors. In other cases, threats are gener-
ally benign and only take action when someone “gets into their space.” For example, an unau-
thorized aircraft purposefully or unintentionally intrudes on another country’s airspace creating a
provocation of tensions. The defending system response course of action may be based on proto-
col or a measured retaliatory physical or verbal warning.
     Threats, in general, typically exhibit three types of behavior patterns or combinations thereof:
aggressive, concealed, and benign. Threat patterns often depend on the circumstances. For example,
aggressors exhibit acts of aggression. Benign threats may “tend to their business” unless provoked.
Concealed threats may appear to be benign or disguised and strike targets of opportunity (TOO)
unexpectedly.

Threat Environment Constraints. The threat environment is characterized by boundaries that
have various attributes that are conﬁned by constraints such as resources and physical constraints.

Ideology, Doctrine, and Training Constraints. Ideology, doctrine, and training are often key
factors in threat actions.


Threat Encounters
When systems interact with known threats, the interactions—such as encounters or engagement—
should be documented and characterized for later use by other systems in similar encounters. Threat
encounters intended to probe another system’s defenses can be described with a number of descrip-
tors: aggressive, hostile, cooperative, inquisitive, investigative, bump and run, and cat and mouse.
     When threat encounters turn hostile and defensive action must be taken, systems resort to
various tactics and countermeasures to ensure their survival.

System Tactics. When systems interact with their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, they often
ENGAGE threats or opportunities. Systems and system threats often employ or exhibit a series of
evasive actions intended to conceal, deceive, or camouﬂage the target of opportunity (TOO).
Generally, when evasive tactics do not work, systems deploy countermeasures to disrupt or distract
hostile actions. Let’s examine this topic further.

Threat Countermeasures. To counter the impact or effects of threats on a system, systems
often employ threat countermeasures. Threat countermeasures are any physical action performed
by a system to deter a threatening action or counter the impact of a threat—i.e., survivability.
Sometimes adversarial systems acquire or develop the technology to counter the TOO’s system
countermeasures.

Threat Counter-Countermeasures (CCM). Sometimes system threats compromise the
established security mechanisms by deploying counter-countermeasures (CCM) to offset the effects
of a TOO’s countermeasures.


Concluding Thoughts
This concludes our overview of system threats and opportunities. You should emerge from this dis-
cussion with an awareness of how the system you are using or developing must be capable of inter-
                                                15.5 Example Constructs of System Behavioral Interactions    153

acting with threats and opportunities in the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. More explicitly, you
will be expected to develop a level of technical knowledge and understanding to enable your team
to specify or oversee the speciﬁcation of system capabilities and levels of performance related to
threats and opportunities.
     Now that we have an understanding of the opportunistic and potentially hostile entities, we are
now ready to investigate how a system interacts with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and the
balance of power to perform missions.


15.5 EXAMPLE CONSTRUCTS OF SYSTEM
BEHAVIORAL INTERACTIONS

If we observe and analyze the pattern of interactions between human-made systems, we can iden-
tify some of the primary interaction constructs. In general, examples of common interactions of
most friendly systems include the following:
    • Open loop command interactions (Figure 15.2)
    • Closed loop command and control (C2) interactions (Figure 15.2)
    • Peer data exchange system interactions (Figure 15.3)
    • Status and health broadcast system interactions (Figure 15.4)
    • Issue arbitration/resolution system interactions (Figure 15.5)
    • Hostile encounter interactions (Figure 15.6)




                                   Open Loop Command System
                                                                           4
     1                         2           3                            System             5
         Higher       Command Stimuli                                 Response(s)
                                               System of Interest                               Operating
         Orderer
                                                     (SOI)                                     Environment
         System




                    Closed Loop Command and Control (C2) System
                               2                                           4
    1                 Command & Control    3                            System         5
         Higher           Stimuli                                     Response(s)
                                               System of Interest                               Operating
         Order
                                                     (SOI)                                     Environment
         System


                        Highly Iterative                                Highly Iterative



                   Performance Monitoring                   Performance-Based Outcomes & Results
                               6                                               7

Figure 15.2 Open Loop and Closed Loop Command and Control (C2) System Examples
154    Chapter 15      System Interactions with Its Operating Environment


               1
                   Request for
               Information/Status
                    (Stimulus)

                       2
                Acknowledgment
                   (Response)

                          3
                    Data/Exchange                          Where:
  System              (Stimulus)
   System                                                            = Optional
    AA                                       SystemBB
                                            System
                    Highly Iterative

                       4      Data
                           Validation
                           (Response)


                   5       Retransmit
                            Request



Figure 15.3 Peer Data Exchange System Interactions Example


                                   1
                           Status, Health, or
                             Data Request
                               (Stimulus)                                    Examples

                                                   Higher
                                                    Higher          • Peer System Relationships
     Systemofof
    System
                                                   Order
                                                    Order           • Electronic Monitoring Systems
  Interest(SOI)
 Interest  (SOI)               2
                                 Data              System
                                                    System
  (Transmitter)
   (Transmitter)           Acknowledgement       (Receivers)
                                                  (Receivers)
                              (Response)

                               • Status
                               • Health
                               • Outcomes
Figure 15.4 Status & Health Broadcast System Interactions Example


15.6 SYSTEM COMPLIANCE WITH ITS
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT

The balance of power of systems, coupled with humankind’s general desire for peace and harmony,
requires systems to comply with standards imposed by society. Standards in this context refer to
explicit and implicit, self-imposed expectations by society such as laws, regulations, ordnances,
codes of conduct, morals, and ethics. Thus, system survival, peace, and harmony are often driven by
a system’s compliance to these standards. System adherence to these standards involves two terms
that are often interchanged and require deﬁnition. The terms are compliance and conformance.
                                              15.6 System Compliance with Its Operating Environment    155


                       1       Request for
                               Arbitration/
                               Resolution
                                (Stimulus)
                                                                               Examples
                           2                                           • Competition for Resources
                           Request
                                                                       • Court System
     Systemofof
    System             Acknowledgement               Higher
                                                      Higher
     Interest
      Interest            (Response)                 Order
                                                      Order
      (SOI)
       (SOI)                                         System
                                                      System

                           3
                                Resolution
                                (Response)


Figure 15.5 Issue Arbitration/Resolution System Interactions Example


                                  1
                            Hostile Action
                             (Stimulus)

                                  2
                       Countermeasures
                                                                                Examples
                           Response
                          (Response)                                     · Internet
                                                                           Military Fighter Aircraft
                                                                         · Viruses &Security
     System A
    (Aggressor
                        3  Counter-
                                                     System B
                                                     (Defender
                                                                         ·            Antibiotics
                       Countermeasures
       Role)                                           Role)
                           Response
                          (Response)


                            4    Tactical
                                 Response
                                (Response)



Figure 15.6 Hostile Encounter Interactions Example

The Consequences of Noncompliance
When a system fails to adhere to established standards, it places itself at risk with society. Society’s
response to a lack of compliance generally involves formal or informal notiﬁcation, establishment
that noncompliance occurred, adjudication of the degree or noncompliance, and sentencing in
accordance with prescribed consequences or penalties. In some cases the system may voluntarily
elect to bring itself into compliance or be mandated to be compliant. In other cases, society may
ostracize or punish the instigators.
156     Chapter 15   System Interactions with Its Operating Environment

    For systems such as ships, aircraft, and automobiles intentional or unintentional noncompli-
ance with the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS, and INDUCED ENVI-
RONMENT can be very unforgiving or even worse, catastrophic.

Levels of System Interactions
System interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT occur at two levels: strategic inter-
actions and tactical interactions. Let’s explore each of these in detail.

Strategic Interactions. HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS exhibit a higher level of behavior that
reﬂects a desire to advance our current condition as a means of achieving higher level vision. To
achieve the higher-level vision, humans must implement a well-deﬁned strategy, typically long
term, based on stimuli and information extracted from out operating environment. We refer to
implementation of this long-term strategy as strategic interactions. These strategic interactions are
actually implemented via a series of premeditated missions—tactical interactions—with speciﬁc
mission objectives.

Tactical Interactions. All life forms exhibit various types of tactics that enable the system to
survive, reproduce, and sustain itself. We refer to a system’s implementation of these tactics within
the conﬁnes of its operating environment as tactical interactions. In general, this response
mechanism focuses all existing survival needs in the short term—obtaining the next meal.

System Interaction Analysis and Methodology. Depending on the compatibility and inter-
operability of an interface, consequences of the engagement may be positive, neutral, or negative.
As a system analyst or SE, your mission is to:
      1. Develop a thorough understanding of the engagement participants (systems).
      2. Deﬁne the most probable use cases and scenarios that characterize how the User intends
         to use the system.
      3. Analyze the use cases by applying natural and scientiﬁc laws of physics to thoroughly
         understand the potential outcomes and consequences.
      4. Specify system interface requirements that ensure engagement compatibility and inter-
         operability success within cost, schedule, and technology constraints.

Adapting to the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Most systems are designed to perform in a
prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. There are situations whereby a system is transferred
to a new location. The net result is the need for the system to adapt to its new operating environ-
ment. Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 15.4
Military troops deploy to arid or snow regions. Depending on the initial conditions—namely acclimation to
the previous environment—the troops must learn to adapt to a new operating environment.


 EXAMPLE 15.5
As part of a strategy for climbing a high mountain, mountain climbers travel to a series of base camps to
satisfy logistics requirements and allow their bodies time to acclimate to the thin air environment over a period
of several days.
                                                                                                 Guiding Principles   157

     9
         Higher Order 10             11
                                        Roles
                                                           12                  13
           Systems     Organization      Roles&&                Operating
                                                                 Operating          Resources
                        Organization    Missions                Constraints          Resources
                                        Missions                 Constraints
           Domain
                      1
                                                   System of Interest (SOI)
                               SUPPORT
                                SUPPORT                PERSONNEL
                                                        PERSONNEL        MISSIONRESOURCES
                                                                         MISSION  RESOURCES
                            SYSTEM
                             SYSTEM Element
                                     Element             Element
                                                          Element              Element
                                                                                Element
14                        2                        3                                       4

      PHYSICAL
       PHYSICAL
  ENVIRONMENT
   ENVIRONMENT
        Domain
         Domain                                                                                  8
   • •HUMAN-MADE
       HUMAN-MADE
                                                                                                       SYSTEM
                                                                                                        SYSTEM
     • NATURAL                                                                                       RESPONSES
       • NATURAL                                                                                      RESPONSES
     • INDUCED                                                                                         Element
       • INDUCED                                                                                        Element




                          5                    6                           7
                              FACILITIES
                               FACILITIES          PROCEDURAL
                                                    PROCEDURAL                 EQUIPMENT
                                                                                EQUIPMENT
                                Element
                                 Element            DATAElement
                                                   DATA  Element                 Element
                                                                                  Element



Figure 15.7 System Element Contributions to Overall System Performance




System Interactions Synthesis
As an SE, you must learn to synthesize these interactions in terms of an overall system solution.
Figure 15.7 provides an illustration.
     Here we have a diagram that captures the high-level interactions between the SYSTEM OF
INTEREST (SOI) (1), HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM (9) and the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
(14). The SOI is illustrated via a “ﬁshbone” diagram. We include in the diagram the system ele-
ments that are performance AFFECTER factors that must integrate harmoniously to achieve the
mission objectives. In combination the SOI elements produce the SYSTEM RESPONSES (8)
element, which consists of behavior, products, by-products, and services.
     In operation, the SOI (1) responds to command and control guidance and direction from the
HIGHER ORDER systems element that consists of ORGANIZATION (10), ROLES AND MIS-
SIONS (11), OPERATING CONSTRAINTS (12), and RESOURCES (13) system elements. Based
on this direction, the SOI system elements interact with the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and
provide SYSTEM RESPONSES (8) back to the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and the HIGHER
ORDER SYSTEMS element.


15.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

Principle 15.1 System interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT during an engage-
ment may be cooperative, friendly, benign, competitive, adversarial, hostile, or combination of
these.
158    Chapter 15    System Interactions with Its Operating Environment

Principle 15.2 Every system responds to stimuli and cues in its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
with behavioral actions, products, by-products, services, or combinations thereof.


15.8 SUMMARY

During our discussion of system interactions with its operating environment, we described a system’s inter-
actions via the Behavioral Responses Model. A system’s responses are driven by strategic and tactical inter-
actions related to opportunities and threats in the environment. Systems generally interact with cooperative,
benign, competitive, or aggressor systems. Based on those responses, we indicated how a system might employ
countermeasures and counter-countermeasures to distract, confuse, defend or interact with other systems. We
concluded our discussion by highlighting the context of the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT based on the
SYSTEM OF INTEREST perspective.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
   (a) If applicable, identify whether the system operates by a closed loop or an open loop.
   (b) If by a closed loop, how does the system process stimuli and cues and provide measured responses.
3. Identify external systems that interface with your product or service. Characterize them in terms of coop-
   erative, benign, or adversarial.
4. What vulnerabilities or susceptibilities does your system, product, or service have to threats in its operat-
   ing environment? What capabilities, tactics, or procedures have been added to the product to minimize vul-
   nerability or susceptibility?
Chapter              16

     System Mission Analysis

16.1 INTRODUCTION

The primary purpose of any system is to satisfy individual or organizational objectives with an
expected tangible or intangible return on investment (ROI). These objectives may range from the
quality of life such as happiness, entertainment, education, and health to the basic necessities of
life—organizational survival, proﬁtability, food, and shelter. The act of striving to accomplish these
objectives can be summarized in one operative term, mission.
     The accomplishment of individual and organizational missions requires the employment of
systems, products, and services that leverage human capabilities. Selection or acquisition of those
systems begins with understanding the WHO, WHAT, WHEN, WHERE, and HOW system User(s)
plan to accomplish the mission(s). We refer to activities required to develop this understanding as
a mission analysis.
     This chapter introduces the key elements of the mission analysis and provides the foundation
for deriving system capabilities and requirements. Our discussions focus on the key attributes of a
mission.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What are the key tasks required to deﬁne a system mission?
     2. What is a Mission Event Timeline (MET)?
     3. What is mission task analysis?
     4. What are the primary mission phases of operation?
     5. What system related operations and decisions are performed during the pre-mission phase?
     6. What system related operations and decisions are performed during the mission phase?
     7. What system related operations and decisions are performed during the postmission?
     8. What are the key decisions that occur within mission phases and trigger the next phase?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
     • Mission A pre-planned exercise that integrates a series of sequential or concurrent opera-
       tions or tasks with an expectation of achieving outcome-based success criteria with quan-
       tiﬁable objectives.
     • Mission Critical System “A system whose operational effectiveness and operational suit-
       ability are essential to successful completion or to aggregate residual (mission) capability. If


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                   159
160     Chapter 16   System Mission Analysis

        this system fails, the mission likely will not be completed. Such a system can be an auxil-
        iary or supporting system, as well as a primary mission system.” (Source: DSMC—adapted
        from Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
      • Mission Needs Statement (MNS) “A nonsystem speciﬁc statement that identiﬁes an orga-
        nizational operational capability need.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC T&E Mgt. Guide,
        Appendix B, DoD Glossary of Test Terminology, p. B-20-21)
      • Mission Reliability “The probability that a system will perform its required mission criti-
        cal functions for the duration of a speciﬁed mission under conditions stated in the mission
        proﬁle.” (Source: Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
      • Operational Constraints “Initially identiﬁed in the Mission Need Statement (MNS). As a
        minimum, these constraints will consider the expected threat and natural environments, the
        possible modes of transportation into and within expected areas of operation, the expected
        (operating) environment, operational manning limitations, and existing infrastructure support
        capabilities.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC—Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and
        Terms)
      • Phase of Operation A high-level, objective-based abstraction representing a collection
        of SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) operations required to support accomplishment of a
        system’s mission. For example, a system has pre-mission, mission, and postmission
        phases.
      • Point of Delivery A waypoint or one of several waypoints designated for delivery of mission
        products, by-products, or services.
      • Point of Origination or Departure The initial starting point of a mission.
      • Point of Termination or Destination The ﬁnal destination of a mission.
      • Task Order A document that: 1) serves as triggering event to initiate a mission and 2)
        deﬁnes mission objectives and performance-based outcomes.
      • Time Requirements “Required functional capabilities dependent on accomplishing an
        action within an opportunity window (e.g., a target is vulnerable for a certain time period).
        Frequently deﬁned for mission success, safety, system resource availability, and production
        and manufacturing capabilities.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-499B Draft)
      • Timeline Analysis “Analytical task conducted to determine the time sequencing between
        two or more events and to deﬁne any resulting time requirements. Can include task/time-
        line analysis. Examples include:
        a. A schedule line showing key dates and planned events.
        b. An engagement proﬁle detailing time based position changes between a weapon and its
           target.
        c. The interaction of a crewmember with one or more subsystems.” (Source: Former MIL-
           STD-499B Draft)
      • Waypoint A geographical or objective-based point of reference along a planned roadmap
        to mark progress and measure performance.


16.2 MISSION DEFINITION METHODOLOGY

Organizational and system missions range from simple tasks such as writing a letter to performing
highly complex International Space Station (ISS) operations, managing a government. Regardless
of application, mission analysis requires consideration of the steps speciﬁed below:
                                                              16.2 Mission Deﬁnition Methodology       161

Step 1:   Deﬁne the primary and secondary mission objective(s).
Step 2:   Develop a mission strategy.
Step 3:   Deﬁne phase-based operations and tasks.
Step 4:   Create a Mission Event Timeline (MET).
Step 5:   Bound and specify the mission OPERATING ENVIRONMENT interactions.
Step 6:   Identify outcome-based system responses to be delivered.
Step 7:   Identify mission resources and sustainment methods.
Step 8:   Perform a mission task analysis.
Step 9:   Assess and mitigate mission and system risk.
Let’s explore each of these steps in more detail.

Step 1: Deﬁne the Primary Mission Objective(s)
People often mistakenly believe that missions begin with the assignment of the “mission” to be
accomplished. However, missions are action-based applications of systems, products, or services
to solution spaces for the purposes of resolving or eliminating all or a portion of an operational
need—meaning a problem or opportunity space. These actions may be oriented toward a single
event or occur via one or more reusable missions over a period of time. Consider the following
examples:


 EXAMPLE 16.1
The NASA Space Shuttle’s external tank (ET), which is expendable, represents a single event mission applica-
tion. On completion of its mission, the ET is jettisoned and burns up in the atmosphere.



 EXAMPLE 16.2
NASA’s Space Shuttle Orbiter vehicle performs via a series of mission applications to ferry components of
the International Space Station (ISS) for integration and support of science.

As with any system, the initial step in performing mission analysis is to understand the underlying
motivation and primary/secondary objectives to be accomplished. Mission objectives are charac-
terized by several attributes. For our discussion the two primary attributes are:
    1. Outcome-based results to be achieved.
    2. Mission reliability required to achieve those results.

Identify the Outcome-Based Results. When you deﬁne a mission objective, the ﬁrst step is
to deﬁne WHAT results are expected to be produced. The results should be:
    1. Preferably tangible as well as measurable, testable, and veriﬁable.
    2. Contribute to accomplishment of HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM tasking.

Determine the Mission Reliability. Human systems, despite careful planning and execution,
are not infallible. The question is: Given resource constraints, WHAT is the minimum level of level
of success you are willing to accept to provide a speciﬁed return on investment (ROI). From an SE
162                     Chapter 16           System Mission Analysis

point of view, we refer to the level of success as mission reliability. Mission reliability is inﬂuenced
by internal EQUIPMENT element failures or over/undertolerance conditions, human operator
performance (judgment, errors, fatigue etc.) and interactions with OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
entities and threats.
     Mission reliability is the probability that a system will successfully accomplish a mission
of a speciﬁc duration in a prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and accomplish objectives
without a failure event. Depending on the system application, 100% mission reliability may be pro-
hibitively expensive, but a 90% mission reliability may be affordable.

Authors Note 16.1 Since reliability ultimately has a cost, establish an initial reliability esti-
mate as simply a starting point and compute the cost. Some Acquirers may request a Cost-as-an-
Independent-Variable (CAIV) plot of cost as a function of capability or reliability to determine what
level of capability or reliability is affordable within their budgetary constraints.

Specify and Bound the Required Level of Performance. Once the mission reliability is
established, system designers can proceed with identifying the level of performance required of the
system elements, such as EQUIPMENT and PERSONNEL, subject to cost, schedule, and risk
constraints.
     Once we establish the primary mission objectives, the next step of mission analysis is to deﬁne
the mission proﬁle.

Step 2: Develop a Mission Strategy
A mission begins with a point of origination and terminates at a point of destination. As end-to-
end boundary constraints, the challenge question is: HOW do we get from the point of ORIGINA-
TION to the point of DESTINATION?
     We begin by establishing a strategy that leads to a mission proﬁle or a roadmap that charts
progress through one or more staging and control points, or waypoints. A waypoint represents a
geographical location or position, a point in time, or objective to be accomplished as an interim
step toward the destination, as illustrated in Figure 16.1. Each phase of operation is decomposed
into one or more objectives focused on the pathway to successful completion of the mission. Con-
sider the following examples:

                                                                                                                                  Destination
 Point of                                                                                                                          or Point of
Origination                                                     Staging, Control, or Way Points                                   Termination

                 0                     1                   2                   3                   4                   5                   6

                                                       OPERATING ENVIRONMENT Conditions
                            Pre-Mission Phase                    Mission Phase          Post-Mission Phase
   Initial Conditions




                        Objective #1
                                            Objective #2
                                                                Objective #3
                                                                                    Objective #4
                                                                                                        Objective #5
                                                                                                                            Objective #6




                  t0                   t1                  t2                  t3                  t4                  t5                  t6 Time
Figure 16.1 Operational Concept Timeline Example
                                                             16.2 Mission Deﬁnition Methodology       163


 EXAMPLE 16.3
A ship cruise line has several ports of call or waypoints on its scheduled item erary for a 7-day voyage. A
package delivery service has performance-based deliveries or waypoints for a delivery route.

Step 3: Deﬁne Phase-Based Operations and Tasks
Human-made systems, especially cyclical systems, sequence through three sets of objective-based
actions to accomplish a mission: 1) prepare for the mission, 2) conduct the mission, and 3) perform
post-mission actions and processing. We characterize these objectives as the pre-mission, mission,
and post-mission phases of operation. For those systems to be placed in storage following the
mission, an interim phase—storage—may be added.
     When implemented, the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) consisting of the MISSION SYSTEM
and SUPPORT SYSTEM must provide capabilities and levels of performance to support these
phases of operation. Each phase consists of use case based operations and tasks, all focused on
accomplishing the phase outcome-based performance objective(s).

Step 4: Create a Mission Event Timeline (MET)
Once we establish the waypoints, the next task is to determine waypoint time constraints. We refer
to these time constraints as milestone requirements derived from the mission event timeline (MET).
The MET can be presented as a simple, high-level schedule down to a highly detailed, multi-level,
networked schedule.

Guidepost 16.1 Mission analysis up to this point has focused on the “ideal” mission—namely
what we intend to accomplish. However, to accomplish a mission, the MISSION SYSTEM must
interact with the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and its elements, consisting of HUMAN-MADE
systems, the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, and the INDUCED ENVIRONMENT. This brings us to
our next mission analysis task: bound and specify the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

Step 5: Bound and Specify the Mission OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT Interactions
Once the basic mission is deﬁned, the next step is to bound and specify its OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT. Throughout the pre-mission, mission, and postmission phases, the SOI interacts with
external systems within its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. These systems may include friendly
systems, benign systems, or hostile threats and harsh environmental conditions.
     Collectively the mission analysis identiﬁes and analyses these systems, their roles
relative to the mission, and what impacts they may have on performing the mission and accom-
plishment of its performance objectives. For example, what systems does the MISSION SYSTEM
need to: 1) communicate with, 2) perform deliveries and transfers to, and 3) interact with on an
encounter/engagement basis along with the mission proﬁle.

Guidepost 16.2 Our earlier discussion emphasized the need to identify the outcome-based
results of the mission. The question is: WHAT products, by-products, or services is the system
required to PRODUCE or AVOID to achieve the OUTCOME-based results. This brings us to the
next task: identify system responses.
164     Chapter 16   System Mission Analysis

Step 6: Identify Outcome-Based System Responses
Throughout all phases of the mission, an SOI produces a series of behaviors, products, by-
products, and services to satisfy internal and external requirements. Internal requirements include
performance monitoring, resource consumption, and payload/cargo manifests. External require-
ments include the examples listed in Table 16.1.

Step 7: Identify Mission Resources and Sustainment Methods
Human-made systems have ﬁnite resource capacities that require replenishment and refurbishment.
Depending on the mission operating range of the system relative to its current mission application,
mission analysis must consider HOW the system’s expendables and consumables will be resup-
plied and replenished. Operationally, the question is: How will the organization sustain and main-
tain the mission from beginning to end?

Step 8: Perform a Mission Task Analysis
Throughout the pre-mission, mission, post-mission phases, speciﬁc operational tasks must be per-
formed to accomplish the phase-based mission objectives. These tasks ultimately provide the basis
for capabilities the SOI must provide to accomplish the mission. Therefore the mission analysis
should:
      1. Identify the high-level outcome-based mission tasks to be performed.
      2. Synchronize those tasks to the Mission Event Timeline (MET).
      3. Identify the task performance-based objectives.

Step 9: Assess and Mitigate Mission and System Risk
Some systems are required to perform missions in harsh OPERATING ENVIRONMENTs that may
place the system at risk to threats, not only in completing its mission but also in returning safely
to its home base. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 16.4
Loose, hidden objects on a lawn can cause injury to people and damage a lawnmower blade and engine. Birds,
ducks, and geese pose threats to airports and aircraft in ﬂight. Loose objects and debris thrown into the air by
vehicles on the road can cause injury to others and damage to vehicles. Unprotected computer systems are
vulnerable to viruses.

Table 16.1 Examples of mission requirements derived from analysis of external systems

Type of External System                                                Example Sources of Requirements

Friendly or cooperative systems                                    Communications
                                                                   Deliverable items, etc.
Benign systems                                                     Communications
                                                                   Detection and avoidance
                                                                   Evasive tactics, etc.
Hostile or Adversarial systems                                     Rules of engagement
                                                                   Detection and avoidance
                                                                   Countermeasures/counter-counter measures
                                                                   Aggressive/defensive actions, etc.
                                                                                        16.4 Summary       165

Risks assessments include considerations of system vulnerability, susceptibility, survivability, and
maintainability. Most people tend to think in terms of external benign, adversarial, or hostile
systems that may be threats to the system. However, since a system interacts with itself, it can also
be a threat to itself. Recall from our discussion of the architecture of systems in Chapter 8 how a
system interacts with: 1) its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and 2) itself. Analytically, the sources
of these threats begin with the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM elements—comprised
of PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, MISSION RESOURCES, PROCEDURAL DATA, SYSTEM
RESPONSES, and FACILITIES. Consider the following EQUIPMENT system element examples.


 EXAMPLE 16.5
Failed automobile components, such as a blown tire, can cause a driver to loose control of the vehicle while
driving. Failures in an aircraft’s ﬂight control system or broken blades in a jet engine fan can force and emer-
gency landing or have catastrophic consequences.
     Internal failures or degraded performance also has negative impacts on system performance that ulti-
mately translates into mission failure or degree of success. Perhaps one of the most notable examples is the
Apollo 13 catastrophe. Mission analysis should identify those areas in system capabilities that may be vul-
nerable or susceptible to external internal threats, especially for mission critical components.

Author’s Note 16.1 Internal threat analysis is typically performed via failure modes and effects
analysis (FMEA). For mission critical components, the FMEA may be expanded into a failure
modes, effects, and criticality analysis (FMECA) that assesses the degree of criticality.


16.3 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern mission analysis.

Principle 16.1 Every system mission must accomplish one or more organizational performance
objectives.

Principle 16.2 Human-made systems have three primary phases of operation: pre-mission,
mission, and post-mission; an interim phase may be further required for some systems.

Principle 16.3 Every system phase of operation must satisfy one or more outcome-based per-
formance objectives associated with accomplishment of an overall system mission and its per-
formance objectives.

Principle 16.4 Mission success requires ﬁve key elements: a purpose, resources, a reasonably
achievable outcome-based performance objective(s), a Mission Event Timeline (MET), and a will-
ingness to perform. Where there is no willingness to act, the other elements are meaningless.


16.4 SUMMARY

Our discussion of mission analysis highlighted several key points that require emphasis:
     • Every system concept consists of interactions of abstract entities derived from the System Element
       Architecture: 1) SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) consisting of the MISSION SYSTEM and the
       SUPPORT SYSTEM and 2) the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
166     Chapter 16    System Mission Analysis

      • Each mission begins with a point of origination and concludes with a destination or point of termina-
        tion with intervening staging, control, or waypoints based on speciﬁc objectives and Mission Event
        Timeline (MET) events.
      • Between the point of origination and point of termination, some missions may require interim way-
        points or delivery points that satisfy speciﬁc mission objectives.
      • Every mission must be founded on an operational strategy that deﬁnes HOW the system elements—
        namely PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, and FACILITIES—will be deployed and employed at critical
        staging events to accomplish mission objectives constrained by a Mission Event Timeline (MET).
      • Every mission is characterized by at least three mission phases of operation: 1) pre-mission, 2) mission,
        and 3) post-mission.
      • During each phase of operation, system element interactions must be orchestrated and synchronized in
        accordance with mission objectives and a Mission Event Timeline (MET).
      • Every mission requires mission critical capabilities with a minimum level of performance to be pro-
        vided by the system elements—namely PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, and MISSION RESOURCES—
        to achieve a speciﬁed outcome.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Identify the following:
   (a) How many different missions does the system perform?
   (b) What are those missions?
   (c) Pick two missions and perform a mission analysis using the methodology described in this section.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Select a contract program within your organization. Interview program personnel to understand what form
   of mission analysis was performed on the program.
   (a) Was the mission analysis required as a contract deliverable? If so, when was it required to be deliv-
       ered? Were subsequent updates required? Was there a required outline format?
   (b) Who performed the mission analysis?
   (c) How was the mission analysis documented?
   (d) What was the most difﬁcult parts of the analysis to accomplish?
   (e) In what ways do program personnel believe the analysis beneﬁt the program?
   (f) What would you do differently next time?
   (g) How did program and executive management view the importance of the analysis?
   (h) Were the right amount of resources and expertise applied to accomplish the task?
   (i) What were the shortcomings, if any, of the end product?


REFERENCES

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998.           Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.
  DSMC Test and Evaluation Management Guide, 3rd ed.       2001.
  Defense Acquisition Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.              MIL-STD-499B (cancelled draft). 1994. Systems Engineer-
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). Glossary:       ing. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
  Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th ed.
Chapter              17

     System Use Cases and Scenarios

17.1 INTRODUCTION

From an SE perspective the challenge in developing systems is being able to translate mission
objectives, operations, and tasks into a set of capability requirements that can be transformed into
a physical design solution. Most organizations and individuals attempt to make a quantum leap
from the mission objectives to writing text requirements into the System Performance Speciﬁca-
tion (SPS). This is typically accomplished without understanding:
     1. What problem space the User is attempting to solve.
     2. How they intend to deploy and employ the solution space system to perform missions to
        address all or a portion of the problem space.
As systems become more complex, they require a solution development methodology that is easily
understood by Acquirers, Users, and System Developers. One method is to employ system use cases
and scenarios to bridge the gap between mission objectives and speciﬁcation requirements.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     • What is a system use case?
     • What are the attributes of a use case?
     • What is a use case analysis and how do you perform one?
     • How do use cases relate to system capability requirements?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
     • Actor “A role of object or objects outside of a system that interacts directly with it as part
       of a coherent work unit (a use case). An Actor element characterizes the role played by an
       outside object; one physical object may play several roles and therefore be modeled by
       several actors.” (UML Notation Guide, para. 6.1.2, p. 75)
     • Operational Scenario A hypothesized narrative that describes system entity interactions,
       assumptions, conditions, activities, and events that have a likelihood or probability of actu-
       ally occurring under prescribed or worst-case conditions.
     • Sequence Diagram “A diagram that represents an interaction, which is a set of messages
       exchanged among objects within a collaboration to effect a desired operation or result.”
       (UML Notation Guide, para. 7.2.1, p. 80)


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                 167
168        Chapter 17       System Use Cases and Scenarios

      • Use Case A statement that expresses how the User envisions deploying, operating, sup-
        porting, or disposing of a system, product, or service to achieve a desired performance-based
        outcome.
      • Use Case Diagram “A graph of actors, a set of use cases enclosed by a system boundary,
        communication (participation) associations between the actors and the use cases, and gen-
        eralizations among the use cases.” (UML Notation Guide, para. 6.1.2, p. 75)
      • Use Case Scenario A set of conditions a MISSION SYSTEM use case may encounter in
        its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT that requires a unique set of capabilities to produce a
        desired result or outcome. Scenarios include considerations of HOW a User or threat might
        apply, misapply, use, misuse, or abuse a system, product, or service.

17.2 UNDERSTANDING THE ANALYTICAL
CONTEXT OF USE CASES AND SCENARIOS

A reference framework that illustrates the context of use cases and scenarios and their importance
is provided in Figure 17.1. Note that the entity relationships in the ﬁgure are partitioned into three
domains: an Operations Domain, an Analysis Domain, and an Engineering Domain. Based on this
framework, let’s characterize these relationships.
      1. Each mission is assigned at least one or more mission objectives.
      2. Each mission objective is accomplished by an integrated set of mission operations per-
         formed by the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM.
      3. Each MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM operation is decomposed into hierar-
         chical chains of sequential and concurrent tasks.
      4. Each task is performed and measured against one or more performance standards and imple-
         mented via at least one or more use cases.

  Operations Domain                            Analysis Domain                           Engineering Domain
            Mission
           Objective(s)                  Bounded by   Use Cases
                                            1 .. *    ●   Deployment         Bound
                                                           ● O & S
                  Achieve                                 ● Disposal


Accomplished by
     1 .. *
                                               Characterize
           Operations
      ●   MISSION SYSTEM                                        Bounded by
      ●   SUPPORT SYSTEM                                           1 .. *
                                                                                                          Characterized by
                                                          Use Case                                             1 .. *
                                                          Scenarios                                Required
Decomposed into                                       ●   Application        Address
     1 .. *                                           ●   Proper Use                              Operational
                                                                                       Requires
                          Characterize                    ● Misuse                                Capabilities
              Tasks                                                                     1 .. *
                                                           ● Abuse



                                                                                                  Bound
   Measured by                                                                                            Bounded by
      1 .. *                                                                                                 1.. *

           Performance                                                                            Performance
            Standards                                                                             Requirements


Figure 17.1 System/Product Use Cases and Scenarios Entity Relationships
                                                                     17.3 What Are Use Cases?   169

    5. Each use case is bounded by at least one or more use case scenarios.
    6. Each use case scenario represents HOW the use case can be applied, used, misused, abused,
       etc. and is bounded and speciﬁed by at least one or more required operational capabilities.
    7. Each required operational capability identiﬁes WHAT the system, product, or service must
       perform to fulﬁll each use case and accommodates various use case scenarios and is quan-
       tiﬁed by at least one or more performance requirements.
This introductory framework establishes the backdrop for our discussion of system use cases and
scenarios.


17.3 WHAT ARE USE CASES?

A use case is characterized by a set of attributes that describe HOW the User might deploy, operate,
support, or dispose of the system. The attributes, which serve as a checklist for developing use
cases, include:
    • Unique identiﬁer
    • Objective
    • Outcome-based results
    • Assumptions
         Initial state
         Final state
         Environmental conditions
         Preceding circumstances (optional)
         Operating constraints
         External inputs
         Resources
         Event-based timeline
         Frequency of occurrence and utility priorities
    • Processing capabilities
    • Scenarios and consequences
         Probability of occurrence
         Use case scenario actors
         Stimuli and cues
         Consequences
         Compensating/mitigating actions
Given this list, let’s brieﬂy describe each one and its contribution to the characterization.

Attribute 1: Unique Identiﬁer
Each use case should have its own unique identity and not overlap, conﬂict, or duplicate other use
cases. Therefore each use case should be tagged with its own unique identiﬁer and title.

Attribute 2: Objective
Each use case must have at least one or more outcome-based performance objectives.
170    Chapter 17   System Use Cases and Scenarios

Attribute 3: Outcome-Based Results
Use cases should produce at least one or more system/entity behaviors, products, by-products, or
services that may be tangible or intangible to achieve the desired outcome-based objective.

Attribute 4: Assumptions
The formulation of use cases requires that SEs make assumptions that characterize the initial con-
ditions that form the basis for initiating a use case. Assumptions include the following:

Initial State. The INITIAL state of a use case represents the assumed physical operational state
of the system, product, or service when the use case is initiated.

Final State. The FINAL state represents the desired physical or operational state of the system
when the desired outcome has been achieved.

Environmental Conditions. The current environmental conditions specify and bound the
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions that exist when a system, product, or service use case
is initiated.

Preceding Circumstances (Optional). For some applications, the circumstance or sequence
of events leading up to the initiation of a use case need to be identiﬁed. Preceding circumstances
provide a basis for documenting this assumption.

Operating Constraints. For some use cases the system, product, or service may have opera-
tional constraints such as organizational policies, procedures, task orders; local, federal, state, and
international regulations or statutory laws; or public opinion; or a Mission Event Timeline (MET).
Operational constraints thus serve to bound or restrict the acceptable set of corporate, moral, ethical,
or spiritual actions allowed for a use case.

External Inputs. Every system, product, or service processes external inputs to add value to
achieve the speciﬁed outcome.

Resources. Every system, product, or service requires MISSION RESOURCES to perform its
mission. MISSION RESOURCES are typically ﬁnite and are therefore constrained. The resources
attribute documents what types of resources (i.e. expendables or consumables) are required to
sustain system/entity operations.

Event-Based Timeline. Use cases may require a Mission Event Timeline (MET) to synchro-
nize the planned actions or intervention of human operators or expected responses from the system
or its operators.

Frequency of Occurrence and Utility Priorities. Every use case has a cost and schedule for
development, training, implementation, and maintenance. The realities of budgetary cost and sched-
ule limit the number of use cases that can be practically implemented. Therefore, prioritize use
cases and implement those that maximize application and safety utility to the User.
     Note that we said, to maximize application and safety utility. If you prioritize use cases, emer-
gency capabilities and procedures should have a very remote frequency of occurrence. Neverthe-
less, they can be the most critical. As is the case in trade study evaluation criteria, you may need
to analytically express utility in terms of a multiplicative factor. Instead of assigning a 1 (low) to
                                                                           17.3 What Are Use Cases?     171

5 (high) weighting factor priority to each use case, multiply the factor by a level of criticality from
1 (low) to 5 (high) to ensure the proper visibility from a safety perspective.
     Commercial organizations produce products and services to sell in the marketplace at a proﬁt
and sustain the business operations for the long term. Organizational products and services MUST
be SAFE for the Users to deploy, operate, and support. Hypothetically, you could focus all resources
on safety features and produce a product that is so burdened with safety features that it has no
application utility to the User.
     Although our discussion focuses on the development of a product or service, remember that
the system has other elements than just EQUIPMENT (PERSONNEL, PROCEDURAL DATA,
etc.). So, when confronted with increasing design costs, there may be equally effective alternatives
for improving safety such as operator certiﬁcation, training and periodic refresher training, cau-
tionary warning labels, and supervision that may not require product implementation.

Attribute 5: Processing Capabilities
The heart of a use case centers on stimulus-response processing for a speciﬁed set of conditions to
produce the desired or required outcome. Some domains refer to this as a transfer or response func-
tion. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 17.1
A photovoltaic or solar cell transforms sunlight into electrical energy.

Author’s Note 17.1 Remember, the context here is a simple box representing a system or item
at any level of abstraction with input(s) and output(s). Focus on simpliﬁcation of the solution space.
Avoid attempting to deﬁne processing for multiple levels simultaneously.

Attribute 6: Scenarios and Consequences
As humans, we tend to be optimistic and ideally believe that everything will be successful. While
this is true most of the time, uncertainties do occur that create conditions we have not planned for
operationally or in terms of system, product, or service capability. Once a use case is identiﬁed,
ask the question: WHEN the User employs this use case:
     1. WHAT can go wrong that we haven’t anticipated?
     2. WHAT are the consequences of failure and how do we mitigate them?
We refer to each of these instances as use case scenarios and consequences? Consider the follow-
ing example:


 EXAMPLE 17.2
Suppose that we are designing a compact disk (CD) or digital video disk (DVD) player. Ideally, the high-level
CD/DVD use case describes a User inserting the CD/DVD into the player—and magic happens! The User
gets the result, be it music or a movie. The User has thus a use case scenario with a POSITIVE outcome.
Now, what happens if the User inserts the CD/DVD upside down? The User has a use case scenario with a
NEGATIVE outcome. This leads to the question: When we design the CD/DVD device, how should the User
be advised of this situation? If we add notiﬁcation capability to the device, development costs increase. In
contrast, the LOW-COST solution may be to simply inform the User via the product manual about the con-
vention of ALWAYS inserting the CD/DVD so that the title faces upward.
172     Chapter 17   System Use Cases and Scenarios


                                    MISSION SYSTEM

                                          Use Case #1


                                                                                    User #2
                                          Use Case #2                               (Actor)




       User #1                            Use Case #3
       (Actor)
                                                                                    User #3
                                                                                    (Actor)
Where: UML® = Unified Modeling Language


Figure 17.2 UML® Use Case Diagram



Probability of Occurrence. Once use case scenarios are identiﬁed, we need to determine the
probability of occurrence of each one. As in the earlier discussion of use case priorities, scenarios
have a probability of occurrence. Since additional design features have a cost, prioritize scenarios
with User safety as a predominant consideration.

Use Case Scenario Actors. Our discussion up to this point has focused on the WHAT is most
likely or probable to occur: use cases or scenarios. The key question is: WHO or WHAT are the
interacting entities during use cases and scenarios. The Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML®)
characterizes these entities as “actors.”
     Actors can be persons, places, real or virtual objects, or events. UML® represents actors as
stick ﬁgures and use cases as ellipses, as shown in Figure 17.2.
      • User 1 (actor) such as a system administrator/maintainer interacts with use cases 1 through 3.
      • User 2 (actor) interacts with use cases 1 and 2 (capabilities).
      • User 3 (actor) interacts with use case 3 (capabilities).
In our previous example, the actors include User, CD/DVD, and CD/DVD player.

Stimuli and Cues. Use cases are initiated based on a set of actions triggered by system
operator(s), external systems, or the system. Consider the following stimulus–response actions:
      • The User or an external system initiates one or more actions that cause the system to respond
        behaviorally within a speciﬁed time period.
      • The system notiﬁes the User to perform an action—to make a decision or input data.
      • The User intervenes or interrupts ongoing actions by the system.
Each of these examples represents instances whereby the User or System stimulates the other to
action. Figure 17.3 illustrates such a sequence of actions using a UML sequence diagram.
                                                                              17.3 What Are Use Cases?        173


                            SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
    System                  SUBSYSTEM                  SUBSYSTEM
   Operator                     1                          2


               1: XXXXXX

                                           2: XXXXXX




                                           3: XXXXXX

                4: XXXXXX




Figure 17.3 UML® Use Case Sequence Diagram




Scenario Consequences. Each use case and scenario produces an outcome that may have
consequences. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 17.3
If scenario X occurs and the operator or system responds in a speciﬁed manner, instabilities and
perturbations may be induced into the system that may have NEGATIVE consequences. Therefore each use
case and scenario should identify the potential consequences of proper use/misuse, application/misapplication,
and abuse.

Compensating/Mitigating Actions. Given the set of consequences identiﬁed for use cases
and use case scenarios, we need to identify what compensating/mitigating actions should be
incorporated into the system, product, or service to eliminate or minimize the effects of a
NEGATIVE outcome consequences. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 17.4
Suppose that we are to design a car. Since a car can collide with other vehicles, walls, or trees, a generalized
interface solution of the car body-to-external system is insufﬁcient. An analysis of use cases and use case sce-
narios suggests that passengers can lose their lives or sustain injuries in a collision. So a specialized interface
consisting of a bumper is added to the car frame as a compensating/mitigating action. However, impact tests
reveal that the bumper is inadequate and requires yet a more specialized solution including the following
sequences of design actions:
Design action 1:    Incorporate shock absorbers into the vehicle’s bumpers.
Design action 2:    Install and require use of seat belts.
Design action 3:    Install an air bag system.
Design action 4:    Install an anti-lock braking system (ABS).
Design action 5:    Specify proper vehicle operating procedures.
Design action 6:    Increase driver awareness to drive safely and defensively.
174     Chapter 17   System Use Cases and Scenarios

17.4 USE CASE ANALYSIS

Each use case and its most likely or probable scenarios represent a series of anticipated interac-
tions among the actors. Once the scenarios and actors are identiﬁed, system analysts need to under-
stand the most likely or probable interactions between the system or entity of interest and external
systems within its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
     UML® tools are useful in understanding the stimuli, cues, and behavioral responses between
interacting systems. Sequence diagrams serve as a key tool. Sequence diagrams consist of actors
and lifelines as illustrated in Figures 2.5 and 17.3.
      • Actors Consist of entities at a given level of abstraction—such as SYSTEM, PRODUCT, and
        SUBSYSTEM—and external systems within the abstraction’s OPERATING ENVIRON-
        MENT. For example, a SUBSYSTEM use case might depict its operator(s), if applicable,
        and external systems such as other SUBSYSTEMS, and PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
        conditions.
      • Lifeline Consists of a vertical line to represent time relative processing. Bars are placed
        along the lifeline to represent entity activities or processing of external inputs, stimuli, or
        cues and behavioral responses.
      • Swim Lanes Consist of the regions between the actor lifelines for illustrating sequential
        operations, tasks, products, by-products, or services interactions and exchanges and between
        each actor.
To illustrate HOW these are employed, consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 17.5
Let’s suppose a User (actor) interacts with a calculator (actor) to accomplish a task to perform a mathemati-
cal calculation and communicate the results. Figure 17.4 provides a simple illustration of the interaction.
Observe that Figure 17.4 is structurally similar to and expands the level of detail of Figure 17.3. To keep the
example simple, assume the calculator consists of two SUBSYSTEMS, 1 and 2.

The User and each of the SUBSYSTEMS have an INITIAL State and FINAL State and conditional
loops that cycle until speciﬁc decision criteria are met to terminate operation. We assume each of
the SUBSYSTEM activities include wait states for inputs. When inputs arrive, processing is per-
formed, and control is passed to the next activity. Here’s how a potential use case scenario might
be described.
      • SUBSYSTEM 1 performs Activity 20 to await user inputs via the keyboard.
      • When the System Operator Activity 10 enters data as Output 10, Activity 20 accepts
        the operator keyboard entries and converts the information into machine-readable code as
        Output 20.
      • SUBSYSTEM 2 performs: 1) Activity 30 to await data inputs and 2) Activity 31 to perform
        the required computation and output the mathematical results as Output 31.
      • In the interim SUBSYSTEM 1 Activity 21: 1) awaits Output 31 results, 2) converts the results
        into meaningful operator information, and 3) displays the results as Output 21.
      • Following data entry (i.e., Activity 10), the System Operator performs Activity 11 to: 1) await
        Output 21 results, 2) record the results, and 3) communicate the results as Output 11.
These cycles continue until the calculator is turned off, which is the FINAL State.
                                                            17.5 Relating Use Cases to Speciﬁcation Requirements                       175

                                                      System of Interest (SOI)
   System Operator (Swim lane)                   SUBSYSTEM 1 (Swim lane)                       SUBSYSTEM 2 (Swim lane)
                                                        Initial State                                   Initial State
      Initial State
                                 Output
                   Activity       10
                                                          Activity              Output 20
                     10
                                                            20                                           Activity
                                                                                                           30

                                                                                            Output 31    Activity
  Output                                  Output 21                                                        31
                                                          Activity
   11              Activity                                 21
                     11


                                                                                                                        Condition 31
                                                                        Condition 21           Condition 30
    Condition 11                              Condition 20
                          Condition 10


                                                                                                         Final State
                                                          Final State
                   Final State

Figure 17.4 UML Symbology Swim Lanes Example




How Many Use Cases?
A key question people often ask is: How many use cases are required for a system? There are no
magic answers; 10 through 30 use cases might be average. Some highly complex systems may just
have 5 or 6; others, 10 to 20. All depends on the individuals and organizations involved. Some
want simplicity to keep the number small; others want detailed lists. Keep in mind that a system
may have 5 to 8 primary use cases; the remainder may be secondary or subordinate use cases that
support the primary use cases.


17.5 RELATING USE CASES TO
SPECIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

You may note that the application of use cases is ﬁne for system design, but WHY are we address-
ing them here? There are several reasons:
    1. Use cases serve as a valuable tool for Acquirer SEs to work with Users to understand their
       needs and translate their visions of HOW they intend to deploy, operate, and support the
       system into a more technical description. Use cases isolate on speciﬁc system features and
       associated capabilities that the User can easily understand. This avoids the need to write
       abstract system requirements language that may or may not have meaning or interest to the
       User.
    2. Once the use cases and scenarios are identiﬁed and prioritized, they provide a basis
       for translation into speciﬁcation requirements suitable for system, product, or service
       acquisition.
    3. Use cases, which can be derived from Acquirer speciﬁcations, provide a mechanism for
       System Developers to formulate system operational concepts and design solutions.
176     Chapter 17    System Use Cases and Scenarios

17.6 FINAL THOUGHTS

From a SE perspective, use case analysis should be a key tool of any system development effort.
However, engineers often view this activity as non–value-added paperwork to the User and product,
and believe their time is better spent contemplating creation of elegant designs. The reality is the
most elegant designs are useless unless the User can easily and understandably implement them
with their current skill set to perform missions. This is WHY “just in time” training for system
operators must take place prior to system acceptance and delivery.
     Keep in mind that the people who give the bureaucratic argument are the same people who,
after a system fails during integration and test, capitulate and remark, HOW was I to know WHAT
the User wanted? I’m only human. . . . Besides they couldn’t decide what they wanted. Docu-
menting use cases is a simple matter. It requires professional discipline, something that tends to
get lost in modern-day engineering efforts. If you doubt this, ask yourself how many products have
disappointed you and made you wonder . . . why no one within the System Developer’s organiza-
tion bothered to consult the Users. If they had, they would have easily learned that this step is crit-
ical to the User’s success and acceptance of the system, product, or service.

17.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system use cases and scenarios.

Principle 17.1 Every use case has at least one or more most likely or probable scenarios, some
with positive outcomes, others with negative outcomes: your mission as an SE is to mitigate risk
and maximize positive outcomes.

Principle 17.2 Every use case, scenario, and requirement has a value to the User, a cost to
implement, and a level of acceptable operational risk.

Principle 17.3 Every system mission consists of one or more use case based capabilities.

17.8 SUMMARY

Our discussion of system use cases and scenarios highlighted the need to employ use cases as a means of
avoiding quantum leaps between User’s visionary requirements and system design. We also showed that use
cases and scenarios provide a powerful tool that Users, Acquirers, and System Developers. They can be used
to improve communications and to understand how the envisioned system is to be deployed, operated, and
supported.
      • Use cases provide a means of identifying and prioritizing key User requirements for implementation.
      • Use cases must be prioritized, based on most likely or probable occurrences for development subject
        to program technical, cost, and schedule constraints.
      • Use case scenarios provide a basis for understanding not only how the User might use a system,
        product, or service. Also how the misuse or abuse might result in risks with consequences that require
        design compensating or mitigating actions.
      • Use case scenarios must be prioritized within use case technical, cost, and schedule constraints.
      • Use case attributes provide a standard framework to uniformly and consistently characterize each use
        case.
                                                                                            Reference   177

    • UML interaction diagrams serve as a useful tool for understanding the sequencing of actor interac-
      tions and behavioral responses.
    • Each use case and its attributes should be documented and placed under baseline management control
      for decision making.


NOTE

The Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML®) is a registered trademark of the Object Management Group (OMG).


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Identify the following:
   (a) System actors
   (b) System use cases
   (c) System use case diagrams
   (d) Use case sequence diagrams


ORGANIZATION CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Check with your organization to see if any programs employ use cases and scenarios for deriving system
   capabilities and requirements.
   (a) Were these required by contract or a program decision?
   (b) What were the programs experiences?
   (c) Were the teams properly trained in applying use cases and scenarios?
   (d) What tools were used to perform use case analysis?
   (e) How were the use cases and scenarios documented?
   (f) How did the program link use cases and scenarios to speciﬁcation requirements?


REFERENCE

Object Management Group (OMG). 1997. Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML®) Notation Guide, Version 1.1, Needham,
  MA.
Chapter              18

      System Operations Model

18.1 INTRODUCTION

As the mission analysis identiﬁes a system’s use cases and scenarios, preferably in collaboration
with the User, the next challenging concept is working with the User to conceptualize how they
intend to deploy, operate, support, and dispose of a system. One of the mechanisms for documenting
the conceptualization is the system concept of operations, or ConOps. This section introduces the
System Operations Model that provides the structural framework for developing the ConOps.
     The System Operations Model provides a high-level operational workﬂow that characterizes
HOW a system: 1) is conﬁgured for a mission, 2) conducts the mission, and 3) is supported fol-
lowing a mission. The structure of the model consists of operations and tasks that can be translated
into speciﬁcation requirements or as workﬂow for the system engineering design solution.
     Our discussions provide insights regarding how the model’s operational capabilities are allo-
cated and ﬂowed down to the system elements—such as EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, and FACIL-
ITIES. As a result, these discussions provide the foundation for the topic that follows, system
mission and support operations.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is the System Operations Model?
      2. What is a Concept of Operations (ConOps)?
      3. What is the purpose of the System Operations Model?
      4. Graphically illustrate the System Operations Model.
      5. Describe each of the model’s operations or tasks.
      6. Delineate the differences in the model from its robust version.
      7. What is a System Operations Dictionary?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Concept of Operations (ConOps) A description of the workﬂow of a system’s sequential
        and/or concurrent operations required to achieve pre-mission, mission, and postmission
        phase outcome-based performance objectives.
      • Control or Staging Point A major decision point that limits advancement of workﬂow
        progress to the next set of objective-based operations until a set of go–no go decision crite-
        ria are accomplished.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

178
                                                  18.2 The System Concept of Operations (ConOps)        179

    • System Operations A set of multi-level, interdependent activities or tasks that
      collectively contribute to satisfying a pre-mission, mission, or postmission phase objective.
    • System Operations Dictionary A document that scopes and describes system entity oper-
      ational relationships and interactions required to support a speciﬁc phase and mode of oper-
      ation. The operational relationships and interactions are analyzed and translated into a set of
      required operational capabilities, which are then transformed into system performance
      requirements to support each mode of operation.
    • System Operations Model A generalization of system operations that can be employed as
      an initial starting point for identifying the workﬂow and operations for most systems.


18.2 THE SYSTEM CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS (ConOps)

Once a system’s problem space and solution spaces are bounded, the next step is to understand HOW
the User intends to use a solution space system. Most systems are precedented and simply employ
new technologies to build on the existing infrastructure of operations, facilities, and skills. This does
not mean, however, that unprecedented systems do not occur.

Referral For more information about precedented and unprecedented systems, refer to Chapter
3 on the deﬁnition of these systems.

If you expand the problem–solution space concept, our analysis reveals that the solution space time-
based interactions—namely entity relationships—can be characterized by a set of operations that
can be generalized into the System Operations Model. In turn, the model provides a framework for
developing the ConOps, which describes the top-level sequential and concurrent operations
required to accomplish the system’s mission.



 EXAMPLE 18.1
A system concept of operations (ConOps) for a system such as the Space Shuttle system describes the oper-
ational sequences required to deliver a payload into outer space, deploy the payload and conduct experiments,
and return the cargo and astronauts safely to Earth.

We refer to Example 18.1 as cyclical operations within the system/product life cycle. Living organ-
isms, such as humans, exhibit this cyclical characterization as evidenced by our daily need for food,
water, rest, and sleep.
    We can generalize a ConOps in terms of a common set of objectives that reﬂect how the User
plans to use the system. These objectives include:
    1. Deploy the system.
    2. Conﬁgure the system for deployment and operational use.
    3. Check the system’s readiness to conduct pre-mission, mission, and postmission operations.
    4. Employ the system asset.
    5. Clean it up and store it for the next use.
    6. Discard the system, when appropriate.
To better understand HOW these objectives can be integrated into a total system operations solu-
tion, let’s explore a description of the System Operations Model.
180         Chapter 18      System Operations Model

18.3 THE SYSTEM OPERATIONS MODEL

The System Operations Model depicted in Figure 18.1 provides a construct that can be applied to
HUMAN-MADE systems. Although there are a number of variants on this graphic, let’s explore
this model to better understand how it operates. First, a word about the contents of the graphic.
     Each box in Figure 18.1 represents an integrated, multi-level collection of system use case-
based capabilities and activities required to achieve an overall mission objective. We can expand
or decompose each of these capabilities into lower level operational capabilities. Ultimately these
capabilities and their respective levels of performance are allocated to one or more of the system
elements—such as PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, and FACILITIES.
     Each decision block (diamond) is referred to as a control or staging point and requires a go–no
go decision from a decision authority based on a predeﬁned set of exit or entrance criteria. Each
operation and control point is tagged with a unique identiﬁer. The identiﬁer is used to map to a
speciﬁc requirements section in the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or to a detailed nar-
rative in an operational concept description (OCD).

Referral For more information about linking ConOps operations and capabilities to the SPS,
refer to Chapter 28 System Speciﬁcation Practices.

Author’s Note 18.1 Observe the usage of ConOps and OCD. Various organizations use one
or the other term. ConOps, to some people, infers a summary discussion of how a system will
operate while OCD infers supporting detail to a ConOps. Pick one term or the other and apply it
consistently across programs.




                                                                                                                                          Await
                                          Continue
                                                                                                                                          Go-ahead
 1                                                           6                           7
        System                                                   Configure                     Assess
      Development                     5                          System for                  Operational
                                               Mission                                                                                9
         Phase                                                    Mission                      Mission
                                              Notification
                                                                                              Readiness              8
                                                                                                                                          Conduct
                                                                                                                                          Mission

 2     Entrance                                                          20                                               10
       Criteria                                                                                                                   Conduct t
                                          Await Mission                          Perform System
                                                                                                                                  System
                                          Notification                            Maintenance
                                                                                                                                  Mission
  3
           Deploy
           System                     4
                                                                                    15                                                     11    12
                                                                                             Exit Criteria
      19      Redeploy                    Conduct
                                          Training
                                                                               Continue                                  13
             18               17                                              Active Duty                                     Assess Mission &
                    Train          Conduct                                                        14                               System
                                    System                                                                                     Performance
                                   Training                                                            Deactivate
                                                                                                       System       Exit
                                                                                       21                       System O&S       22
                              16                                                             Deactivate/           Phase              System
                                                                                                         /
                                   Replenish                                                 Phase-Out                                Disposal
                                    System                                                    System                                   Phase
                                   Resources

                                                                                                  Where:      XX    = Reserved

Figure 18.1 Generalized System Concept of Operations (ConOps) Model
                                                     18.4 System Operations Model Description     181

18.4 SYSTEM OPERATIONS MODEL DESCRIPTION

Figure 18.1 depicts the System Operations Model that applies to most HUMAN-MADE systems.
Entry into the model begins when a system is transitioned from its System Development Phase (1)
of the system/product life cycle. Entrance criteria (2) are evaluated to assess system readiness to
begin active duty. Let’s explore the ﬁeld operations that follow.

Operation 3.0: Deploy System
Operation 3.0 to deploy the system addresses system capabilities and activities required to deliver
and install the system at the User’s required destination. As each system rolls off the production
line and is veriﬁed against performance requirements, the system is packed and shipped for deploy-
ment or distribution to the User. Activities include: transportation; load/unloading; crate/uncrating;
initial setup, installation, and assembly; system checkout; veriﬁcation; integration into higher level
systems; and veriﬁcation of interoperability at that level.
     On completion of all planned activities, the Operation 4.0 Conduct System/Mission Training
decision is made.

Operation 4.0: Conduct System/Mission Training Decision
Operation 4.0 Conduct System/Mission Training, a decision control point, determines if the system
is to be placed immediately into active duty or reserved for operator training or demonstrations.
    • If the system/mission training decision is Yes or TRUE, workﬂow progresses to Operation
      17.0 Conduct System Training.
    • If the system/mission training decision is No or FALSE, workﬂow progresses to Operation
      5.0 Await Mission Notiﬁcation decision.

Operation 5.0: Mission Notiﬁcation Decision
Operation 5.0 Mission Notiﬁcation, a decision control point, must await notiﬁcation to prepare to
conduct a mission. Depending on the system and application, Operations 4.0 and 5.0 are each effec-
tively a cyclical WAIT STATE for the system that loops until a higher level authority issues an
order to conduct the mission.
    • If the mission notiﬁcation decision is Yes or TRUE, workﬂow progresses to Operation 6.0
      Conﬁgure System for Mission.
    • If the mission notiﬁcation decision is No or FALSE, workﬂow cycles back to Operation 4.0
      Conduct System/Mission Training decision.

Operation 6.0: Conﬁgure System for Mission
Operation 6.0 Conﬁgure System for Mission includes system capabilities and activities required to
prepare and conﬁgure the system for the required mission. On receipt of mission orders, the system
is conﬁgured and supplied for the mission. Operational activities include pre-mission planning,
physical hardware and software changes, personnel training, and refueling. System conﬁgura-
tion/reconﬁguration activities include the synchronized orchestration of the system elements such
as:
    1. PERSONNEL Operators, administrators, etc.
    2. PROCEDURAL DATA Operating procedures, media, etc.
182     Chapter 18   System Operations Model

      3. Interfaces with HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS Friendly, cooperative systems.
      4. SUPPORT SYSTEM Media, instructors, supply, maintainers, etc., into a planned, coherent
         operation focused on achieving the allocated mission tasks and objectives.
    On completion of the activities, system veriﬁcation is performed to ensure that the system is
properly conﬁgured for the mission.
      • If the system veriﬁcation check is successful, workﬂow progresses to Operation 7.0, Assess
        Operational Mission Readiness.
      • If system defects or deﬁciencies are discovered, workﬂow progresses to Operation 20.0
        Perform System Maintenance.

Operation 7.0: Assess Operational Mission Readiness
Operation 7.0 Assess Operational Mission Readiness includes system capabilities and activities
required to review the overall readiness to conduct the assigned mission. After the system has been
conﬁgured for the mission and all system element resources are fully integrated and operational,
mission operational readiness is assessed. The assessment evaluates the readiness posture of the
integrated set of system elements—such as EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, and FACILITIES—to
perform their assigned mission.
     If the readiness assessment is No, the system is tagged as operationally deﬁcient with a RED
or YELLOW tag. A mission impact risk assessment decision is made to determine if the deﬁciency
warrants cancellation of the mission or replacement of the system/element with a backup system.
      • If the system requires maintenance, workﬂow progresses to Operation 20.0 Perform System
        Maintenance.
      • If the system is determined to provide the capabilities required to support the mission, work-
        ﬂow progress to Operation 9.0 Await Mission Go-ahead Decision.

Author’s Note 18.2 To facilitate a later discussion in this chapter, Operations 8.0, 11.0, 12.0,
and 19.0 are unused in Figure 18.1 and reserved for our follow-on topical discussion.

Operation 9.0: Mission Go-Ahead Decision
Operation 9.0 Mission Go-ahead, a decision control point, determines if tasking orders to conduct
the mission have been issued.
      • If Operation 9.0 Await Mission Go-ahead Decision is Yes or TRUE, workﬂow proceeds to
        Operation 10.0 Conduct Mission.
      • If the Operation 9.0 Await Mission Go-ahead Decision is No or FALSE, system readiness is
        periodically checked by cycling back to Operation 7.0 Assess Operational Mission Readiness.

Operation 10.0: Conduct System Mission
Operation 10.0 Conduct System Mission includes system capabilities and activities required to
conduct the system’s primary and secondary mission(s). During this operation the system may
encounter and engage threats and opportunities as it performs the primary and secondary mission
objectives.
    If the system requires maintenance during the conduct of the mission, Operation 16.0 Replen-
ish System Resources or Operation 20.0 Perform System Maintenance may be performed, if
practical.
                                                         18.4 System Operations Model Description   183


 EXAMPLE 18.2
A ﬁghter aircraft may require refueling during the conduct of an operational mission.

On completion of the mission, workﬂow proceeds to Operation 13.0 Assess Mission and System
Performance.

Operation 13.0: Assess Mission and System Performance
Operation 13.0 Assess Mission and System Performance includes system capabilities and activi-
ties required to review the level of mission success based on mission primary and secondary objec-
tives and system performance contributions to that success. Activities include postmission data
reduction, target impact assessment, strengths, and weaknesses; threats; mission debrief observa-
tions and lessons learned; and mission success. These operations also provide the opportunity to
review human performance, strengths, and weaknesses in the conduct of the mission. On comple-
tion of Operation 13.0 Assess Mission System Performance, workﬂow progresses to Operation 14.0,
a Deactivate/Phase-out System Decision.

Operation 14.0: Deactivate/Phase-out System Decision
Operation 14.0 Deactivate/Phase-out System, a decision control point, determines if the system is
to continue current operations, be upgraded, or be decommissioned or phased out of active duty.
The decision is based on exit criteria (15) that were established for the system.
    • If the deactivate/phase-out system decision is Yes or TRUE, workﬂow progresses to Opera-
      tion 21.0 Deactivate/Phase-out System.
    • If the decision is No or FALSE, workﬂow proceeds to Operation 16.0 Replenish System
      Resources.

Operation 16.0: Replenish System Resources
Operation 16.0 Replenish System Resources includes system capabilities and activities required to
restock or replenish system resources such as personnel, fuel, and supplies. If deﬁciencies are found
in the system, the system is sent to Operation 20.0 Perform System Maintenance. On completion
of Operation 16.0 Replenish System Resources, workﬂow progresses to Operation 18.0 Redeploy
System decision.

Operation 17.0: Conduct System/Mission Training
Operation 17.0 Conduct System Training includes capabilities and activities required to train Users
or system operators in how to properly operate the system. For larger, more complex systems, initial
operator training is sometimes performed at the System Developer’s factory prior to system deploy-
ment to the ﬁeld. Remedial and skills enhancement training occurs after the system is already in
ﬁeld service.
     During Operation 17.0 Conduct System Training, new system operators are instructed in the safe
and proper use of the system to develop basic skills. Experienced operators may also receive reme-
dial, proﬁciency, or skills enhancement training based on lessons learned from previous missions or
new tactics employed by adversarial or competitive threats.
     On completion of a training session, workﬂow progresses to Operation 16.0 Replenish System
Resources. If the system requires maintenance during training, Operation 20.0 Perform System
Maintenance is activated.
184     Chapter 18   System Operations Model

Operation 18.0: Redeploy System Decision
Operation 18.0 to redeploy the system, a decision control point, determines if the physical system
is to be repeployed to a new User location to support organizational mission objectives.
      • If Operation 18.0 Redeploy System decision is Yes or TRUE, workﬂow progresses to
        Operation 3.0, which is to deploy the system.
      • If Operation 18.0 Redeploy System decision is no or FALSE, workﬂow proceeds to Opera-
        tion 4.0 Conduct System/Mission Training decision and the cycle repeats back to Operation
        18.0 Deploy System Decision.

Operation 20.0: Perform System Maintenance
Operation 20.0 Perform System Maintenance includes system capabilities and activities required
to upgrade system capabilities or correct system deﬁciencies through preventive or corrective main-
tenance. Systems are tagged with easily recognizable color identiﬁers such as RED or YELLOW
to represent corrective or preventive maintenance actions required to correct any defects or deﬁ-
ciencies that may impact mission success.
     On successful completion of system maintenance, the system is returned to active duty via the
next operation—be it Operation 6.0 Conﬁgure System Mission, Operation 7.0 Assess Operational
Mission Readiness, Operation 10.0 Conduct Mission, Operation 16.0 Replenish System Resources,
or Operation 17.0 Conduct System/Mission Training—of the requested need for maintenance.

Operation 21.0: Deactivate/Phase-out System
Operation 21.0 Deactivate/Phase-out System includes system capabilities and activities required to
disengage and remove the system from active duty, store, warehouse, “mothball,” or disassemble
the system and properly dispose of all its components and elements. Some systems may be stored
or “mothballed” until needed in the future to support surges in mission operations that cannot be
supported by existing systems. On completion of the deactivation, the system proceeds to the
System Disposal Phase (22) of its system/product life cycle.

System Operations Dictionary
Obtaining team agreement on the graphical depiction of the concept of operations is only the ﬁrst
step. When working with larger, complex systems and development teams, diagrams at this level
require scoping deﬁnitions for each capability to ensure proper understanding among team
members. For example, you and your team may deﬁne a speciﬁc operational capability differently
from a team operating in another business domain, depending on the system’s application.
     One solution is to create a System Operations Dictionary. The dictionary, which deﬁnes and
scopes each capability similar to the previous System Operations Model descriptions, should be
maintained throughout the life of the system.

Final Thoughts
The System Operations Model is used to deﬁne systems, products, organizations, services, etc. We
can apply this model as an initial starting point for most, if not all, HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS,
such as automobiles, the Space Shuttle, airlines, hospitals, businesses, ﬁre and ambulance services.
    Collectively and individually, each of the model’s operations represents a generalized construct
applicable to most systems. As an SE, collaborate with the User(s) to tailor the System Operations
Model to reﬂect their needs within the constraints of contractual, statutory, and regulatory require-
ments. Each operation should be scoped and bounded via a System Operations Dictionary to ensure
                                      18.5 Developing a More Robust System Operations Model      185

all members of the Acquirer, User, and system development teams clearly understand what is/is not
included in speciﬁc operations—with no surprises!
     From an individual’s perspective, the System Operations Model may appear to be very simple.
However, on closer examination, even simple systems often require forethought to adequately
deﬁne the operational sequences. If you challenge the validity of this statement, consider the
following:
    • Develop the System Operations Model for a car and driver.
    • Conduct a similar exercise with each of three colleagues who are unfamiliar with the Model.
      The diversity of colleague opinions may be enlightening.
    • Repeat the exercise as a team focused on achieving a single, collaborative consensus for the
      ﬁnal diagram.
Now consider the case where the System Operations Model involves the deﬁnition of a more
complex system with a larger stakeholder community. If you contemplated the previous car and
driver exercise, you should appreciate the challenges of getting a diverse group of people from
various disciplines, political factions, and organizations to arrive at a consensus on a System Oper-
ations Model for a speciﬁc system.
     You will discover that engineers often refer to the System Operations Model as “textbook
stuff.” They:
    1. Act offended to spend time addressing this concept.
    2. Have a natural tendency to focus immediately on physical hardware and software design,
       such as resistors, capacitors, data rates, C++ language, and operating systems.
    3. Whine to their management about the need to focus their time on resistors, coding, etc.

Beware If your program, customer, and User community have not agreed to this top-level
concept and its lower level decomposition, system development problems further downstream his-
torically can be traced back to this fundamental concept. Even worse, ﬁelding a system that does
not pass customer validation for intended usage presents even greater challenges, not only techni-
cally but also for your organization’s reputation.
    • Obtain Acquirer and User community consensus and “buy in” prior to committing resources
      for development of the system. Investigate how the User envisions operating the planned
      system to achieve organizational mission objectives. Avoid premature hardware and software
      development efforts until these decisions are approved and ﬂowed down and allocated to
      hardware and software speciﬁcations.
    • Use the System Operations Model as an infrastructure for identifying and specifying opera-
      tional capabilities that can be translated into System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
      requirements.
    • When reviewing and analyzing speciﬁcations prepared by others, use the System Operations
      Model to assess top-level system performance requirements for completeness for system
      operations.

18.5 DEVELOPING A MORE ROBUST SYSTEM
OPERATIONS MODEL

The preceding System Operations Model provided a fundamental understanding of how a system
might be employed by the User. As a high level model, it serves a useful tutorial purpose. The
model, however, has some areas that need to be strengthened to accommodate a broader range of
186       Chapter 18          System Operations Model


 1
       System                                                                                                                                          Await
     Development                         Wait          6                          7                                          Unavailable               Go-Ahead
        Phase                                              Configure                     Assess
                                     5                     System for                  Operational
                                                                                                                         8                         9
                                                            Mission                      Mission                                    Ready
        Entrance                            Mission                                     Readiness
  2                                        Notification                                                                                                 Conduct
        Criteria                                                                                                                         Execute
                                                                                                                                                        Mission
                                                              20                                  System Deficiency
                                                                                                                                         Mission
                                 3                                  Perform
              Deploy System                                          System                   Return to Service
                                                                   Maintenance
           19                                                                                          10                                                   11
                Remediate &
                Restore Site                                                     ··   Maintain
                                                                                      Refurbish
                                                                                                            Conduct
                                                                                                            System
                                                                                                                                       Provide Mission
                                                                                                                                        Oversight &
                                                 Await
                                                 Mission
                                                                                  ·   Upgrade               Mission                       Support
           Redeploy                                                                                                          Feedback
                                       4                                              15
                                                                                            Exit
         18                                                                                Criteria                Real-Time
                                           Train                                                                  Mission Data
                      Continue                                                                      13                                                 12
                                                            Continue                                     Assess System
                          16                                                14                            & Mission                           9
                                                                                                                                 Mission                Continue
17                                                                                                       Performance
                                                                                                                                 Complete               Mission
      Replenish               Conduct System/
       System                 Mission Training                 Deactivate                     21                                  22
      Resources                                                 System                               Deactivate/                       System
                                     Replenish
                                                                                                     Phase-Out                         Disposal
                                                                                                      System                            Phase

Figure 18.2 Robust System Concept of Operations (ConOps) Model


system applications. Figure 18.2 provides an expanded System Operations Model. To maintain con-
tinuity with the previous model, we have preserved the original numbering convention and simply
added the following operations:
Operation 8.0:                 Mission Ready Decision
Operation 11.0:                Provide Mission Oversight and Support
Operation 12.0:                Mission Complete Decision
Operation 19.0:                Remediate and Restore Site


18.6 THE IMPORTANCE OF THE GENERALIZED
SYSTEM OPERATIONS MODEL

The System Operations Model serves as a high-level framework that orchestrates the totality of
system synchronized to a time-based schedule. Operations in the model are performed by one
of more of the system elements (EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, FACILITIES, etc.). The allocation
of these operations to the system elements is important from several perspectives.

Speciﬁcation Developer’s Perspective
From a speciﬁcation developer’s perspective, the System Operations Model construct provides the
infrastructure for working with customers and Users to capture, organize, and specify system
requirements. Operational capabilities and performance decomposed and derived from this infra-
structure can be translated into text requirements for system or lower level speciﬁcations.

Referral For more information about translating operational capabilities into speciﬁcation
requirements, please refer to Chapter 32 Speciﬁcation Development Practices.
                                                                      18.7 Guiding Principles   187

Speciﬁcation Analyst Perspective
From a system analyst’s perspective, the System Operations Model construct can be used to as an
infrastructure to assign existing speciﬁcation requirements for speciﬁc operations. If each System
Operations Model operation is decomposed into hierarchical levels of sub operations, the system
analyst can easily ﬁnd the holes representing missing requirements or the need for clariﬁcation.

Author’s Note 18.3 Properly trained system engineers and others who develop systems (prod-
ucts, organizations, services, etc.) understand and appreciate the importance of capturing Acquirer
and User community expectations of system capabilities, behavior, and performance based on how
the system will be used. The System Operations Model, as a high level of system abstraction, serves
as the top-level infrastructure to deﬁne how the system is to be operated. Using the model as a
framework, system operational capabilities and performance can be easily speciﬁed. System oper-
ational analysis enables us to decompose each of the system life cycle operations into successively
lower level tasks and activities, each of which is characterized by a speciﬁc system capability,
behavior, and performance.

Author’s Note 18.4 Many untrained speciﬁcation writers focus exclusively on Operation 10.0
Conduct Mission. Even worse, they employ the feature-based approach by specifying features of the
system for Operation 10.0. As human products of electrical, mechanical, and software disciplines,
engineers of this type immediately focus on their “comfort zone,” physical system hardware and soft-
ware requirements and solutions. As a result the speciﬁcations often fall short of complete system
requirements coverage as noted by the absence of mission requirements for Operations 3.0 through
13.0 and 16.0 through 19.0. Even within Operation 10.0 Conduct Mission, these writers focus only
on speciﬁc physical features without consideration for system phases, modes, and states when using
cases and scenarios, and so on. As a result, many requirements are missed or misplaced.
    1. Despite the shortcoming noted in the previous points, standard system speciﬁcation outlines
       such as the former MIL-STD-490A tend to force the speciﬁcation developers to at least par-
       tially consider these missing steps (Operations 3.0–13.0 and 16.0–19.0) in areas such as
       Design and Construction Constraints.
    2. Based on the author’s experience, competent systems engineers begin their systems analy-
       sis work with the System Operations Model or some version tailored speciﬁcally for their
       system application and User needs. This statement serves as a key indicator of the train-
       ing and maturity level of system engineers. Application of the System Operations Model
       enables you to sort out the true system engineers from the “wannabes” and the level of risk
       associated with their position on the program.


18.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern development of the System Operations Model.

Principle 18.1 Every human-made system has its own unique System Operations Model that
represents HOW the User deploys, operates, supports, and phases out the MISSION SYSTEM.

Principle 18.2 Each MISSION SYSTEM operation or task and its supporting system elements
either adds value and contributes to achieving a phase-based performance objective or not; if not,
eliminate it!
188    Chapter 18    System Operations Model

Principle 18.3 Synchronize every System Operation Model operation or task to a
performance-based Mission Event Timeline (MET).

Principle 18.4 Every System Operation Model operation or task represents a system use case;
each use case represents a capability that must produce a deﬁned outcome while coping with one
or more most likely or probable OPERATING ENVIRONMENT scenarios.


18.8 SUMMARY

The preceding discussions represent the embryonic, conceptual views of how the User intends to use the
system. The operations can be translated into explicit system level capabilities and performance requirements.
These requirements should ultimately be allocated to the system elements, the EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL,
FACILITIES, and so on. Our next discussion will decompose these operations into greater levels of detail via
system phases, modes, and states of operation. We will thus begin to narrow, bound, and specify system capa-
bilities and performance required of each of the system elements to support the ConOps operational tasks.

Author’s Note 18.5 As we stated earlier, it is impractical to illustrate all conceivable applications of
systems. Our discussion over the past few pages has been intended to provide a basic orientation and aware-
ness that will stimulate your thought processes and enable you to translate these approaches into your own
business domain systems.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
   (a) Apply the System Operations Model to the selected system to determine which operations apply.
   (b) Does the system have operations that are not identiﬁed in the model?
   (c) Using the System Operations Model as the initial starting point, tailor the model to the system and its
       application.
   (d) As a sanity check, map each use case to the System Operations Model operations. For those opera-
       tions that are not addressed by a use case, is the set of use cases deﬁcient? If the User did not have
       resource constraints, how would you address the deﬁciencies with the User?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for direction and guidance in the development of the system
   Concept of Operations (ConOps) or operational concept description (OCD).
   (a) What requirements are levied on development of the ConOps or OCD?
   (b) When does the media required development of either of these documents?
2. Contact a small, medium and large contract program within your organization.
   (a) Does the contract require development of a ConOps or OCD?
   (b) Does the program have a ConOps or OCD? If not, why not?
   (c) If so, how did the ConOps or OCD beneﬁt the program?
   (d) Based on development of the ConOps or OCD, what would the program do differently next time?
Chapter              19

     System Phases, Modes,
     and States of Operation

19.1 INTRODUCTION

Our discussion of the System Operations Model provides a workﬂow that illustrates HOW the User
might deploy, operate, and support a system or product to perform organizational missions. In
general, the workﬂow consists of objective-based sequential and concurrent operations, each requir-
ing two or more tasks to be accomplished. Tasks in turn are subdivided into subtasks, and so on.
     As we probe deeper into the System Operations Model, our analysis reveals that it consists
of three types of SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) operations. These operations are required to:
1) prepare for a mission, 2) conduct and support a mission, and 3) follow-up after the mission.
These SOI operations are performed by the integrated efforts of the MISSION SYSTEM (s) and
the SUPPORT SYSTEM.
     When a system is ﬁelded, Users learn the basics of system operations that include HOW to
employ a system, product, or service during these phases of operation via user’s guides, reference
manuals, and checklist procedures. Each phase of operation, which is assigned objectives to be
accomplished, consists of embedded modes of operation. Each mode of operation represents User
selectable options available to perform speciﬁc mission operations and tasks. Users also learn about
EQUIPMENT capabilities, safe operating procedures, and performance limitations available to
support these operations and tasks. WHAT the User sees are the results of system development;
however, they do not reﬂect the highly iterative, time-consuming analysis and decision making that
the SE design process requires to produce these results.
     Our discussion in this chapter introduces the concept of system phases, modes, and states of
operation. We build on the foundation of use cases and use case scenarios and System Operations
Model to illustrate how SEs:
     1. Establish phases of operation.
     2. Derive modes of operation from use cases.
     3. Derive system architectural conﬁgurations and interfaces that represent the system’s state
        of operation.
Given a foundation in HOW a system is organized, we explore how modal transitions occur within
and between system phases of operation. Finally, we illustrate how modal capabilities are accu-
mulated and integrated as physical conﬁgurations or states of the architecture to support User phase-
based objectives.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                 189
190     Chapter 19   System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      • What is a phase of operation?
      • What is the objective of the pre-mission phase of operation?
      • What is the objective of the mission phase of operation?
      • What is the objective of the postmission phase of operation?
      • What is a mode of operation?
      • What is a state of operation?
      • What is the difference between an operational state and a physical state?
      • What are the relationships among phases, modes, and states of operation?
      • How do use cases and scenarios relate to modes of operations?
      • What is a modal triggering event?


Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Mode of Operation An abstract label applied to a collection of system operational capa-
        bilities and activities focused on satisfying a speciﬁc phase objective.
      • Phase of Operation Refer to deﬁnition provided in Chapter 16 System Mission Analysis.
      • State of Operation The operational or operating condition of a SYSTEM OF INTEREST
        (SOI) required to safely conduct or continue its mission. For example, the operational state
        of an aircraft during take-off includes architectural conﬁguration settings such as wing ﬂap
        positions, landing gear down, and landing light activation.
      • State “A condition or mode of existence that a system, component, or simulation may be
        in; for example, the pre-ﬂight state of an aircraft navigation program or the input state of
        given channel.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • State Diagram “A diagram that depicts the states that a system or component can assume,
        and shows the events or circumstances that cause or result from a change from one state
        to another.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990) State diagrams are also called state transition
        diagrams.
      • State Machine A device that employs a given conﬁguration state to perform operations
        or tasks until conditions or an external triggering event causes it to transition to another
        conﬁguration state.
      • Triggering Event An external OPERATING ENVIRONMENT stimuli or cue that causes
        a system to initiate behavioral response actions that shift from a current mode to a new mode
        of operation.



19.2 SYSTEM PHASES, MODES, AND STATES RELATIONSHIPS

To facilitate your understanding of system phases, modes, and states of operation, let’s establish
their context using the entity relationship framework shown in Figure 19.1.


Author’s Note 19.1 The following description depicts the results of a highly iterative analysis
of system phases, modes, and states that may be very time-consuming, depending on system com-
                                                                     19.2 System Phases, Modes, and States Relationships                            191

                  Allows
                   1 .. *                                                                                                              Applicable
              3                                                                                                                            to
                   Use                                                1                                                 4
Required by         UseCases
                        Cases                         Applicable
   1 .. *         • •Deployment                           to                                  Part of                       Subphases of
                       Deployment                                          Phasesofof
                                                                          Phases
                   • •Operations
                        Operations                                                                                           Operation
                      • •Support         Allows                           Operation
                                                                           Operation
                          Support                                                                   May Consist of           (if applicable)
                     • •Disposal          1 .. *                                                        2 .. *
                          Disposal
                                                                      Part of                                                         Supports
     Accommodates               Accommodates                                    Consists of
         1 .. *                     1 .. *                                        1 .. *
                                                     Abstracted       2
                                                     into 1 .. *
                                                                           Modesofof
                                                                          Modes
                                                                          Operation
                                                                           Operation          Supported by
                                                           Part of                               1 .. *

                                                                     Supports
                                         May consists of                        Supported by                         7
                                             1 .. *                                1 .. *
                            5                                         6                                                        Physical
                                                                                                                                Physical
                                Submodes of         Supports                              Characterizes                     Configuration(s)
                                                                                                                             Configuration(s)
                                                                           Statesofof
                                                                          States                                              • •Architecture
                                 Operation                                                                                         Architecture
              Abstracted                              Supported by        Operation
                                                                           Operation                    Characterized           • •Interfaces
                                (if applicable)                                                                                     Interfaces
              into 1 .. *                                1 .. *                                              by                  • •Settings
                                                                                                                                     Settings

                                                                                                                                        Requires

Figure 19.1 Relationships Between System Use Cases and Phases, Modes, and States of Operation




plexity. In the list there are included subphases and submodes of operation, although most systems
do not employ these features. They are provided here for illustration purposes for those systems
that do employ those terms.
      1. Each phase of operation (1):
         a. Consists of at least one or more modes of operation (2).
         b. Allows application of at least one or more use cases (3).
         c. May consist of at least two or more subphases of operation (4).
      2. Each subphase of operation (4) (if applicable) is:
         a. An element of a higher level phase of operation (1).
         b. Accommodates at least one or more use cases (3).
         c. Supported by at least one or more modes of operation (2).
      3. Each use case (3) is:
         a. Applicable to at least one or more phases of operation (1).
         b. Analytically abstracted into at least one or more higher level modes of operation (2) or
            into submodes of operation (5).
         c. May require one or more physical conﬁgurations (7).
      4. Each mode of operation (2):
         a. Is unique to one and only one phase of operation (1).
         b. Accommodates at least one or more use cases (3).
         c. Supported by at least one or more physical conﬁgurations (7).
      5. Each submode of operation (if applicable) is:
         a. Unique to one and only one mode of operation (2).
         b. Accommodates at least one or more use cases (3).
         c. Supported by at least one or more states of operation (6).
192     Chapter 19   System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

      6. Each state of operation (6):
         a. Supports at least one or more modes of operation (2) or submodes of operation (5).
         b. Consists of at least one or more physical conﬁgurations (7).
      7. Each physical conﬁguration (7) is:
         a. Characterized by the system/item architecture, interfaces, and settings.
         b. Unique to a state of operation (6).
         c. Employed by at least one or more use cases (3).

Author’s Note 19.2 Since our focus here is on general relationships of system phases, modes,
and states of operation, Figure 19.1 is presented with those key elements. As we will see in Chapter
21 System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation, the linkages between use cases,
modes and states of operation, and physical conﬁguration states (i.e., the physical design solution)
are accomplished via required operational capabilities that lead to performance requirements. The
subject of phases, modes, and states is often confusing; this is because it is complicated by people
who often misapply the terms. Therefore, we defer the required operational capabilities dimension
until later.

Given this framework of entity relationships, let’s begin our discussion with system phases of
operation.

19.3 UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM PHASES OF OPERATION

Our discussion of the System Operations Model introduced a key concept in understanding how
human-made systems typically operate. The operations presented in Figures 18.1 and 18.2 provide
an initial framework for organizing and collecting system capability requirements as well as
developing the initial system engineering design. Let’s explore the relationship of phases and
operations.

Operational Phase Objectives
If we analyze and assimilate the set of system operations and their objectives, we can partition the
operations into three distinct classes of abstraction: pre-mission, mission, and postmission operations.
Analytically we refer to these abstractions as phases of operation.

Author’s Note 19.3 All human-made systems have at least three phases of operation. Although
some systems may be placed in storage, keep in mind that the operative term is “operation.” Since
the system does not perform an action, storage represents an action performed on a system and is
therefore not considered an operation.

Pre-mission Phase Objective. The objective of the pre-mission phase of operations, at a
minimum, is to ensure that the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) (i.e., MISSION SYSTEM and
SUPPORT SYSTEM) is fully prepared, conﬁgured, operationally available and ready to conduct
its organizational mission when directed.

Mission Phase Objective. The objective of the mission phase of operations, at a minimum, is
to conduct the mission SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI). Besides achieving the SOI’s mission
objectives, one must mitigate mission risks and ensure the system’s safe operation and return.

Post-mission Phase Objective. The objectives of the postmission phase of operations, at a
minimum, are to:
                                                      19.3 Understanding System Phases of Operation   193

     1. Analyze mission outcome(s) and performance objective results.
     2. Replenish system consumables and expendables, as applicable.
     3. Refurbish the system.
     4. Capture lessons learned.
     5. Analyze and debrief mission results.
     6. Improve future system and mission performance.
To see how phases of operation may apply to a system, consider the example of an automobile trip.


 EXAMPLE 19.1
During the pre-mission phase prior to driving an automobile on a trip, the driver:
1. Services the vehicle (oil and ﬁlter change, new tires, repairs, etc.).
2. Fills the tank with gasoline.
3. Checks the tire pressure.
4. Inspects the vehicle.
5. Loads the vehicle with personal effects (suitcases, coats, etc.).

During the mission phase following a successful pre-mission checkout, the driver:
1. Departs on the trip from the point of origination.
2. Drives defensively in accordance with vehicle safe operating procedures.
3. Obeys vehicular laws.
4. Navigates to the destination.
5. Periodically checks and replenishes the fuel and coolant supply enroute.
6. Arrives at the destination.

During the post-mission phase on arrival at the point of destination, the driver:
1. Parks the vehicle in a permissible space.
2. Unloads the vehicle.
3. Safely secures the vehicle until it is needed again.

Subphases of Operation
Some complex systems may employ subphases of operation. Airborne systems such as aircraft and
missiles have phases of ﬂight within the mission phase. Phases of ﬂight for an aircraft system might
include: 1) push back, 2) taxi, 3) take-off, 4) climb, 5) cruise, 6) descend, 7) land, 8) taxi, and 9)
park. Using the phases of operation as the frame of reference, the phases of ﬂight would be equated
to subphases of the mission phase of operation. Each of the subphases focuses on speciﬁc aspects
and objectives that contribute to the overall aircraft system objective: transport passengers safely
and securely from a Point of Origination or Departure to a Point of Termination or Destination.

Guidepost 19.1 Once the systems phases of operation are established, we can proceed with
aligning the use cases with the respective phases.

Aligning Use Cases with System Phases of Operation
Once the system’s use cases have been identiﬁed, SEs align each use case with a speciﬁc phase of
operation as shown in Table 19.1. Each use case in the table is associated with a phase of operation.
194     Chapter 19   System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

Table 19.1 Assignment of use cases to speciﬁc system phases of operation

Use Case        Use Case Description                               Phase of Operation
(UC)
                                            Pre-mission Phase        Mission Phase         Postmission Phase

UC 1                 (Description)                   •
UC 2                 (Description)                   •
UC 3                 (Description)                   •
UC 4                 (Description)                                          •
UC 5                 (Description)                                          •
UC 6                 (Description)                                          •
UC 7                 (Description)                                          •
UC 8                 (Description)                                          •
UC 9                 (Description)                                          •
UC 10                (Description)                                                                  •
UC 11                (Description)                                                                  •
UC 12                (Description)                                          •
UC 13                (Description)                                          •
UC 14                (Description)                                                                  •




19.4 UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM MODES OF OPERATION

Operationally, modes of operation represent options available for selection at the User’s discretion,
assuming certain conditions and criteria are met. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 19.2
An automobile driver, assuming certain conditions and criteria are met, has the following modes of operation
available for discretionary selection: PARK, REVERSE, NEUTRAL, DRIVE, and LOW. While the vehicle
is in the DRIVE mode, the driver is permitted by the vehicle’s design to shift to the REVERSE mode subject
to satisfying the following conditions and criteria:
1. The vehicle is at a safe location conducive to the action permissible under law and safe driving rules.
2. The vehicle is safely stopped and the brake pedal is depressed.
3. The driver can view on-coming trafﬁc from all directions.
4. The action can be safely completed before other trafﬁc arrives.

Deriving Modes of Operation
When we analyze use cases aligned with speciﬁc phases of operation, we soon discover that some
use cases share an objective or an outcome. Where there is sufﬁcient commonality in these sets or
clusters of use cases that share an objective, we abstract them into higher level modes of opera-
tion. Figure 19.2 illustrates how use cases (UCs) are abstracted into modes of operation.

Author’s Note 19.4 You may discover that some modes can be further abstracted into higher
level modes. Where this is the case, we establish a modal hierarchy and designate submodes within
a mode of operation. For simplicity, we assume that all use cases reside at the same level in the
Figure 19.2 illustration.
                                                       19.4 Understanding System Modes of Operation          195

 Pre-Mission Phase                    Mission Phase                       Post-Mission Phase


                                              UC #4
                                  Mode 3

                                      UC #12      UC #5



     Mode 2    UC #3

       UC #2                                                                          UC #14
                                      UC #6      UC #7
                                                                            UC #10
                                                                                             Mode 6
                                           Mode 4
                                                                                      UC #11


    Mode 1                                     UC #8

                                     UC #13
                                                       Mode 5
      UC #1                                                                      Where:
                                               UC #9

                                                                                             = Mode

                                                                                     UC #_   = Use Case ID

Figure 19.2 Use Cases Mapped to System Phases of Operation



Author’s Note 19.5 In some cases there are no speciﬁc guidelines for identifying modes of
operation. Independent teams of equally capable SE analysts and developers can then hypotheti-
cally design and produce a system or product that complies with a set of User capability and per-
formance requirements. Each team may nevertheless have variations of system modes of operation.
The point is to learn to recognize, understand, and establish a team-based consensus concerning
system phases and modes of operation. Then, together, the team can apply common sense in
abstracting operations into modes of operation.

Understanding the Modes of Operation Construct
Modes of operation can be depicted graphically or in tabular form. Since SEs communicate with
graphics, we will employ the basic construct shown in Figure 19.3.
     The construct is divided into pre-mission, mission, and postmission phases of operation to
facilitate a left to right control ﬂow. Although each of these phases of operation may consist of one
or more modes of operation, only one mode is shown in each phase for simplicity.
     Other than a general left-to-right cyclical workﬂow (pre-mission to mission to postmission),
modes of operation are both time dependent and time independent. Many systems establish Mission
Event Timelines (METs) that constrain: 1) the pre-mission-to-mission transition, 2) mission-to-
post-mission transition, and 3) post-mission-back to pre-mission transition during the system turn-
around. Within each mode of operation the MET event constraints may be further subdivided.

Understanding System Modal Transitions
The preceding discussion highlights the identiﬁcation of system modes of operation by phase and
the transition diagram used to modal interactions. Based on this understanding, we are now ready
to investigate the stimulus or triggering events and conditions that initiate transition from one mode
to another.
196     Chapter 19   System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation


Pre-Mission Phase                      Mission Phase                 Post-Mission Phase



                                             Mode 2
                     1
                                                                        2



       Mode 1
                                                                               Mode 3


                                                 3




Figure 19.3 Basic Phase and Modes of Operation Construct




     Note that each mode in Figure 19.3 is interconnected via curved lines with arrows that repre-
sent transitions from one mode to another. These transitions are initiated by pre-deﬁned triggering
events or conditions.
     Our discussion here focuses on the entity relationships of phases, modes, use cases, use case
scenarios, and required operational capabilities. The question is: What causes a system, product,
or service to transition from one phase, mode, and use case to another during a mission? This
brings us to a discussion of triggering events.

Triggering Event-Based Transitions. Most systems, as state machines, are designed to cycle
within a given mode of operation until some external stimulus such as an operator initiates a tran-
sition to a new mode of operation. The occurrence of the external stimulus is marked as a trigger-
ing event. As discussed earlier, the triggering event may be data or interrupt driven whereby:
      1. The system receives data from an external system.
      2. A system User enters/inputs data into the system in accordance with prescribed Standard
         Operating Practices and Procedures (SOPPs) or rules of engagement to transition to the
         next phase or mode of operation.
Data-driven triggering events may be synchronous (i.e., periodic) or asynchronous (i.e., random)
occurrences. When making the transition from one mode to another, the User may impose speciﬁc
time requirements and constraints.
     Figure 19.4 illustrates a simple, two-mode system that transitions from Mode 1 to Mode 2
when triggering Event 1 occurs and from Mode 2 back to Mode 1 on triggering Event 2. Trigger-
ing event transitions from Mode 1 to Mode 2 and back to Mode 1 require different sets of assump-
tions and conditions.
     The graphic depicts the bidirectional transition as two separate transitions, T1 and T2. For T1,
some external triggering Event t1 initiates the transition from Mode 1 to Mode 2; transition to Mode
2 is completed at Event t2. Some time later, another stimulus triggers Event t3, which initiates a
transition from Mode 2 to back to Mode 1; transition to Mode 1 is completed by Event t4.
                                                   19.4 Understanding System Modes of Operation   197

    External                     Time Constraints
Stimulus or Cue


    System                Event 1                        Event 2


                                              T1
                                          Transition

                 Mode 1                                       Mode 2
                                          Transition

                                              T2


                          Event 4                        Event 3



                                                                            External
                                                                        Stimulus or Cue
Figure 19.4 Modal Transition Loop Construct


Author’s Note 19.6 The system development team must establish the convention for transi-
tioning from one mode of operation to another. For example, do you establish an entry criterion
for the next mode or an exit criterion for the current mode? Typically a mode does not have both
entry and exit criteria. Why? The transition from the current mode, n, to the next mode, n + 1, is
a single transition. You do not specify the exit criterion for the current mode and then specify that
same condition as the entry criterion for the other side of the modal interface. In most applica-
tions, the best approach is to deﬁne only the exit criterion for the current mode of operation.

Describing Modal Transitions. Once you establish a conceptual view of the system phases and
modes, the next step is to characterize the triggering events and conditions for initiating the modal
transitions. One mechanism for accomplishing this is the mode transition table shown in Table 19.2.
     In general, Table 19.2 depicts how a system transitions from its current mode: leftmost column
to the next mode, which is the rightmost column. Interior columns deﬁne information relating to
the transition conditions. Each row in the table represents a single mode of operation and includes
a numerical transition ID. Transition information includes: identiﬁcation of the triggering source
or event, the type of event—asynchronous or synchronous—and any transition resource or time
constraints for completion of the transition. Consider the following example from Table 19.2.


 EXAMPLE 19.3
If the system is in the OFF Mode, placement of the Power Switch in the ON position (e.g.
ASYNChronous triggering event) initiates Transition ID T1. Transition from the OFF MODE to the POWER-
UP INITIALIZATION Mode is constrained to 30 seconds maximum. This leads to various power system sta-
bilization capability and performance requirements.
198    Chapter 19    System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

Table 19.2 Modal transition table example

Current             Triggering     Triggering       Event Type       Transition       Next Mode
Mode n                Event          Event                           Constraints        n+1
                                   Condition                          (seconds)

OFF                    T1         Power              ASYNC             30 Sec.     POWER-UP/
                                  Switched ON                                       INITIALIZATION
ACTIVATE               T2         I/O Device         ASYNC             3 Sec.      CONFIGURE
ACTIVATE               T6         I/O Device         ASYNC             3 Sec.      NORMAL
                                                                                    OPERATIONS
CONFIGURE              T4         I/O Device         ASYNC             3 Sec.      POWER-UP
                                                                                    INITIALIZATION
CONFIGURE              T3         I/O Device         ASYNC             3 Sec.      CALIBRATE
CONFIGURE              T5         I/O Device         ASYNC             3 Sec.      POWER-UP
                                                                                    INITIALIZATION
Etc.


Author’s Note 19.7 Note that the process of identifying system modes of operation and modal
transitions is highly iterative and evolves to maturity. Since subsequent technical decisions are
dependent on the system modes decisions, your role as an SE is to facilitate and expedite team
convergence.

Analyzing Mode Transitions. Modal transitions represent interfaces whereby control ﬂow is
passed from one mode to another. While the modes characterize SYSTEM level operations, there
may be instances whereby different PRODUCTs or SUBSYSTEMs provide the mode’s primary
capabilities. If separate system development teams are addressing the same modes, make sure that
both teams operate with the same set of assumptions and decisions. Otherwise, incompatibilities
will be created that will not surface until system integration and test. If left undiscovered and
untested, a potential hazard will exist until ﬁeld system failures occur, sometimes catastrophically.
     The challenge for SEs is to ensure compatibility between any two modes such that initializa-
tions and conditions established for one mode are in place for the successor mode processing. The
intent is to ensure that modal transitions are seamless. How do you ensure consistency? Document
the modes of operation, Mission Event Timeline (MET), and modal transitions in the system’s
ConOps or operational concept description (OCD) document.

Final Thoughts about Modal Transitions. In our discussion of system operations and
applications, we highlighted various types of system applications—single use, reusable, recyclable,
and so forth. Most reusable systems are characterized by cyclical operations. Cyclical systems have
a feedback loop that typically returns workﬂow or control ﬂow back to the pre-mission phase of
operation, either powered down or prepared for the next mission.
     Now consider a system such as the Space Shuttle’s External Tank (ET). From a mission per-
spective, the ET’s fuel resource is a consumable item and the ET’s entity is an expendable item.
At a speciﬁc phase of ﬂight and MET event, the ET is jettisoned from the Orbiter Vehicle, tumbles
back toward Earth, and burns up on reentry into the atmosphere.
     In the case of an expendable system such as the ET, one might expect the modes of operation
to be sequential without any loop backs to previous modes. However, from an SE design perspec-
tive, ET operations involve systems that may require cycling back to an initial mode due to
“scrubbed” launches. Therefore, expendable systems require modes of operation that ultimately
transition to a point of termination mode—such as REENTRY.
                                                   19.5 Understanding System States of Operation    199

Generalized Modes of Operation for Large, Complex Systems
The preceding discussions addressed a simple product example as a means of introducing and illus-
trating system modes of operation. When you investigate the modes of operation for large, complex,
multipurpose, reusable systems, additional factors must be considered.


 EXAMPLE 19.3
Example considerations include reconﬁguration, calibration, alignment, replenishment of expendables, and
consumables.

As in the case of the System Operations Model, we can deﬁne a template that can be used as an
initial starting point for identifying classes of modes.

Generalized Modes of Operation Template
Theoretically we can spend a lot of time analyzing and abstracting use cases into a set of modes
by phase of operation. Once you develop a number of systems, you soon discover that system
modes are similar across numerous systems and you begin to see common patterns emerge. This
leads to the question: Rather than reinvent via modal use case analysis the modes for every system,
WHY NOT explore the possibility of starting with a standard set of modes and tailoring them to
the speciﬁc system application? If this is true what are the common set of modes?
     Table 19.3 provides a listing of common phase-based modes of operation. Further analysis
reveals that these modes have interdependent relationships. We illustrate these relationships in
Figure 19.5. Is this template applicable to every system as a starting point? Generally, so. Recog-
nize this is simply a starting point, not an end result.


19.5 UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM STATES OF OPERATION

Scientiﬁcally, the term state refers to the form of physical matter, such as solid, liquid, or gas. In
this context a state relates to the structure—meaning a conﬁguration—and the level of activity
present within the structure. Therefore, a state:

                 Table 19.3 Generalized modes of operations by phase

                 Phase of Operation               Potential Mode of Operation

                 Pre-mission Phase*           • OFF mode (coincides with state)
                                              • POWER-UP /INITIALIZATION mode
                                              • CONFIGURE mode
                                              • CALIBRATE/ALIGNMENT mode
                                              • TRAINING mode
                                              • DEACTIVATE mode

                 Mission Phase*               • NORMAL operations mode
                                              • ABNORMAL operations mode

                 Postmission Phase*           • SAFING mode
                                              • ANALYSIS mode
                                              • MAINTENANCE mode

                 * Some systems may permit MAINTENANCE mode(s) in all three phases.
200        Chapter 19     System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

            Pre-Mission Phase                         Mission Phase          Post-Mission Phase
                                CALIBRATE/
                  4             ALIGHMENT
                                   Mode                          15              SAFING
                                                                                  Mode
       CONFIGURE
         Mode
                                                        NORMAL
                                  3                    OPERATIONS
                                             6            Mode                      16
                  2

              1             POWER-UP/                       10
   OFF
                          INITIALIZATION
   Mode                                                                 14
                                Mode
                                                                                   ANALYSIS
                                                 9       ABNORMAL                    Mode
                                                         OPERATIONS
                                      5
                                                            Mode
                      7
      18                         TRAINING
                                   Mode          11         12                      17
               DEACTIVATE
                  Mode                8
                                                     MAINTENANCE Mode
                           13
Figure 19.5 Fundamental System Phase and Modes of Operation Construct


      1. Should be observable, testable, measurable, predictable, and veriﬁable.
      2. May be STATIC or DYNAMIC—having an inﬁnite number of time-variant states.

Author’s Note 19.8 The term “inﬁnite states” refers to situations, such consumables, whereby
the amount of the resource remaining represents a physical state. Examples include ﬂuid levels,
brake pad wear, and tire wear. SE, as a discipline, builds on the physical conﬁguration theme to
deﬁne the STATE of a system, product, or service. Therefore, STATE encompasses the system’s phys-
ical architecture, such as interfaces and conﬁguration settings, and a range of acceptable tolerances
of physical components at a given instance in time or time period.

Operational versus Physical States
The concept of states of operation is often confusing because of two contexts: operational versus
physical. Let’s describe each of these.

Operational States. We describe the state of a system or product in simple terms such as ON
(operating) and OFF (nonoperating). Organizations often use the term state to represent the state
of readiness or operational readiness of the integrated set of system elements—such as
PERSONNEL or EQUIPMENT. By inference, this means that the integrated system and each
system element is:
      • Physically Conﬁgured Architectures and interfaces with a capability necessary and sufﬁ-
        cient to conduct speciﬁc types of mission(s).
      • In acceptable operating condition or health at a given point in time sufﬁcient to safely and
        reliably accomplish the mission and its objectives.
Operating states are generally identiﬁed by terms with “-ed” or “-ing” sufﬁxes. Consider the fol-
lowing examples:
                                                      19.5 Understanding System States of Operation       201


 EXAMPLE 19.4
The operational states of an aircraft (EQUIPMENT, crew, etc.) include parked, taxiing, taking off, ascend-
ing, cruising, descending, and landing.


 EXAMPLE 19.5
A lawnmower having an adequate supply of fuel and oil and tuned for efﬁcient operation can be described in
the following operational states:
1. STOPPED/READY In a state of readiness for the homeowner (the User) to mow the lawn or store the
   mower.
2. IDLING Engine operating with blade disengaged; mower standing still.
3. MOWING Engine operating with blade engaged; mower moving across lawn mowing grass.
4. STORAGE Stored with the fuel drained from the tank, etc.



 EXAMPLE 19.6
Consider an automobile operating on a ﬂat road surface. When the driver conﬁgures the vehicle in the DRIVE
(mode), the vehicle’s physical design responds to the driver’s inputs. In response, the vehicle conﬁgures its
subsystems to respond to the stimulus accordingly. The drive train—meaning the engine and transmission—
are designed to allow the driver to control the following vehicle operational states: PARKED, STOPPED,
ACCELERATING, CRUISING, DECELERATING, and BRAKING.

Physical Conﬁguration States. The OPERATIONAL state of a system or product may consist
a number of allowable PHYSICAL conﬁguration states. Building on our previous discussion,
consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 19.7
An automobile’s physical system design consists of several subsystems such as drive train, electrical, environ-
mental, fuel, and entertainment. Subject to some prerequisite conditions, the automobile’s design allows each
of these subsystems to operate simultaneously and independently. Thus, when the vehicle is in an operational
state—such as STOPPED or CRUISING—the driver can choose to:
1. Turn the sound system ON or OFF.
2. Turn the windshield wipers ON, OFF, or change their wiping interval.
3. Adjust the heating/cooling temperature level.
4. Adjust seat positions.
5. Apply force to or release the accelerator.
6. Apply braking.

Each of these physical adjustments ranges from ﬁnite to an inﬁnite number of physical conﬁgura-
tion states.
     The preceding example illustrates WHY a system’s operational state includes one or more
physical conﬁguration states. This leads to the question: What is the relationship between system
phases, modes, operational states, and physical conﬁguration states of operation? As illustrated in
Figure 19.6, we can deﬁne the entity relationships via a set of design rules listed in Table 19.4.
     To see how these entity relationships are applied, consider the following example:
202    Chapter 19    System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

                    Operational    Operational    Operational
                     Phases         Modes           States          Physical Configuration States

                                                                                      System


                                                                      Subsystem A              Subsystem n


                                                    State 101        · Allowable Actions    · Allowable Actions

                                    Mode 10
                                                                     · Prohibited Actions   · Prohibited Actions
                     Pre-
                    Mission                         State 10_        · Allowable Actions    · Allowable Actions

                    Phase
                                                                     · Prohibited Actions   · Prohibited Actions
                                    Mode 1_
                                                    State 201        · Allowable Actions    · Allowable Actions
                                                                     · Prohibited Actions   · Prohibited Actions
                                    Mode 20
  System            Mission                         State 20_        · Allowable Actions    · Allowable Actions
 Operations         Phase                                            · Prohibited Actions   · Prohibited Actions
                                    Mode 2_
                                                    State 301        · Allowable Actions    · Allowable Actions

                                    Mode 30
                                                                     · Prohibited Actions   · Prohibited Actions
                     Post-
                    Mission                         State 30_        · Allowable Actions    · Allowable Actions
                    Phase                                            · Prohibited Actions   · Prohibited Actions
                                    Mode 3_
                                                                                                              6
Figure 19.6 How Operational Phases, Modes, and States Inﬂuence Physical System Design and Vice Versa




Table 19.4 System operations, phases, modes, operational states, and physical conﬁguration states entity
relationship rules

ID              Entity                                 Entity Relationship Rules

19.1     System operations         System operations consists of at least three phases of operation.
19.2     Phases of operation       Each phase of operation consists of at least one or more use case-based
                                   modes of operation.
19.3     Modes of operation        Each mode of operation controls of at least one or more system
                                   operational states.
19.4     Operational states        Each system operational state is supported by at least one or more
                                   physical states of operation.
19.5     Physical conﬁguration     Each physical conﬁguration state of operation is characterized by at least
         states                    one or more allowable actions and at least one or more prohibited
                                   actions.




 EXAMPLE 19.8
The driver of an automobile places the vehicle in DRIVE (mode) and starts moving forward (operational state),
both allowable actions. As the vehicle moves forward (operational state) at a threshold speed, the vehicle’s
computer system automatically locks (allowable action) the doors to prevent passengers from inadvertently
opening the doors and falling from the vehicle (prohibited action).
                                                                                                                  19.6 Equating System Capabilities to Modes                     203

19.6 EQUATING SYSTEM CAPABILITIES TO MODES

The preceding discussions enable us to link system operations, phases, modes, and states. Ulti-
mately these linkages manifest themselves in the deliverable system that has allowable and pro-
hibited actions as documented in the User’s manual for safe and proper operating practices.
Allowable actions represent physical capabilities that the system provides subject to contract cost,
schedule, technology, and risk constraints.
     In our discussion of the system modes of operation, we considered the need to organize and
capture capabilities for a given system element, OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, and design con-
struction and constraints. For each type of capability, we described HOW operational capabilities
are:
       1. Represented by aggregations of integrated sets of requirements.
       2. Documented in the SPS.
       3. Allocated and ﬂowed down to multiple system levels of abstraction.
If we analyze the System Capabilities Matrix from a mode of operation perspective, the matrix
reveals combinations of system elements that must be integrated to provide the required operational
capabilities for each mode of operation. Each of these combinations of elements and interactions
are referred to as the system’s physical conﬁguration state or architecture. Thus each mode of oper-
ation is accomplished by architectural conﬁgurations of system elements. Let’s explore this point
further by using Figure 19.7.
     The icon in the upper left side of the chart symbolically represents the System Capabilities
Matrix. Note that an arrow links each of the horizontal rows of capabilities for each mode of oper-
ation to a speciﬁc Physical (Architecture) State. Thus, for the POWER OFF mode, there is a unique


                                                                                                               Physical (Architecture) States
    System Capabilities Matrix                                                                                · POWER-OFF Mode Configuration
                                                                                                              · POWER-UP INITIAL. Mode Configuration
                   PHASE       SYSTEM ELEMENTS                OP. ENVIRON.
                                                                                                              · CONFIGURE Mode Configuration
                                                                                  configuration
                                                                                  Architectural
                                                                                   Constraints
                                                                                   Construct.
                                                                                    Design &




                                                                                                              · CALIBRATE/ALIGN Mode Configuration
  OPíL. MODE
                                                                                                              · TRAINING Mode Configuration
               1

               17
                     2

                    18   19
                           3    5

                               21
                                    6

                                    22
                                         7

                                         23
                                              8

                                              24
                                                   9

                                                   25
                                                        10

                                                        26
                                                             11

                                                             27
                                                                  12

                                                                  28
                                                                       13

                                                                       29
                                                                             14

                                                                             30
                                                                                    15

                                                                                    31
                                                                                           16

                                                                                           32                 · NORMAL OPS Mode Configuration
                                                                                                              · ABNORMAL OPS Mode Configuration
                                                                                                                                                       Levied SPS Requirements




               33   34   35    37   38   39   40   41   42   43   44   45    46     47     48

               49

               65
                    50

                    66
                         51

                         67
                               53

                               69
                                    54

                                    70
                                         55

                                         71
                                              56

                                              72
                                                   57

                                                   73
                                                        58

                                                        74
                                                             59

                                                             75
                                                                  60

                                                                  76
                                                                       61

                                                                       77
                                                                             62

                                                                             78
                                                                                    63

                                                                                    79
                                                                                           64

                                                                                           80                 · SAFING Mode Configuration
               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96
                                                                                                              · ANALYSIS Mode Configuration
               81

               81
                    82

                    82
                         83

                         83
                               85

                               85
                                    86

                                    86
                                         87

                                         87
                                              88

                                              88
                                                   89

                                                   89
                                                        90

                                                        90
                                                             91

                                                             91
                                                                  92

                                                                  92
                                                                       93

                                                                       93
                                                                             94

                                                                             94
                                                                                    95

                                                                                    95
                                                                                           96

                                                                                           96                 · MAINTENANCE Mode Configuration
               81

               81
                    82

                    82
                         83

                         83
                               85

                               85
                                    86

                                    86
                                         87

                                         87
                                              88

                                              88
                                                   89

                                                   89
                                                        90

                                                        90
                                                             91

                                                             91
                                                                  92

                                                                  92
                                                                       93

                                                                       93
                                                                             94

                                                                             94
                                                                                    95

                                                                                    95
                                                                                           96

                                                                                           96
                                                                                                              · POWER-DOWN Mode Configuration
               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96




                                                                                                  · Design & Construction Constraints
                                                                                                  · Natural Environment Requirements
                                                                                                  · Induced Environment Requirements
 Required
                                                                                                  · Man-Made System Threats Requirements
                                                                                                  · Man-Made System Requirements
Operational                                                                                       · System Responses Requirements
Capabilities                                                                                      · Facility Requirements                System
                                                                                                  · Personnel Requirements            Performance
                                                                                                  · Equipment Requirements            Specification
                                                                                                                                         (SPS)
                                                                                                  · Procedural Data Requirements
                                                                                                  · Mission Resources Requirements
Figure 19.7 Synthesizing System Phase, Modes, & Physical Conﬁguration States
204    Chapter 19    System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

physical architecture required to support the mode. Similarly, for the NORMAL OPERATIONS
mode, each system entity within each level of abstraction has a unique architectural conﬁguration
that is integrated to form the Normal Operations mode conﬁguration.

Concept Synthesis
In summary, Figure 19.7 illustrates how required operational capabilities ﬂow from the System
Capabilities Matrix into the SPS and subsequently are allocated to and provided by the system
architecture physical states of operation for each mode of operation.


19.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish guiding principles
that apply to development of system phases, modes, and states of operation.

Principle 19.1 Every system phase of operation consists of at least two or more User-selectable
modes of operation.

Principle 19.2 Every system mode of operation represents a capability to accommodate one or
more use cases, each with one or more probable scenarios.

Principle 19.3 Each system mode of operation requires a pre-deﬁned set of condition-based trig-
gering event criteria for transitioning to another mode of operation.

Principle 19.4 Every system mode of operation requires at least one or more capability-based
operational states to accomplish its performance-based objective.

Principle 19.5 Each operational state is supported by at least one or more physical conﬁgura-
tion states of operation.

Principle 19.6 Each physical state of operation is characterized by at least one or more allow-
able actions and at least one or more prohibited actions.


19.8 SUMMARY

We have seen how system modes of operation are supported by the system element capabilities. Capabilities,
in turn, are documented as a set of capabilities with bounded levels of performance in the System Performance
Speciﬁcation (SPS), ﬂowed down and allocated to system elements levels of abstraction within the various
levels of its abstraction.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
3. For each of the following types of systems, identify the various states of operation.
   (a) Data communications
                                                                                                   Reference     205

   (b) Aircraft operations
   (c) Computer system states
   (d) Package delivery service
   (e) Organization operations
   (f) Building environmental control
   (g) Food service operations
   (h) Natural environment
   (i) Vehicle operations


REFERENCE

IEEE Std 610.12-1990, 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Electrical and
  Electronic Engineers (IEEE) New York, NY.
Chapter              20

      Modeling System and
      Support Operations

20.1 INTRODUCTION

Our previous discussion introduced the System Operations Model as the foundation for identify-
ing, organizing, and conceptualizing the capabilities of the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI). The
results of this exercise can be translated into System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) by the
Acquirer or employed by a System Developer to analyze the SPS.

Referral For more information about analyzing speciﬁcations, refer to the discussion on Speci-
ﬁcation Analysis practices in Chapter 28.

Once the SOI’s capabilities are identiﬁed, the key question is: WHO is accountable for perform-
ing those capabilities and achieving the associated level of performance? More speciﬁcally, are
they performed by the MISSION SYSTEM or SUPPORT SYSTEM or both?
     Once we understand HOW the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM interact, we can
allocate the interactions as constraints down to each entity’s system elements (PERSONNEL,
EQUIPMENT, etc.). Ultimately system element interactions will be ﬂowed down as constraints to
the EQUIPMENT and its supporting HARDWARE and SOFTWARE elements.
     This section explores the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM interactions. Our dis-
cussions employ a matrix mapping technique to illustrate how system operations within the system
Concept of Operations (ConOps) are allocated to pre-mission, mission, and postmission phases.
Since MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM operations are application dependent, we
introduce a method for modeling the operations. The discussion employs several examples to illus-
trate application of the method.

Author’s Note 20.1 The discussions in this chapter establish a base for understanding how the
system will be applied to perform missions and interactions. You will ﬁnd people who believe this
is a case of analysis paralysis. Granted, you have to strike a BALANCE between LEAF level analy-
sis details and being able to “see the forest.” Those who diminish the value of deﬁning system
interactions are also the ones who:
      1. Carry the information around in their heads.
      2. Fail to document anything.



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

206
                                                           20.2 Mission Phases and Operations   207

    3. Do not communicate their understanding to others.
    4. Complain that everyone else should know what they know about the system.
Remember, as an SE, one of your many roles is simpliﬁcation that leads to decision making and
immediate communications about those decisions. Complex system designs are simpliﬁed by
decomposition and analysis; documentation is the preferred method for capturing engineering deci-
sion making for communications.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
    1. What are some types of system applications?
    2. What are dedicated use operations?
    3. What are reusable/recyclable systems?
    4. What is means by a system’s control ﬂow?
    5. What is means by a system’s data ﬂow?
    6. How are control ﬂow and data ﬂow related?
    7. What are system operations cycles?


20.2 MISSION PHASES AND OPERATIONS

Our previous discussion of the generalized System Operations Model provided conceptual insights
into the system Concept of Operations (ConOps). The key question is: WHAT system elements are
accountable for providing the capabilities required to perform these operations?

Referral For more information about the generalized system operations model, refer to the dis-
cussion of System Concept of Operations in Chapter 18.

Recall the ConOps tasks depicted in Figures 18.1 and 18.2. We observed that the tasks can be
ORGANIZED into three types of system phases and operations: 1) pre-mission operations, 2)
mission operations, and 3) post-mission operations. Each of these mission phase operations includes
concurrent MISSION SYSTEM Operations (e.g., aircraft) and SUPPORT SYSTEM Operations (e.g.,
aircraft ground-based ﬂight controllers).
     To better see how the operational tasks in Figures 18.1 and 18.2 relate to the operations cate-
gories, let’s employ a matrix mapping technique that enables us to relate System Operations Model
operations to the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM and their respective phases of
operation.

Equating System Operations to MISSION SYSTEM and
SUPPORT SYSTEM
Figure 20.1 shows the numerous concurrent MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM oper-
ations that occur throughout the pre-mission, mission, and post-mission phases. Concurrent oper-
ations require synchronized, simultaneous interactions between the MISSION SYSTEM (e.g., the
Space Shuttle) and the SUPPORT SYSTEM (the ground/ﬂight controllers, communications
systems, etc.). Interoperability between the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM is crucial
to mission success. Recognize that Figure 20.1 is simply an analytical tool to understand which
operational tasks are performed by the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM by opera-
tional phase.
208       Chapter 20     Modeling System and Support Operations


                                                       System Phase of Operation
      #    = Reference to description
                                             Pre-Mission       Mission         Post Mission
           = Not Applicable                MISSION SUPPORT MISSION SUPPORT MISSION SUPPORT
                                           SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM
                                           Elements Elements Elements Elements Elements Elements
            Operational Task
3.0 Deploy System
4.0 Conduct Training Decision
5.0 Mission Notification Decision
6.0 Configure System for Mission
7.0 Assess Mission Readiness
9.0 Mission Go-Ahead Decision
10.0 Conduct System Mission
13.0 Assess Mission & System Performance
14.0 Deactivate System Decision
16.0 Replenish System Decision
17.0 Conduct System Training
18.0 Redeploy System Decision
20.0 Perform System Maintenance
21.0 Deactivate / Phase-Out System
                                                                                               1
Figure 20.1 Mapping Operational Tasks to MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM Elements as a Function of
System Phases of Operations


Modeling SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) Operations
Once the logical entity relationships are identiﬁed between system elements, the next step is to
understand how the relationship interactions occur. We can do this by modeling the system element
interactions.
     Figure 20.2 illustrates how a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) might operate relative its OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT. To keep the diagram simple, we depict Operation 1.0 (pre-mission oper-
ations) and Operation 3.0 (post-mission operations) as high-level abstractions. Operation 2.0 on
mission operations is expanded to a lower level of detail to depict Operation 2.1 on MISSION
SYSTEM operations and Operation 2.2 on SUPPORT SYSTEM operations.

Author’s Note 20.2 Based on the convention previously established, the OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT interfaces (arrows) that touch the Operation 2.0 dashed boundary represent interfaces
or interactions with all embedded operations—operations 2.1 and 2.2, operation 4.1 (HIGHER
ORDER SYSTEMS interfaces) with Operations 2.1 and 2.2, and so forth.

This diagram illustrates two key points concurrently:
      1. SOI operations cycle or loop sequentially from pre-mission to mission to post-mission
         phases of operation.
      2. The system interacts with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT while performing these
         operations.
Regarding the second point, during the SOI’s mission phase the MISSION SYSTEM and the
SUPPORT SYSTEM interact continuously via physical contact, informational data exchanges, or
visually as indicated by the interconnecting, bidirectional arrow. To better understand these two
key points, let’s investigate this ﬂow in detail.
                                                           20.2 Mission Phases and Operations   209

                                   Initial
                                    State
                                               SYSTEM OF
                                                INTEREST
                    1.0                           (SOI)          4.0
                     Pre-Mission Operations                      Operating Environment

                                                                                4.1
       2.0
       Mission Operations                                  1                      HIGHER
                                                                                   ORDER
                                                                                    System
               2.1                      2.2
                MISSION        3         SUPPORT
                SYSTEM                   SYSTEM
               Operations               Operations                        4.2
                                                           2                 PHYSICAL
                                                                           ENVIRONMENT
                                                                              Systems

                     3.0
                     Post-Mission Operations
                                                               Self-Interactions
                   Recycle
           4                         Final State


Figure 20.2 Concurrent Mission Operations


Operational Control Flow and Data Flow
When you analyze systems, two types of ﬂows occur: 1) control ﬂow or work ﬂow
and 2) data ﬂow. Control ﬂow or workﬂow enables us to understand how system operations are
sequenced. Data ﬂows enable us to understand how information—such as electrical, optical, or
mechanical—is transferred or exchanged between the system entities. To illustrate these points,
let’s investigate the control ﬂow and data ﬂow aspects further.
     Figure 20.3 depicts intersecting arrows on the left hand side and the SOI operations on the
right side. The vertical arrow symbolizes control ﬂow; the horizontal arrow symbolizes data ﬂow.
By convention, control ﬂow or workﬂow sequences down the page from one operation to another;
data ﬂow moves laterally back and forth across the page between system entities.
     By this convention, control ﬂow or work ﬂow:
    1. Proceeds from Initial/State to Operation 1.0, Pre-Mission Operations
    2. Proceeds to Operation 2.0, Mission Operations
    3. Proceeds to Operation 3.0, Post-Mission Operations
    4. Proceeds to Final/State.
Cyclical systems may employ a feedback loop as indicated by the line from the Final/State deci-
sion block back to START. From a data ﬂow perspective, information is exchanged between
Operation 2.1 (MISSION SYSTEM Operations) and Operation 2.2 (MISSION SUPPORT
SYSTEM Operations) throughout Operation 2.0 (Mission Operations).
     If we expand the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM operational interactions to
include all phases of operation—pre-mission, mission, and post-mission, Figure 20.4 results. Each
of the phases of operation is expanded into concurrent MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT
SYSTEM operations.
210      Chapter 20         Modeling System and Support Operations

                                                   Initial State


                                  1.0




                                                                                                            Control Flow
                                  Pre-Mission Operations


                 2.0 Mission
                 Operations


                      2.1                               2.2
                      MISSION                           SUPPORT
                      SYSTEM                            SYSTEM                                    Data Flow
                      Operations                        Operations




                                  3.0
                                  Post-Mission Operations


                                                       Final State


Figure 20.3 Concurrent Mission Operations Construct

                 Initial State
                                                                         Mission Complete
       1.0 Pre-Mission
                                                                         3.0 Post Mission
                                                                         Operations
          1.1                           1.2
           Pre-Mission                   Pre-Mission
              System                       Support                            3.1                          3.2
           Operations                    Operations                           Post-Mission                 Post-Mission
                                                                                  System                      Support
                                                                               Operations                   Operations



                                 1.3
Await Mission
                                                                   2.3
                Conduct Mission              Continue Mission                                                              Continue
                                                                                                  3.3
  2.0 Mission
  Operations                                                                                            Post-Mission
                                                                                                         Complete
          2.1                           2.2
                                                                                                  3.4
             Mission                       Mission                                                                  Continue
              System                       Support
                                                                                     Deactivate
           Operations                    Operations
                                                                                      System
                                                                                                         Final state

Figure 20.4 Concurrent Multi-Phase Operations


     Transitions between the pre-mission, mission, and post-mission phases are illustrated with deci-
sion control points: 1) Operation 1.3 (Conduct Mission?), 2) Operation 2.3 (Mission Complete?),
and 3) Operation 3.3 (Post-Mission Complete?) to represent cyclical loop back decision points. A
fourth decision control point, Operation 3.4 (Deactivate System?), is also included. If a system is
to continue active duty service, control ﬂow or workﬂow passes back to Inital/State.
                                                20.3 Understanding System Operational Applications       211

20.3 UNDERSTANDING SYSTEM
OPERATIONAL APPLICATIONS

When analyzing and designing systems, SEs need to understand how the User intends to operate
the system. Although every system exhibits areas of commonality at high levels of abstraction,
uniqueness occurs at lower levels based on User applications. These graphical illustrations repre-
sent only a few unique applications. You should analyze the types of products and services your
organization provides to identify how this discussion applies to your business domain.

Types of User Applications
User system applications and operations are categorized a number of ways. Examples include:
    1. General use or multipurpose applications.
    2. Dedicated use applications.
    3. Types of stakeholders.
To better illustrate these categories, let’s explore some examples.

General Use or Multipurpose System Applications. General use or multipurpose system
applications refer to a MISSION SYSTEM that is developed for general application across a broad
spectrum of User missions and mission applications. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 20.1
General use or multipurpose system applications include desktop computers, automobiles, tables, and chairs,
and so on. Figure 20.5 provides a high-level model of an automobile’s operations.

Some systems, such as aircraft and computers, may be multipurpose and capable of being conﬁg-
ured for speciﬁc mission applications. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 20.2
A military aircraft platform is designed with standardized mechanical, electrical, and communications inter-
faces to accommodate a variety of payloads that enable the aircraft system aircraft and pilot—to perform
reconnaissance, air-to-air, air-to-ground, damage assessment, among the missions.

Dedicated Use System Application. When a system is conﬁgured for a speciﬁc type of
mission, we refer to the conﬁguration as a dedicated use application. Consider the following
example:


 EXAMPLE 20.3
A commercial aircraft may be conﬁgured for dedicated use in transporting ticketed passengers on charter ﬂights
or have the seats removed for multi-use transportation of cargo.

    Based on this discussion and examples, some SOIs are multi-use systems capable of being con-
ﬁgured for dedicated use applications. The act of reconﬁguring or replenishing MISSION
RESOURCES for the system after each mission for new applications is referred to as cyclical
operations.
212    Chapter 20     Modeling System and Support Operations


                                         3
                 Driver
                  Driver                                               Initial state
                  (User)
                   (User)
            2

                                                 1.0                                   4
          OPERATING
                                                  Pre-Mission Operations
         ENVIRONMENT

             HigherOrder
            Higher                               2.0




                                                                                       Vehicle Cycle
                    Order
              Systems
               Systems
                                                       Mission Operations



           PhysicalSystems
          Physical   Systems                     3.0
           Environments
            Environments
            • •Human-Made
                Human-Made
                                                  Post-Mission Operations
                 • •Natural
                     Natural
                • Induced
                  • Induced
                                                         5
                                                                         Continue Mission


                                                                 Mission Complete
Where:
                                    6
       = User Flow
                                             Final State                     1      Car-Driver
                                                                                     System
Figure 20.5 Single User—Multi-Phase Operations



Single-Use or Reusable System Applications. In general, most systems are either single
use or reusable. Single-use applications are those such as missile systems that have a single concept-
to-disposal operational life cycle. Reusable or recyclable applications refer to cyclical systems that
are used repeatedly with a deﬁned life expectancy, such as the automobile. Consider the following
examples:


 EXAMPLE 20.4
Single-use system applications include the Space Shuttle’s External Tank (ET), missiles and munitions, com-
mercial product packaging, and ﬁreworks.



 EXAMPLE 20.5
Reusable applications include the Space Shuttle’s Orbiter Vehicle (OV) and Solid Rocket Boosters (SRBs),
automobiles, and disposable cameras (i.e., from the consumer’s perspective).

Reusable systems typically require some level of replenishment and/or refurbishment after each
application or operational cycle to restore it to a state of readiness for the next mission. Reusable
systems must be designed to include technical considerations such as reliability, availability, main-
tainability, and safety.
                                                               20.3 Understanding System Operational Applications         213

Types of Stakeholders. Types of Users inﬂuence system operational capabilities. Thus, a
MISSION SYSTEM may require capabilities to: 1) conduct actual missions and 2) serve as training
mechanisms when not conducting missions. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 20.6
Some systems such as aircraft used for training pilots may require capabilities to accommodate ﬂight instruc-
tors and controls for the instructors. Automobile driving schools employ special vehicles that include an
instructor brake.

Modeling Business Operations
The preceding discussions focused exclusively on a SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)—namely the
car and driver. Now, what about businesses that perform MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT
SYSTEM roles such as restaurants and car dealerships? From the business owner’s perspective,
the organization performs as a MISSION SYSTEM. In performing that role, the business must
provide systems, products, or services to customers in a SUPPORT SYSTEM role.
     We can model these dual MISSION SYSTEM/SUPPORT SYSTEM roles by the simple model
shown in Figure 20.6 via operations A through n. In the model a customer enters the business via
Operation A, progresses through the workﬂow, and exits the shopping and dining experience via
Operation n. From the business perspective operations A through n represent concurrent operations
such as clothing, sporting goods, and lawn and garden tools. As a recyclable system, daily busi-
ness operations begin with the Initial State and conclude with Final State representing termination
of the day’s operations. Figure 20.6 illustrates a basic business operations model such as a restau-
rant, automobile dealership, amusement park, or photo processing LAB.




                                                                         3     Initial State           1   SYSTEM OF
      HIGHER
       HIGHER
       ORDER
        ORDER                                                                                               INTEREST
      SYSTEMS                                             4
       SYSTEMS                                                1.0                                             (SOI)
                                                                   Pre-MissionOperations
                                                               1.0Pre-Mission  Operations

  OPERATING
 ENVIRONMENT                          2.0 Mission Operations

     2                                5                              6                                 7
                                          Operation                      Operation                         Operation
           Users
                                             A                              B                                “n”

                       Interactions                   Interactions                   Interactions

        External
          External
         Systems
          Systems                                                    8
    Environments
     Environments                                                                                   Continue Mission
     • •Human-Made
         Human-Made
         • Natural
           • Natural
         • Induced
           • Induced                                                          Mission Complete

                                                                                                           10
    Where:                                            9                                                           Final
                                                               3.0Post-Mission
                                                              3.0  Post-MissionOperations
                                                                                Operations                        State
              =User Flow

Figure 20.6 Modeling Cyclical Business Operations that Support Customer Workﬂow
214     Chapter 20   Modeling System and Support Operations

Points to Ponder
The preceding paragraphs provided examples of general use, multipurpose, and dedicated use
system applications; single-use, multi-use, and reusable applications; and types of stakeholders. As
an SE, you may not always be able to delineate these types of systems easily. Your job will be to
make sure that all stakeholders have a clear and concise understanding about the semantics of usage
and the applications. To illustrate how these terms are stakeholder dependent, consider the follow-
ing example.


 EXAMPLE 20.7
Disposable cameras illustrate a reusable MISSION SYSTEM that can be viewed from a number
of different perspectives. A customer purchases a disposable camera, makes pictures, returns the camera to a
processing laboratory, and receives a set of prints. From the customer’s perspective, the camera—or MISSION
SYSTEM—is:

    1. Single use with one operational cycle—namely one roll of ﬁlm limited by frame count.
    2. Disposable—namely returned to the processing laboratory.
From the processing laboratory perspective, the camera is viewed as:
      1. Dedicated use—namely designed for speciﬁc ﬁlm speed, aperture settings, etc.
      2. Recyclable—namely replenished with ﬁlm after each use for another consumer application,
         assuming that the camera meets a set of technical “ﬁtness for use” criteria.
Reusable or multi-use mission operations, maintenance, and training activities continue until a deac-
tivation order is received to transition the existing system from active duty service. When this
occurs, the existing system or capability is phased out over time, simultaneously with a phase-in
of a new system or capability. Typically, the new system operates in a concurrent, “shadow,” or
“pilot” mode to verify and validate interoperability with external systems until replacement of the
existing system or capability begins.

20.4 OPERATIONAL CYCLES WITHIN CYCLES

While businesses have daily cyclical operations at the enterprise level, entities within the business
may have iterative cycles. If you investigate the context of the MISSION SYSTEM’s application,
analysis reveals several embedded or nested operational cycles. Let’s explore an example of this
type.

City Bus Transportation System
Let’s assume we have a city bus transportation system that makes a loop around the city several
times a day, every day of the week, seven days a week. As part of each route, the bus makes sched-
uled stops at designated passengers pickup/drop-off points, passengers board, pay a token, ride to
their destination, and exit the vehicle.
     At the end of each route, the vehicle is returned to a maintenance facility for routine preven-
tive maintenance. If additional corrective maintenance is required, the vehicle is removed from
active service until the maintenance action is performed. During maintenance, an assessment deter-
mines if the vehicle is scheduled for replacement. If repairable, the vehicle is returned to active
service. If the vehicle is to be replaced, a new vehicle is acquired. The current vehicle remains in
                                                                                                                   General Exercises     215

                                                        Acquire New Vehicle
 Initial
  State                                                                                                                   Decommission
             AcquireNew
            Acquire  New                                                                                                     Vehicle
                                             1 Vehicle Life Cycle          Return Vehicle to Active Service
              Vehicle
               Vehicle
                                                                                             Maintenance
                                                    Initiate                           6        Cycle
                           Initiate Route         Route Cycles         New
                            Initiate Route                              New                                                     Final
                               Service                                Driver
                                Service                                Driver                                                   State
                                                                                                                Perform
                                                                                                                 Perform
             Driver
    3      Shift Cycle                                                           Return                        Corrective
                                                                                                                Corrective
                                                                                 Vehicle                      Maintenance
                                                                                                               Maintenance
                           Load/ Drop-Off              Exit Vehicle             to Active
                            Load/ Drop-Off
                             Passengers                                          Service       Corrective
                              Passengers
                                                                                              Maintenance
                                                                                               Required
                                                                                                               Removefrom
                                                                                                              Remove    from
      Route         4                                                                                         Active
      Stops
                             Travel to
                              Travel to
                                                  Continue                                                     ActiveService
                                                                                                                      Service
                             Next Stop
     Remain       Route       Next Stop
                  Cycle
                                                 Passenger
                                          5        Cycle                             Perform          • Routine Maintenance
                                                                                      Perform
                                                                                    Preventive        • Safety Inspections
                                                                                     Preventive
                                                                                   Maintenance        • Replenishment
                                                                                    Maintenance
                End of               Daily Schedule
                Route
                              2          Cycle
Driver
On-Shift                                                                          Return Vehicle
                                                                                    Return Vehicle
                                                                                  to Maintenance
                                      End of Driver’s Shift                        to Maintenance
                                                                                      Facility
                                                                                       Facility

Figure 20.7 Bushiness Operational Cycles within Cycles


active service until it is decommissioned, which may or may not be linked to the new vehicle enter-
ing service, depending on business needs.
     Figure 20.7 provides an operational model for this example to illustrate nested operational cycle
within cycles. The six operational cycles, which are assigned reference identiﬁers (1) through (6),
include: a Vehicle Life Cycle (1), a Daily Schedule Cycle (2), a Driver Shift Cycle (3), a Route Cycle
(4), a Passenger Cycle (5), and a Maintenance Cycle (6). Depending on the structure of the business
a seventh, Vehicle Fleet Cycle may be applicable. Such is the case with aircraft, delivery vehicles,
rental cars, police cars, and so forth. While there are numerous ways of creating this graphic, the
primary message here is LEARN to RECOGNIZE embedded operational cycles that include the
integration of the MISSION SYSTEM with the SUPPORT SYSTEM during various cycles.

20.5 SUMMARY

The preceding discussions describe high-level, conceptual views of concurrent, dedicated use, recyclable
systems and how the User intends to use the MISSION SYSTEM. The operations represent, and can be trans-
lated into, explicit system-level capabilities and performance requirements. These requirements will ultimately
be allocated to the system elements (EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, FACILITIES, etc.). However, require-
ments allocations often require support from modeling and simulation of operations.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions on that system.
216    Chapter 20   Modeling System and Support Operations

3. NASA’s Space Shuttle employs a launch conﬁguration that integrates the Orbiter Vehicle (OV), Solid
   Rocket Boosters (SRBs), and External Tank (ET). During the launch the SRBs are jettisoned. Later the ET
   is jettisoned and the Orbiter Vehicle continues in ﬂight. If you were to model the system from the SRB
   or ET perspective, using Figure 20.5 as a reference, how would you depict the time-based control ﬂow
   operations?
4. Develop a multi-phase operations model that includes control ﬂow and data ﬂow operations for the fol-
   lowing systems. Use Figure 20.6 as a reference construct.
   (a) Automobile dealership and customers.
   (b) Retail business such as a movie theatre, fast food restaurant, or baseball stadium.
   (c) K-12 public school.
5. What embedded cyclical operations occur in each of the systems in exercise 4.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Identify a contract program within your organization, and research how they operationally delineate
   MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM operations for their deliverable system, product, or service.
   Report your ﬁndings, observations, and results.
Chapter              21

     System Operational Capability
     Derivation and Allocation

21.1 INTRODUCTION

When the system phases and modes of operation are deﬁned, SEs must answer several key
questions:
     1. What operational capabilities are required for each phase and mode of operation that the
        MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM must provide and perform?
     2. How are those capabilities allocated and ﬂowed down to system entities—namely the
        PRODUCT and SUBSYSTEM—at various levels of abstraction?
Our discussion in this section introduces and explores an analytical approach for deriving, allocat-
ing, and ﬂowing down system capabilities. The approach is presented from an instructional per-
spective to explain the basic concept. Actual implementation can be achieved with automated tools
or other methods tailored to your application.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     • What is system operational capability?
     • What are required operational capabilities (ROCs)?
     • What is an Operational Capability Matrix?
     • What is the relationship between modes of operation and system capabilities?

Deﬁnition of Key Terms
     • Design and Construction Constraints User or Acquirer constraints such as size, weight,
       color, safety, material properties, training, and security imposed on all or speciﬁc elements
       of the deliverable system or product.
     • System Capabilities Matrix A matrix method that enables the identiﬁcation of required
       operational capabilities by analytical investigation of operations and interactions for each
       mode of operation and MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM elements, OPERAT-
       ING ENVIRONMENT elements, and design and construction constraints. The matrix also
       identiﬁes the unique architectural conﬁguration required to support the mode of operation.
     • System Operational Capability A use case based operation or task that performs an action
       to produce a speciﬁc performance-based outcome. Note that a system capability represents

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                217
218        Chapter 21        System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation

          the potential to perform an action. In contrast, an operational capability may integrate several
          physical system capabilities to produce a speciﬁc outcome to achieve a mission objective.


21.2 CONCEPT OVERVIEW

To better understand how system operational capability derivation and allocation are performed,
let’s establish the relationships between the organizational mission and the system. Figure 21.1 pro-
vides a graphical framework.
      Organizational Roles and Mission Objectives (1) are accomplished by MISSION SYSTEM
Operations (3) synchronized with a Mission Event Timeline (MET) (2). MISSION SYSTEM oper-
ations (3) interact with the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT system elements (4). During these inter-
actions MISSION SYSTEM Operations (3) consist of Phases of Operation (5), each of which may
consist of several Modes of Operation (6).
      For the MISSION SYSTEM to perform its operations (3), it must provide System Operational
Capabilities (7). Each of these capabilities is translated into System Performance Requirements (8)
that are allocated to applicable MISSION SYSTEM elements (9) (PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT,
etc.). The system’s stakeholders may also identify Design and Construction Constraints (10) that
are levied on one or more System Performance Requirements (8).
      System Performance Requirements (8), allocated to the MISSION SYSTEM elements (9), are
used to formulate and select the MISSION SYSTEM and the System Architectural Conﬁguration(s)
(11) of the system element level. System Performance Requirements (8) are then allocated to each
selected System Architectural Conﬁguration (11). Each System Architectural Conﬁguration (11) is
veriﬁed against the System Performance Requirements (8) to formally demonstrate that the require-
ments have been satisﬁed.
      Based on this framework, let’s begin with our ﬁrst discussion topic, identifying and deriving
system operational capabilities.


      1
          Organizational
          Roles & Mission                                Partitioned     5                                      6
                                  Accomplished
            Objectives                by
                                                            into             Phases of                                  Modes of
                                                                             Operation         Consists of              Operation
      2                       Constrained
                                  by
                                                         3
          Mission Event                     MISSION
            Timeline                        SYSTEM                                   Supported by
                                            Operations
                               Interacts                                7                          Supported by
  Bounded by                     with                                          System
                                                                             Operational
                4                                    Supported by
                                                                             Capabilities
                     OPERATING
                    ENVIRONMENT                                                                              Provided
                                                                                                                                    Supported
                    System Elements                                   Bounded by                                by
                                                                                                                                       By
                                                                                              8                     9
                                                    Bounded by
                                                                               System                                   MISSION
                                                                            Performance                                 SYSTEM
                                                                                                    Allocated
                     10                                                     Requirements                to
                                                                                                                        Elements
                           Design &                          Levied
                          Construction                         on
                                                                                                                                Consists
                          Constraints                                                                                             of
                                                                                                             11
                                                                                            Allocated to
                                                                                                                        System
                                                                                             Levied on
                                                                                                                     Architectural
                                                                                                                    Configuration(s)

Figure 21.1 System Operational Capability Derivation & Allocation
                                                               21.3 Required Operational Capabilities   219

21.3 REQUIRED OPERATIONAL CAPABILITIES

Every use case represents an application of the system, product, or service employed by the End
User to conduct organizational missions, operations, or tasks. Therefore, each use case represents
a required operational capability (ROC).
     Use cases often express very broad, general statements of User expectations. These expecta-
tions require clariﬁcation via analytical WHAT IF scenarios. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 21.1
Suppose a use case characterizes a required operational capability for a DVD player to respond to user com-
mands when a DVD is inserted. WHAT IF the user inserts a single-sided DVD upside down?

As illustrated earlier in Figure 17.1, use case scenarios represent HOW the User might apply, use,
misuse, or abuse the system, product, or service. As such, a use case scenario may motivate System
Developers to specify lower level required operational capabilities mandating:
      1. A warning or caution to the User about an unacceptable, dangerous, or hazardous action,
         safety violation, or condition and request a decision.
      2. Automatical correction of the problem, if practical.

Therefore, the system design must be sufﬁciently robust to respond to the action or condition
without failure or degraded performance. This is why we organize this information and relation-
ships as illustrated in Figure 21.2. Note how each cell representing a logical physical relationship
has its own unique identiﬁer. Ultimately, the required operational capabilities will be translated into
singular SPS or item development speciﬁcation (IDS) requirements statements.


  Where:                                                System Phases of Operation
  #   = Reference to description              Pre-Mission             Mission         Post Mission
      = Not Applicable
                                           MISSION SUPPORT MISSION SUPPORT MISSION SUPPORT
                                           SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM SYSTEM
      MISSION SYSTEM Operations            Elements Elements Elements Elements Elements Elements
3.0 Deploy System                             1         2        3              4     5          6
4.0 Conduct Training Decision                 7         8        9          10       11          12
5.0 Mission Notification Decision             13       14        15         16       17          18
6.0 Configure System for Mission              19       20        21         22       23          24
7.0 Assess Mission Readiness                  25       26        27         28       29          30

9.0 Mission Go-Ahead Decision                 31       32        33         34       35          36

10.0 Conduct System Mission                   37       38        39         40       41          42

13.0 Assess Mission & System Performance      43       44        45         46       47          48

14.0 Deactivate System Decision               49       50        51         52       53          54

16.0 Replenish System Decision                55       56        57         58       59          60

17.0 Conduct System Training                  61       62        63         64       65          66

18.0 Redeploy System Decision                 67       68        69         70       71          72

20.0 Perform System Maintenance               73       74        75         76       77          78

21.0 Deactivate / Phase-Out System            79       80        81         82       83          84 2

Figure 21.2 Operational Tasks to Phases Mapping Representing Required Operational Capabilities
220     Chapter 21   System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation

21.4 IDENTIFYING AND DERIVING SYSTEM
OPERATIONAL CAPABILITIES

Expanding on our discussion in Chapter 19, System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation, we
need to answer a key question: WHAT are the required operational capabilities for each phase and
mode of operation that the MISSION SYSTEM and the SUPPORT SYSTEM must provide to
support? We can answer this question by creating a System Capability Matrix such as the one
shown in Figure 21.2. Observe that the operations names shown in the left column are based on
those deﬁned earlier in our System Operations Model discussion of Figure 18.1.
     The System Capability Matrix maps system operations to phases of operation. The phases of
operation are subdivided into pre-mission, mission, and post-mission phases for the SYSTEM OF
INTEREST (SOI). Each SOI phase is further subdivided into MISSION SYSTEM elements and
SUPPORT SYSTEM elements.
     Each intersecting cell in the matrix contains a unique reference identiﬁer (ID). This identiﬁer
links the matrix cell to an explicit description that scopes and describes what capabilities are pro-
vided. Thus, for Operation 3.0 Deploy System, (1) represents the pre-mission capabilities required
of the MISSION SYSTEM and (2) represents the capabilities required of the SUPPORT SYSTEM.
     When matrix mapping is employed, we may not know explicitly WHAT each system element’s
contribution and relationship are to the overall performance of the operational task. However, by
deductive reasoning and experience it is known that an entity or associative relationship exists. The
intent, as indicated by the reference IDs, is to simply acknowledge that each element has some level
of contribution and relationship of accountability.
     To facilitate the deﬁnition of these acknowledgments, ID numbers serve as symbolic notations
of the reference descriptions. These descriptions may begin informally and evolve to a formaliza-
tion. Remember, the ID entries describe system operations that require operational capabilities and
are translated into one or more speciﬁcation requirements. The matrix shown in Figure 21.2 serves
as a valuable system analysis tool to indicate HOW Operations 3.0 through 21.0—namely Figure
18.1 of the System Operations Model—are supported by capabilities and performance requirements
associated with each MISSION SYSTEM or SUPPORT SYSTEM during each phase of operation.

Author’s Note 21.1 When you create a matrix such as Figure 21.2, the contents can become
very busy, making it difﬁcult to discern which tasks are applicable. For illustrative purposes, let’s
assume we have a system where some operational tasks are not applicable to speciﬁc system
elements.
    We could arbitrarily leave the cell empty, as do most people. The problem is that reviewers
may not know if the SE or analyst considered the applicability and intentionally left the cell blank,
ignored it, or simply overlooked it. Therefore, AVOID deleting the ID. Rather, note in the ID’s
description:

      1. If the operation is applicable to the MISSION SYSTEM or SUPPORT SYSTEM.
      2. The rationale as to why the operation is not applicable. Later, if it is determined that the
         operation is applicable, the “placeholder” allows you to add the capability and avoid
         having to renumber the document test.

Disciplined SE practices require that you at least acknowledge the consideration. One method to
accomplish this is to avoid deleting the ID and shade the background in dark gray as shown in
Figure 21.2. This way tasks that are not applicable (N/A) are explicitly identiﬁed.
     Additionally, if the reviewer wants to know WHY the task is not applicable, they can use the
reference ID to link to the rationale for the decision. There will often be instances where either
                                       21.5 Allocating and Flowing Down System Requirements     221

requirements change or document reviewers determine that this decision did not include a key con-
sideration of the other factors. Thus, the act of leaving the ID intact in a description enables the
document to be easily updated, as required, and the change incorporated into the linked documen-
tation without the IDs having to be renumbered.

System Operations Dictionary
Mapping matrices such as Figure 21.2 should be supported by a System Operations Dictionary that
provides a brief description of how each task is accomplished by the MISSION SYSTEM and/or
SUPPORT SYSTEM. Dictionary descriptions of the matrix serve to bound the derivation of the
MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM capabilities and performance requirements.

Concluding Point
The casual reader may remark that it is impractical to document all 84 IDs shown in Figure 21.2.
Yet, in completing a system development effort, you will unknowingly spend numerous hours on
each of these 84 items. Those who view this matrix as impractical are the same people who often
have to explain to program management during the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE)
Phase WHY certain items have been inadvertently overlooked or ignored during the design phase.
For those programs, SITE requires two to three times the nominally required time. Perform your
analyses “up front” and make sure the 84 items in the ﬁgure are documented, scoped, and well
communicated. The matrix approach simply provides an analytical structure to improve your
chances of success.

21.5 ALLOCATING AND FLOWING DOWN
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS

The preceding discussion provides a method for identifying system operational capabilities required
for each SYSTEM level mode of operation. The capabilities represent WHAT is required to accom-
plish speciﬁc objectives associated with each mode of operation. Therefore, the MISSION
SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM must be capable of being conﬁgured with capabilities and
levels of performance to support each of these modes of operation. To better understand HOW these
capabilities are deﬁned, refer to Figure 21.3.

MISSION SYSTEM Modal Operations and Interactions
You should recognize the key elements of Figure 21.3 from an earlier description of Figure 21.2.
In the earlier ﬁgure we mapped modes of operation to the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT
SYSTEM for each of the three phases of operation—pre-mission, mission, and postmission. Recall
that the IDs enable us to link system capabilities to descriptions deﬁned in a System Operations
Dictionary.
     Figure 21.3, as an expansion of Figure 21.2, enables us to an answer to some basic questions.
For each of a system’s modes of operations (left column):
    1. WHICH phase(s) of operation does the mode support?
    2. WHAT operations and interactions occur with each of the MISSION SYSTEM and OPER-
       ATING ENVIRONMENT system elements?
    3. WHAT are the system design and construction constraints that limit these operations and
       interactions?
    4. WHAT architectural conﬁguration satisﬁes items 1, 2, and 3 above?
222      Chapter 21         System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation

Where:
                                    PHASE                                 SYSTEM ELEMENTS                                                          OP. ENVIRON.




                                                                                                                                                                                           Design & Construct.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Configuration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Architectural
 X = Reference to Required




                                                                                                                                                                                               Constraints
     Operational Capabilities                                                                                                                     Man-Made




                                                         Post-Mission
                                                                                                                                                   Systems




                                 Pre-Mission




                                                                                                 Equipment
                                                                                    Procedural
    = Scenario-Based




                                                                                                                                      Responses
                                                                        Resources




                                                                                                             Personnel

                                                                                                                         Facilities



                                                                                                                                                  Friendly
      Operational Capabilities




                                                                                                                                                                       Induced
                                                                        Mission
                                               Mission




                                                                                                                                                             Threats



                                                                                                                                                                                 Natural
                                                                                                                                      System




                                                                                                                                                             System
                                                                                    Data




                                                                                                                                                  I/Fs
  Operational Mode
  POWER-OFF                       1             2          3               4          5           6             7           8           9           10        11       12        13           14                   15

  POWER-UP INITIAL.              16            17        18               19         20          21           22          23           24           25        26       27        28           29                   30

  CONFIGURE                      31            32        33               34         35          36           37          38           39           40        41       42        43           44                   45

  CALIBRATE/ALIGN                46            47        48               49         50          51           52          53           54           55        56       57        58           59                   60

  TRAINING                       61            62        63               64         65          66           67          68           69           70        71       72        73           74                   75

  NORMAL OPS                     76            77        78               79         80          81           82          83           84           85        86       87        88           89                   90

  ABNORMAL OPS                   91            92        93               94         95          96           97          98           99          100        101      102       103        104                   105

  SAFING                         106           107       108             109        110          111         112         113           114         115        116      117       118        119                   120

  ANALYSIS                       121           122       123             124        125          126         127         128           129         130        131      132       133        134                   135

  MAINTENANCE                    136           137       138             139        140          141         142         143           144         145        146      147       148        149                   150

  POWER-DOWN                     151           152       153             154        155          156         157         158           159         160        161      162       163        164                   1653

Figure 21.3 System Operational Capability Identiﬁcation


From Figure 21.3, similar charts are developed for the PRODUCT level of abstraction. The process
continues to lower levels until all aspects of the system design solution are deﬁned. For example,
the PRODUCT’s unique EQUIPMENT element operations and interactions ultimately are allo-
cated to its HARDWARE and SOFTWARE elements. Consider the following example:


  EXAMPLE 21.2
For the NORMAL OPERATIONS mode, Capability (81) describes operational capabilities required for the
EQUIPMENT element. Capability (86) identiﬁes operational and system capabilities to be established for the
MISSION SYSTEM to avoid, camouﬂage, conceal, or defend itself from external system threats. Capability
(87) identiﬁes any system level operations required for the system to perform in the prescribed INDUCED
ENVIRONMENT.

Consider the next example:


  EXAMPLE 21.3
The Space Shuttle conducts space-based missions in an INDUCED ENVIRONMENT that includes space
debris. So, if you wanted to read about system capabilities required to cope with and operate in the INDUCED
ENVIRONMENT, Capability (87) should provide the answer. If not, it needs to be deﬁned.


One of the unique attributes of Figure 21.3 is that the IDs in any column can be “collected” for a
given MISSION SYSTEM element or OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. This collection of opera-
tions and interactions can then be translated into requirements documented in speciﬁc sections of
the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
                                         21.5 Allocating and Flowing Down System Requirements        223

The Importance of the Operational Capability Matrix
On the surface, Figure 21.3 appears to be just another matrix for mapping modes of operation to
the system elements, OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, and Design and Construction Constraints to
satisfy analytical curiosity. The mapping serves three very important purposes:
    1. It provides a methodical means for organizing and covering all relevant aspects of a system
       design solution.
    2. It provides a mechanism for SEs to “collect” system operational capability needs on an
       attribute basis by column for all phases and modes of operation.
    3. Once requirements are documented, the “collection” process can be reversed to trace back
       to the source of a requirement.
Recall from our earlier discussion that the system levels of abstraction—such as SYSTEM,
PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, and SUBASSEMBLY—consist of one or more physical
instances of items referred to as conﬁguration items (CIs), commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS), and
nondevelopmental items (NDIs). As we derive requirements from the operational capabilities iden-
tiﬁed in Figure 21.3, these requirements are allocated and ﬂowed down to subsequent levels by
using similar mapping techniques at each level.


 EXAMPLE 21.4
EQUIPMENT element capabilities and performance identiﬁed at the SYSTEM level are derived, allocated,
and ﬂowed down to subsequent PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, and PART levels.
Each physical component of the system, regardless of level of abstraction, must support one or more modes
of operation discussed here.


 EXAMPLE 21.5
A potentiometer—which is an adjustable resistance device—installed on a printed circuit board may only
support the CALIBRATE mode.

Final Thoughts
With time, a system analyst becomes proﬁcient in being able to mentally assimilate the informa-
tion and synthesize the Operational Capability Matrix. Although SEs may not realize it, we sub-
consciously assimilate and synthesize this information all the time.
     For those SEs who can assimilate this information, you have a challenge. Although you may be
recognized by management and your peers for this ability, the challenge is communicating and
explaining, via matrices such as the one illustrated, WHAT YOU KNOW to others on the develop-
ment team so that the team beneﬁts.

Author’s Note 21.2 When working in an Integrated Product Team (IPT) and other environ-
ments, prepare yourself to be challenged by other disciplines concerning the utility of this approach.
Many view the matrix as analytical bureaucracy. This may require a training session for the team.

Organizational management has a tendency to recognize “hero” personalities who have this level
of ability. However, program and system development success requires more than philosophical
wizards walking about with a lot of information in their heads; the information must be documented,
communicated, and reduced to practice for the personnel.
224        Chapter 21                        System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation

     Organizations and programs that are built around “heroes” often get into trouble during the
System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) Phase and focus blame on the other personnel. The
blaming rationale is that the others should have known WHAT the so-called hero knew but failed
to properly communicate or explain. From the hero’s perspective, the idea was so intuitively obvious
that no explanation was required.


 EXAMPLE 21.6
During a dry run for a Critical Design Review (CDR), which is the ﬁnal technical design review, one of the
presenters describes HOW they anticipated testing a particular operational requirement related to software.
Immediately one of the software SEs asks, “Where did that requirement come from? It isn’t documented in
the speciﬁcation.” The presenter replies, “I thought it was so obvious it didn’t have to be documented.” No
one, should be immune from employing sound engineering practices including documentation coordination,
and communication.


21.6 COLLECTING SYSTEM ELEMENT REQUIREMENTS

Recall the mapping of system operational modes to: phases of operation, system elements, the
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, and Design Construction Constraints in Figure 21.3. We are now
ready to begin summarizing system capability and performance requirements. To facilitate our
discussion, these modes of operation are diagramed in Figure 21.4. In this ﬁgure the Operational
Capability Matrix is represented as a small graphic in the upper left-hand corner. Cells within
the matrix link to a description of capabilities and performance required to support each mode of
operation.



               System Capabilities Matrix
                   PHASE       SYSTEM ELEMENTS                OP. ENVIRON.
                                                                                  configuration
                                                                                  Architectural
                                                                                   Constraints
                                                                                   Construct.
                                                                                    Design &




  OP’L. MODE                                                                                                  System                 System
               1

               17
                     2

                    18   19
                           3    5

                               21
                                    6

                                    22
                                         7

                                         23
                                              8

                                              24
                                                   9

                                                   25
                                                        10

                                                        26
                                                             11

                                                             27
                                                                  12

                                                                  28
                                                                       13

                                                                       29
                                                                             14

                                                                             30
                                                                                    15

                                                                                    31
                                                                                          16

                                                                                          32
                                                                                                           Performance            Requirements
               33   34   35    37   38   39   40   41   42   43   44   45    46     47    48               Specification           Document
               49   50   51    53   54   55   56   57   58   59   60   61    62     63    64                  (SPS)                  (SRD)
               65   66   67    69   70   71   72   73   74   75   76   77    78     79    80

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95    96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95    96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95    96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95    96             Contract Element          Formal Solicitation
               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95    96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95    96




                                                                                                  · Design & Construction Constraint Requirements
                                                                                                  · Natural Environment Requirements
                                                                                                  · Induced Environment Requirements
 Required                                                                                         · OP. EV. Man-Made Threats Requirements
Operational
                                                                                                  · OP. ENV. Man-Made System Requirements
                                                                                                  · System Responses Requirements
Capabilities                                                                                      · Facility Requirements
                                                                                                  · Personnel Requirements
                                                                                                  · Equipment Requirements
                                                                                                  · Procedural Data Requirements
                                                                                                  · Mission Resources Requirements
Figure 21.4 Collecting System Operational Capability Requirements for Speciﬁcation Development
                                                                                                     21.6 Collecting System Element Requirements                               225

                    • Vertical columns represent the collection of required operational capabilities for the
                      MISSION SYSTEM elements, OPERATING ENVIRONMENT elements, Design and Con-
                      struction Constraints, etc.
                    • The operational capabilities of the vertical columns, denoted by the black-ﬁlled circles, are
                      “collected” and translated into speciﬁc types of requirements as shown in the lower center
                      of the graphic.
Acquirer’s translate, organize, and incorporate these required operational capabilities into a System
Requirements Document (SRD) used for formal solicitation of proposals. Subsequently, at contract
award, the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) becomes the basis for System Developers to
reverse the process by extracting the various requirements shown in the bottom center of the
graphic.

System Element Requirements Allocations and Flow Down
As the System Developer analyses each SPS requirement, the question is: WHAT system elements—
such as EQUIPMENT or PERSONNEL—are accountable for providing WHAT required opera-
tional capabilities and levels of performance to satisfy the SPS requirement? We answer this
question via a process referred to as requirements allocation and ﬂow down.
    When we allocate the Level 0 system requirements identiﬁed in Figure 21.4 to the Level 1
MISSION SYSTEM or SUPPORT SYSTEM, we do so as illustrated in Figure 21.5. Then,
MISSION SYSTEM or SUPPORT SYSTEM requirements are allocated and ﬂowed down to the
respective system elements.

EQUIPMENT System Element Allocations
For those requirements allocated to the EQUIPMENT element and documented in the SPS, the
question becomes: WHAT system entities—such as PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUB-



                                                                        LEVEL 0
                                                                      User’s System                                        Operational
                                                                                                                           Capabilities
                                                                                                                             Matrix
                                   Down
                              FlowDown
                 Allocation&&Flow

                                          Requirements Allocation




                                                                                                                                                            Highly Iterative




                                                                             Level 1                                            Level 1
                                                                                                      Reqmts. Allocation




                                                                        MISSION SYSTEM                                     SUPPORT SYSTEM
    RequirementsAllocation
   Requirements




                                                                               · PERSONNEL                                            · PERSONNEL
                                                                     Level 2   · EQUIPMENT             Level 2                        · EQUIPMENT
                                                                     System    · MISSION RESOURCES     System                         · MISSION RESOURCES
                                                                    Elements   · PROCEDURAL DATA                                      · PROCEDURAL DATA
                                                                               · SYSTEM RESPONSES     Elements                        · FACILITIES
                                                                                                                                      · SYSTEM RESPONSES
Figure 21.5 Multi-Level System Operational Capability Allocations
226        Chapter 21                         System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation

               System Capabilities Matrix
                   PHASE       SYSTEM ELEMENTS                OP. ENVIRON.




                                                                                  configuration
                                                                                  Architectural
                                                                                   Constraints
                                                                                   Construct.
                                                                                    Design &
                                                                                                                                                   PRODUCT
  OP’L. MODE
                                                                                                              System                                Reqmts.
               1     2     3    5   6    7    8    9    10   11   12   13    14     15     16

               17   18   19    21   22   23   24   25   26   27   28   29    30     31     32              Performance                             Allocations
               33   34   35    37   38   39   40   41   42   43   44   45    46     47     48
                                                                                                           Specification




                                                                                                                                                   PRODUCT #1
               49   50   51    53   54   55   56   57   58   59   60   61    62     63     64




                                                                                                                                                                PRODUCT #2

                                                                                                                                                                             PRODUCT #3
               65   66   67    69   70   71   72   73   74   75   76   77    78     79     80
                                                                                                              (SPS)
               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96

               81   82   83    85   86   87   88   89   90   91   92   93    94     95     96




                                                                                                  ·Design & Construction Constraint Requirements      1          2           3
                                                                                                  ·NATURAL Environment Element Requirements           4          5           6
                                                                                                  ·INDUCED Environment Element Requirements           7          8           9
 Required                                                                                         ·OP. ENV. Man-Made System Threats Reqmts.         10          11           12
Operational                                                                                       ·OP. ENV. Man-Made System Interface Reqmts.       13          14           15

Capabilities                                                                                      ·SYSTEM RESPONSES Requirements                    16          17           18
                                                                                                  ·FACILITY Element Requirements                    19          20           21
                                                                                                  ·PERSONNEL Element Requirements                   22          23           24
                                                                                                  ·EQUIPMENT Element Requirements                   25          26           27
                                                                                                  ·PROCEDURAL DATA Element Requirements             28          29           30
                                                                                                  ·MISSION RESOURCES Element Requirements           31          32           33

    X = Reference to Required Operational Capability Description

Figure 21.6 System Requirements Allocations to Product Level


ASSEMBLY, and PART levels—are accountable for providing the EQUIPMENT level operational
capabilities and levels of performance to satisfy each SPS requirement? We answer this question
by expanding each set of requirements allocations to lower levels. Figure 21.6 illustrates our
discussion.
     Each requirement allocated to the EQUIPMENT element is allocated to PRODUCT 1,
PRODUCT 2, and PRODUCT 3 as shown at the right side of the graphic. Each capability number
represents the various types of SPS requirements allocated to PRODUCT 1, PRODUCT 2, and
PRODUCT 3. Once the allocations are made, the set of requirements allocated to each PRODUCT
are documented in the topical section of the respective PRODUCT Item Development Speciﬁcation
(IDS), as shown in Figure 21.7.

Top-down/Bottom-up Iterations
The preceding discussion focused on the top-down allocation and ﬂow down of requirements to
various system levels of abstraction. However, despite the nomenclature this is not a linearly
sequential process. It is a highly iterative process whereby requirements allocations between levels
must be reconciled within the architecture for that particular item and traded off within the system
capability and performance constraints. The result is a set of highly iterative top-down/bottom-
up/left-right/right-left set of decision-making activities. Therefore, the oval icon in the upper left
center portion of Figure 21.7 symbolizes this top-down/bottom-up process for all levels of system
decomposition.


21.7 SUMMARY

In summary, this chapter introduced the concept of deriving and allocating required operational capabilities
to multi-level system entities. We began with the system’s modes of operation and identiﬁed the various oper-
ational capabilities and interactions required for each mode. This included the system elements for the
                                                                                                                       General Exercises   227

                                                     PRODUCT
       System                                         Reqmts.                                                  PRODUCT #1
    Performance
    Specification
                                                     Allocations                                                   Item
                                                                                                               Development
       (SPS)




                                                                 PRODUCT #2

                                                                              PRODUCT #3
                                                    PRODUCT #1
                                                                                                               Specification

                                 Highly
                                Iterative




                                                                                            Topical Coverage
                                                                                                               PRODUCT #2
                                                                                                                   Item
 ·Design & Construction Constraint Requirements        1          2           3                                Development
 · NATURAL   Environment Element Requirements          4          5           6                                Specification
 · INDUCED Environment Element Requirements            7          8           9
 · OP. ENV. Man-Made System Threats Reqmts.          10          11           12
 · OP. ENV. Man-Made System Interface Reqmts.        13          14           15
 · SUPPORT  Element Requirements                     16          17           18
 · FACILITY  Element Requirements                    19          20           21                               PRODUCT #3
 · PERSONNEL Element Requirements                    22          23           24                                   Item
 · EQUIPMENT    Element Requirements                 25          26           27                               Development

 · PROCEDURAL     DATA Element Requirements          28          29           30
                                                                                                               Specification

 · MISSION RESOURCES Element Requirements            31          32           33

                                                                                           PRODUCT Unique Requirements
 X = Reference to Required Operational Capability
    Description
                                                                                                                                   7
Figure 21.7 System Requirements Allocations to Subsystems




MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM, OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, and Design and Construc-
tion Constraints.
      Next we described how the required operational capabilities were aggregated and documented in the
System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). We also learned that SPS requirements are allocated and ﬂowed
down to system entities at various system levels of abstraction and documented in their respective Item
Development Speciﬁcation (IDS).
      We also described how the set of required operational capabilities for each mode of operation must be
provided by a unique conﬁguration of system elements referred to as its architecture. The convolution of mode-
based architectural conﬁgurations is referred to as the system architecture.
      Does an SE have to perform all of the analytical work? You and your organization have to answer this
question. With time and experience, you will learn to mentally assimilate and process this concept. Remem-
ber, the methods described in this chapter aim to explain a concept for instructional purposes. The challenge
questions SEs must answer are:
     1. How do we assure a program’s management that all aspects of a system’s speciﬁcation or design solu-
        tion are sufﬁciently addressed to ensure program success.
     2. What tools, methods, and techniques do we use to provide that assurance and level of conﬁdence
        without getting “analysis paralysis.”
For many applications, automated tools based on relational databases are available to support the concept
described here.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
228    Chapter 21    System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation

   (a) Create a System Capabilities Matrix for the selected item that identiﬁes the item’s modes of operation.
   (b) For each mode of operation, pick one or more system elements and identify what operational capabil-
       ities are required to support the mode.
   (c) Repeat item (b) for design and construction constraints.
   (d) Repeat item (b) for OPERATING ENVIRONMENT interactions.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a program within your organization and research how they analyzed, allocated, and ﬂowed down
   their SPS requirements to the various system levels of abstraction. Document your ﬁndings and observa-
   tions. Avoid specifying programs and individuals by name.
   (a) What methods, such as the System Capabilities Matrix, did the program use to ensure that: 1) all
        required operational capabilities were addressed in the SPS and 2) they fully understood the implica-
        tions of satisfying the requirements as evidenced by derivation of lower level requirements.
   (b) Were the SPS requirements identiﬁed via an organized analytical process or random accumulations of
        requirements? Report your ﬁndings and observations.
2. For the program in item 1 above. Based on the method(s) selected:
   (a) What types of tools were used (e.g., internally developed database, spreadsheet, requirements man-
       agement tool)?
   (b) Is this practice common across all programs?
   (c) How many people were involved in the exercise? Was any training provided?
   (d) To what extent was the tool employed?
   (e) How did the amount of time available factor into the usage of the tool?
   (f) What lessons learned did the program collect from the exercise?
Chapter              22

     The Anatomy of a
     System Capability

22.1 INTRODUCTION

Every man-made system provides operational capabilities to support accomplishment of the User’s
organizational or personal missions. Your mission, as an SE, is to ensure that system capabilities
support this mission as discussed in Chapter 13 Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Appli-
cations. Operational capabilities, as system assets, characterize the mechanical, electrical, optical,
chemical, or processing features that enable a system to function, process MISSION RESOURCES,
make decisions, and achieve a required level of success based on performance.
      If you ask most SEs what a capability is, the typical response includes the usual function with
one or more performance bounding elements. Certainly a capability includes these elements;
however, those elements characterize the outcome of a capability. From an engineering perspec-
tive, a capability is broader in scope than simply a functional element, especially in large, com-
plex systems. It represents a physical potential—strength, capacity, endurance—to perform an
outcome-based action for a given duration under a speciﬁed set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
conditions.
      This section explores the anatomy of a system operational capability. We begin our discussion
with the introduction of the System Capability Construct, a graphical template that enables system
analysts and SEs to model a system capability’s behavior. As you will discover, a system capabil-
ity is a “system” in its own context and has its own set of pre-mission, mission, and postmission
phases. We investigate each phase of a capability and the tasks performed.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What are the phases of operation of a capability?
     2. Differentiate automated from semi-automated capabilities.
     3. What is the System Capability Construct?
     4. Why is the System Capability Construct important?
     5. Recreate the System Capability Construct, and describe each of its task ﬂows and
        interdependencies.
     6. What is meant by capability exception handling?
     7. Why is exception handling required?



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                  229
230     Chapter 22   The Anatomy of a System Capability

Deﬁnition of Key Terms
      • Automated or Semi-automated Capability A capability that has been mechanized or pre-
        programmed to execute a series of tasks on receipt of external data or triggering event such
        as an interrupt.


22.2 BOUNDING AN OPERATIONAL CAPABILITY

If you ask a sampling of engineers how they specify a system’s capabilities, most will respond, “We
write requirements.” Although this response has a degree of correctness, requirements are a merely
mechanisms for documenting and communicating WHAT the User requires in terms of acceptance
at delivery. The response you should hear from SEs is: “We specify system capabilities and levels
of performance to achieve speciﬁc outcomes required by the User.”
     When engineers focus on writing requirements statements (i.e., requirements centric approach)
rather than specifying capabilities (i.e., capability centric approach), requirements statements are
what you get. When you attempt to analyze speciﬁcations written with a requirements centric
approach, you will encounter a wish list domain that is characterized by random, semi-organized
thoughts; overlapping, conﬂicting, replicated, and missing requirements; ambiguous statements
subject to interpretation; compound requirements; contract statement of work (CSOW) tasks;
mixtures of goals and requirements, and so on.
     In contrast, speciﬁcations written by SEs who employ model-based requirements derived from
coherent structures of system capabilities generally produce documents that eliminate or reduce the
number and types of deﬁciencies noted above. These speciﬁcations also tend to require less main-
tenance and facilitate veriﬁcation during the system integration and test phase of the program.
     If you analyze and characterize work products of the requirements centric approach, several
points emerge:
      1. Lack of understanding of the end product (e.g., bounding system capabilities) and its inter-
         actions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
      2. Lack of training and experience in how to identify and derive capability-based requirements.
      3. Poor understanding of the key elements of a requirements statement.
We will address the last two points in later chapters. Our discussion in this chapter focuses on the
ﬁrst item; understanding system capabilities.

Referral More information about writing requirements will be presented in Chapter 33 Require-
ments Statement Development practices.

Implicit and Explicit Meanings of a Capability
The term “capability” for most systems has both implicit and explicit meanings. Implicitly, the term
infers the unrealized potential to perform an action. Explicitly, a capability is realized when the
system performs its planned action(s) in its prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT as intended
by its developers.


 EXAMPLE 22.1
A simple device such as a log implicitly has the unrealized potential or capability to displace heavy objects.
Explicitly, the log has a realized capability to physically displace heavy objects WHEN controlled by a human
                                                              22.3 The System Capability Construct     231

with a fulcrum and manipulated by human actions. To successfully complete the desired human outcome—
to displace a heavy object—the log must possess a bounded and integrated set of physical characteristics and
properties—capability—to perform the action.


Automated or Semi-automated Capabilities
In the preceding example the set of actors—human–log-fulcrum—were integrated and mechanized
into a set of semi-automated actions intended to achieve a speciﬁed result, which was to displace a
heavy object. If the fulcrum were implemented as a programmed, repeatable assembly line device,
we could refer to it as automated. Thus the integration, mechanization, and automation of compat-
ible and interoperable system element actions into a “working system” capability provide the basis
for our next discussion.


22.3 THE SYSTEM CAPABILITY CONSTRUCT

A system’s operational capability can be modeled using a basic construct. The construct consists
of sequential and concurrent control ﬂow operations required to: 1) initialize, 2) implement, and
3) complete the capability or action. This is particularly useful when modeling automated or semi-
automated sequences of complex system operations that are common to many human-made
systems.
     If you observe and analyze how an automated or semi-automated, cyclical capability is imple-
mented, you will discover that the construct has its own life cycle with pre-mission, mission, and
post-mission phases. In general, an automated or semi-automated capability is characterized by:
    1. An initial set of preparatory operations, conditions, or conﬁgurations.
    2. A set of primary operations that are executed to accomplish the capability.
    3. A set of closure or termination operations.
To illustrate how these three sets of operational phases and operations are implemented, refer to
Figure 22.1.

Exploring the System Capability Construct
On inspection of Figure 22.1, observe that the model ﬂows from the INITIAL STATE to the FINAL
STATE via a series of sequential and concurrent operations. Thus a system can initiate a capabil-
ity to perform a single action or loop continuously until directed to stop by the HIGHER ORDER
SYSTEM capability—the DO UNTIL (condition). To better understand how the capability is
implemented, let’s investigate each of its operations.

Operation 1.0: Activate Capability Decision. The basic System Capability Construct begins
with a simple “activate capability” decision control point that determines whether the capability is
to be activated or enabled. If the capability is not required and is presently deactivated or disabled,
control ﬂow transfers to the FINAL STATE. If a capability is to be activated, control ﬂow transfers
to Operation 2.0, Initialize the Decision and begin activation.

Operation 2.0: Initialize Decision. From a pre-mission perspective, the ﬁrst operation of a
capability should be to establish any initial conditions that may be required to accomplish the
capability including Initialization. The initial conditions may include data retrieval, initialization
of variables, calibration, and alignment. As a result an initialize decision is made.
232     Chapter 22      The Anatomy of a System Capability

                       Initial State

                 Capability                             Pre-Mission
               Disabled/Failed                          Operations
                                        1.0

                      Enable/Activate
                        Capability                  Initial Conditions
                                                       Established
                                        2.0

                                              Initialize
                         3.0
                               Establish Initial
                                 Conditions



                           4.0                                                              Exception
                                                                                            Handling
        Mission
                                 Perform Capability
       Resources                                                             5.0
      • Consumables                  Operations
      • Expendables                                                                Perform
                                                                               Abnormal Recovery
      8.0                  Report                                                 Operations
            Report         Results
                                              7.0                         Resume
            Results
                                                                         Capability         Corrective
                                 9.0            No Report                                    Action
                                                                                      6.0
                                     Perform Post-
                                      Processing
        Post-Mission                  Operations
         Operations
                                                                                       Unrecoverable
                                                    Disable/Deactivate                  Capability
                                                        Capability                        Failure


                                        Final State
Figure 22.1 Basic System Entity Capability Construct




 EXAMPLE 22.2
A process control computer system may require initialization of speciﬁc parameters, variables, or positioning
of a mechanical arm on some device prior to executing the capability action—namely moving the
mechanical arm.

If the Initialize decision is Yes or TRUE, control ﬂow transfers to Operation 3.0, which is to
establish initial conditions. If the Initialize decision is No or FALSE, control ﬂow progresses to
Operation 4.0, Perform Capability Operations.
                                                               22.3 The System Capability Construct      233

Author’s Note 22.1 The FALSE decision result is intended to accommodate cyclical capabil-
ity actions—namely DO UNTIL (condition)—whereby the capability has already been initialized
in a previous cycle of the construct.

Operation 3.0: Establish Initial Conditions. Operation 3.0 to establish the initial conditions
depends on the type of capability application.


 EXAMPLE 22.3
Computational solutions may require initialization of variables to default values or settings. Mechanical
devices may have a mechanical arm that requires pre-positioning (i.e., alignment) to a calibrated reference
point, step, or stop. Devices with heating or cooling elements may require activation and stabilization over a
prescribed period of time.

Some applications may also require that some form of initial or readiness health status check be
conducted before, during, or following performance of the capability.


 EXAMPLE 22.4
A daily operational readiness test (DORT) may be required to be performed at the beginning of each workday.


Finally, some systems may also include a requirement to report the results of the Establish Initial
Conditions (Operation 3.0) as a health check status back to some central collection point such as a
computer, ﬁle, or system operator I/F. When the initial conditions established by Operation 3.0 have
satisﬁed a pre-determined set of exit criteria or encountered a triggering event or an interrupt by an
external stimulus, such as a system operator input, control ﬂow transfers to Operation 4.0, Perform
Capability Operations.

Operation 4.0: Perform Capability Operations
Operation 4.0 Perform Capability Operations represents the core execution of the capability. The
operation illustrated here is a high-level abstraction that represents the multiple levels of subordi-
nate operations required to perform the primary mission. As the system’s capability is being per-
formed, replenishment of the MISSION RESOURCES element assets such as consumables and
expendables are required to support and sustain system operations.
    Error conditions and latent defects such as design deﬁciencies, ﬂaws, or malfunctions can deter
mechanical capability and force the system to shift to an ABNORMAL operating condition or state.
Abnormal conditions include:
    1. Nonfatal, degraded performance operations.
    2. Emergency operations.
    3. Catastrophic operations that require employment of special actions.
If an abnormal condition triggers a disruption of mechanical capability, control ﬂow transfers to
Operation 5.0, Perform Abnormal Recovery Operations.
     When the mechanical operations are successfully completed and determined to satisfy a set of
exit criteria, control ﬂow transfers to Operation 7.0, Report Results decision.
234    Chapter 22    The Anatomy of a System Capability

Operation 5.0: Perform Abnormal Recovery Operations
When an error, latent defect, exception, or malfunction triggers an abnormal condition, the system
may immediately shift to some form of recovery operation. In general, these conditions are called
exception handling or error correction.


 EXAMPLE 22.5
Software logs an error condition and attempts to resume normal processing or restarts. Data communicaitons
links detect errors and request retransmission or attempt to correct data bits. Watchdog timers are employed
by hardware designers as a periodic heartbeat that restarts the system if not reset within a speciﬁed timeperiod
such as 1 second.

If an ABNORMAL condition occurs, the system should be expected to log or record the event as
well as the conditions under which the event occurs. In this manner, an historical record documents
objective evidence to support reconstruction of the chain of events to better understand how and
why the system encountered the exception. Analysis of results and sequences of actions or condi-
tions leading up to the event may indicate that an operational scenario of a speciﬁc system mode
of operation had not been anticipated by the SE.


 EXAMPLE 22.6
A ﬂight data recorder, referred to as the “black box,” records vital aircraft systems information such as air-
craft conﬁguration, sequences of events, and ﬂight conditions.

When recovery operations satisfy a set of exit criteria, control ﬂow transfers to Operation 6.0,
Resume Capability decision control point.

Operation 6.0: Resume Capability Decision
Operation 6.0 Resume Capability decision makes the determination whether normal capability
operations can be resumed. In general, control ﬂow can transfer to any one of three options: 1)
resume capability, 2) perform corrective action, or 3) exit due to failure. If the recovery has been
successful and satisﬁes pre-determined exit criteria, control ﬂow resumes to Operation 4.0, Perform
Capability Operations.
     If recovery is impractical or impossible under the current conditions, the capability is disabled
or deactivated for the remainder of the mission or until the condition that created it changes. If a
capability is disabled or deactivated, control ﬂow transfers to FINAL STATE. When this occurs,
some systems may require software ﬂags or indicators to be set to indicate the condition and disable
the capability for the remainder of the mission. For hardware systems, power cables may be dis-
connected, maintenance tags may be attached to the equipment, and/or locks may be installed to
prevent usage until the fault is corrected.
     If the recovery has not been completed and the condition is recoverable, control ﬂow trans-
fers back to Operation 5.0, Perform Abnormal Recovery Operations.

Operation 7.0: Report Results Decision
When Operation 4.0 Perform Capability Operations is complete, control ﬂow progresses to Oper-
ation 7.0, Report Results decision control point. If the decision is Yes or TRUE, control ﬂow trans-
fers to Operation 8.0, Report Results. If the decision is No or FALSE, control ﬂow transfers to
Operation 9.0, Perform Postprocessing Operations.
                                                              22.3 The System Capability Construct     235

Author’s Note 22.2 In the context of systems, a system’s mechanical capability may not have
a reporting requirement—as in Operation 8.0. However, a PERSONNEL system element capabil-
ity, operating concurrently with a mechanical capability and with each part performing its own
capability construct, may have a requirement to report results of mechanical capability. For
example, astronauts operating the Space Shuttle’s mechanical robotic arm may observe and ver-
bally report status, results, and completion of mission operations tasks.

Operation 8.0: Report Results
When required, Operation 8.0 Report Results communicates the outcome of operations perform-
ance or status and health checks. The “report” in this context is a generic term that refers to audible,
visual, mechanical, or electrical methods for reporting results. Remember, a report gives informa-
tional, cautionary, or warning indications, depending on the operating condition or situation.


 EXAMPLE 22.7
Audible results include PERSONNEL reporting the results of an operation. A gunshot indicates the shooting
of a projectile, the slam of a door indicates the closure of a mechanism, and so on. Visual examples include
a burst of light from an explosion, a static or ﬂashing signal light from an aircraft, and so on. Mechanical
examples include a movement of a mechanical arm during a hard copy printout, and electrical examples
include a spark or smoke.

When the reporting operations are complete, satisfying pre-determined exit criteria, control ﬂow
transfers to Operation 9.0, Perform Postprocessing Operations.

Operation 9.0: Perform Postprocessing Operations
When completed, the ﬁnal operations of the System Capability Construct is to:
    1. Place the capability in a safe and secure standby, stowed, or dormant physical state or con-
       dition to protect the capability from intrusion or interference by external capabilities or
       threats.
    2. Posture or prepare the capability for its next iterative cycle.


 EXAMPLE 22.8
A mechanical arm must be stowed to a speciﬁc condition, clearing out a software buffer, resetting or recon-
ﬁguring a computer I/O port, and so on. When the postprocessing operations are complete, control ﬂow pro-
gresses to FINAL STATE, at least for this cyclical iteration.


 EXAMPLE 22.9
The Space Shuttle’s robotic arm is retracted and stowed in its Cargo Bay at the completion of a mission for
the return ﬂight back to Earth.

Concluding Point
A system is actually an integrated set of multi-level capabilities to achieve a higher level capabil-
ity. To illustrate this point, consider the Car-Driver system shown in Figure 22.2. Here, the Driver
has a capability construct that interacts with the overall Car capability construct.
236     Chapter 22           The Anatomy of a System Capability

     To further understand how the capabilities interact, refer to Figure 22.3. The ﬁgure illustrates
the car’s various capability options that can be exercised at the driver’s discretion. Each of the
capabilities (i.e., engine, lights, etc.) has its own high-level capability construct (Figure 22.1). From
an SE perspective, the key is to: 1) identify and deﬁne each capability and 2) synchronize the
capabilities into a coherent system operation. This includes the allowable actions and prohibited
actions illustrated in Figure 19.6.

                                                                     Initial
                                                                     State



 Driver Capability Construct                                                                  Car Capability Construct
             Initial State                                                                                  Initial State
                                             1.0                       2.0
                                               Provide                      Provide
                                               Driver                        Car
                                              Capability                   Capability




                                             Continue
             Final State                                                                                    Final State


                                                                    Stop

                                                                      Final
                                                                      State
Figure 22.2 Car-Driver System Operations

                                                   Initial
                                                    State




                                    2.0 Car Capability


      1.0
       1.0
                                         2.1
                                          2.1                2.2
                                                              2.2                   2.3
                                                                                     2.3              2.n
       Provide
        Provide                             Provide
                                             Provide            Provide
                                                                 Provide               Provide
                                                                                        Provide
        Driver
        Driver                                                                                        Provide “n”
                                            Engine
                                             Engine              Lights
                                                                  Lights                Radio
                                                                                         Radio
      Capability*
      Capability*                                                                                     Capability*
                                         Capability*
                                          Capability*        Capability*
                                                              Capability*           Capability*
                                                                                     Capability*




                                                                                                   * Unique Application of the
                              Continue                       Stop                Final             System Capability Construct
                                                                                 State

Figure 22.3 Car Operational Capability Expanded
                                               22.4 System Operational Capability Analysis Rules       237

22.4 SYSTEM OPERATIONAL CAPABILITY ANALYSIS RULES

Our discussion of the automated or semi-automated system capability construct and its application
as a generic template enables us to establish the System Operational Capability analysis rules
identiﬁed in Table 22.1.


Table 22.1 System operational capability analysis guidelines

ID               Topic                               System Analysis and Design Rules

22.1    Multi-phase Operations    Every automated or semi-automated system capability consists of at
                                  least three types of operations: pre-mission, mission, and postmission.
22.2    Capability activated      Each capability must be enabled or activated to perform its intended
        decision                  mission. If not, the capability remains DEACTIVATED or DISABLED
                                  until the decision is revisited in the next cycle.
22.3    Capability initialized    Each automated or semi-automated system capability, when
        decision                  ACTIVATED or ENABLED, may require initialization to establish a set
                                  of initial conditions that enable the capability to perform its mission.
                                  If initialization is not required, workﬂow progresses to the next cycle,
                                  perform capability operations.
22.4    Perform capability        Each automated or semi-automated system capability must perform a
        operations                primary mission that focuses on accomplishing a speciﬁc system level
                                  mission objective (i.e., the SPS requirement).
22.5    Perform exception         Each automated or semi-automated system capability should provide a
        handling                  mechanism for recognizing, recording, and processing exceptions and
                                  errors.
22.6    Perform abnormal          Every automated or semi-automated system capability should provide
        recovery operations       a mechanism for the capability to safely recover from processing
                                  exceptions and errors without destructive consequences to the system,
                                  life, property, or the environment.
22.7    Resume capability         As each recovery operation is attempted, the system must decide
        decision                  whether additional attempts are justiﬁed.
22.8    Report results decision   When a capability completes its operations, other capabilities external
                                  to the capability may require automatic or manual reporting.
22.9    Report results decision   Every automated or semi-automated system capability may require a
                                  mechanism for reporting accomplishment of the capability’s mission
                                  and outcome.
22.10   Perform Postprocessing    Every automated or semi-automated system capability may require a set
        operations                of operations or actions to safely and securely store or stow the
                                  capability to protect it from external threats or itself within resource
                                  constraints.
22.11   Cycle back to INITIAL     Once a capability has cycled through its planned operations, it returns
        STATE                     to its INITIAL STATE or repeats, if so commanded.
238     Chapter 22   The Anatomy of a System Capability

The Importance of the System Capability Construct
At the start of this chapter we contrasted traditional engineering approaches that focus on writing
requirements with modern-day engineering approaches that focus on specifying capabilities. Our
discussion of the System Capability Construct serves as compelling objective evidence as to WHY
it is important to structure and specify a capability and then translate it into a requirements state-
ment. Operations within the structure serve as a graphical checklist for speciﬁcation requirements—
namely WHAT is to be accomplished and HOW WELL (performance) without stating HOW it is
to be implemented.

Author’s Note 22.3 For those who think that we have violated a cardinal rule of system spec-
iﬁcations by specifying HOW to implement a solution, our answer is no. We have not speciﬁed
HOW. Instead, we have translated System Capability Construct operations or tasks into text-based
requirements statements that identify WHAT must be accomplished. The HOW occurs when you
specify:
      1. The physical conﬁguration implementation.
      2. The logical sequences of operations depicted in the construct.

Referral More information on speciﬁcation development methods as provided in Chapter 32 on
System Speciﬁcation practices.

As our discussion illustrated, a capability consists of a series of operations—functional tasks, deci-
sions, inputs, and outcomes. Each of these operations is translated into a speciﬁc requirement state-
ment and is integrated into a set of requirements that bound the total set of capabilities. Without
the capability centric focus, the end product—e.g. speciﬁcation—is nothing more than a set of
random, loosely coupled text statements with missing requirements representing overlooked oper-
ations within the capability construct.
     Does this mean every operation within the construct must have a requirements statement? No,
you have to apply good judgment and identify which operations require special consideration by
designers during the capability’s implementation.
     Remember the old adage: If you do not tell someone WHAT you want, you cannot complain
about WHAT gets delivered. If you forget to specify a speciﬁc operational aspect of a capability,
the System Developer will be pleased to accommodate that requirement for a price—and in some
cases, a very large price. Therefore, do your homework and make sure all capability requirements
are complete. The capability construct provides one approach for doing this, but the approach is
only as good as YOU deﬁne it.
     Our discussion introduced the concept of automated or semi-automated system capabilities.
We described how most human-made system capabilities can be modeled using the System Capa-
bility Construct as a template. The construct provides an initial framework for describing require-
ments that specify and bound the capability.

Resource Utilization Considerations
Now consider situations whereby physical device resources may be limited due to expense, weight,
and size. The solution may require round-the-clock operations in the form of shifts. Examples
include situations where several people utilize single pieces of equipment or where space restric-
tions limit how many people can work in close proximity without interference as in the Space
Shuttle or International Space Station. As a result some workers may perform the primary mission
capabilities while others are in a “sleep cycle”—all concurrent operations.
                                                                                     General Exercises   239

22.5 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish guiding principles
that govern the implementation of a system capability.

Principle 22.1 Every operational capability has a System Capability Construct that models the
capability’s action-based operations, tasks, and external interactions.

Principle 22.2 Every operational capability requires an external trigger—a cue or a stimulus—
to initiate its outcome-based processing.

Principle 22.3 Every operational capability, as an integrated system, consists of three sequen-
tial phase-based actions:
    1. Pre-mission phase—initialization.
    2. Mission phase—application-based performance.
    3. Post-mission phase—analysis and deactivation.

Principle 22.4 Every capability requires consideration of HOW exceptions to NORMAL and
ABNORMAL operations will be handled.

Principle 22.5 On completion of tasking, every capability should report notiﬁcation of suc-
cessful completion.


22.6 SUMMARY

This chapter introduced the System Capability Construct and discussed its application to systems. Our dis-
cussion covered the construct’s operations and control ﬂows, and equated its structure to real world examples.
We also emphasized the importance of the construct as a graphical checklist for specifying capability require-
ments statements in terms of WHAT must be accomplished and HOW WELL without specifying HOW the
requirement was to be implemented.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. If you were the designer of a speciﬁc capability, using Figure 22.1 as a guide,
   (a) Describe the set of tasks the capability should perform.
   (b) How would you handle exceptions?
   (c) How are outcome based results of the capability reported? In what format and media?
   (d) Translate each of the capability tasks into a set of operational capability requirements.
240   Chapter 22   The Anatomy of a System Capability

ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a program within your organization. Interview SEs concerning how they deﬁne and implement a
   capability.
   (a) How do their designers accommodate the various operations or tasks of the System Capability
       Construct?
   (b) Without making them aware of this chapter’s discussions or Figure 22.1, have they synthesized
       this concept on their own or just unconsciously do things ad hoc based on lessons learned from
       experience?
   (c) Present your ﬁndings and observations.
Chapter              23

     System Analysis Synthesis
T  hroughout Part I we sequenced through topical series of chapters that provide an analytical per-
spective into HOW to THINK about, organize, and characterize systems. These discussions provide
the foundation for Part II System Design and Development Practices, which enable us to translate
an abstract System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) into a physical system that can be veriﬁed and
validated as meeting the User’s needs. So, HOW did Part I System Analysis Concepts provide this
foundation?


23.1 SYNTHESIZING PART I ON SYSTEM
ANALYSIS CONCEPTS

Part I concepts were embodied in several key themes that systems analysts and SEs need to under-
stand when developing a new system, product, or service.
     1. WHAT are the boundary conditions and constraints imposed by the User on a
        system, product, or service in terms of missions within a prescribed OPERATING
        ENVIRONMENT?
     2. Given the set of boundary conditions and constraints, HOW does the User envision deploy-
        ing, operating, and supporting the system, product, or service to perform its missions within
        speciﬁc time limitations, if applicable?
     3. Given the deployment, operation, support, and time constraints planned for the system,
        product, or service, WHAT is the set of outcome-based behaviors and responses required
        of the system to accomplish its missions?
     4. Given the set of outcome-based behaviors and responses required of the system to accom-
        plish its mission, HOW is the deliverable system, product, or service to be physically imple-
        mented to perform those missions and demonstrate?
To better understand HOW Part I’s topical series and chapters supported these themes, let’s brieﬂy
explore each one.

Theme 1: The User’s Mission
Boundary conditions and constraints for most systems are established by the organization that owns
or acquires the system, product, or service to accomplish missions with one or more outcome-based
performance objectives. The following chapters provide a topical foundation for understanding
organizational boundary conditions and constraints.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                 241
242    Chapter 23   System Analysis Synthesis

Chapter 13:     Organizational Roles, Missions, and System Applications
Chapter 14:     Understanding the System’s Problem, Opportunity, and Solution Spaces
Chapter 15:     System Interactions with Its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 16:     System Mission Analysis

Theme 2: Deployment, Operations, and Support of the System
Once the organization’s vision, boundary conditions, and constraints are understood, we addressed
HOW the User envisions deploying, operating, and supporting the system to perform its missions.
The following chapters provide a topical foundation for understanding HOW systems, products, or
services are deployed, operated, and supported.
Chapter 17: System Use Cases and Scenarios
Chapter 18: System Operations Model
Chapter 19: System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation

Theme 3: System Behavior in Its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
Given the deployment, operation, support, and time constraints planned for the system, product,
or service, we need to identify the set of outcome-based behaviors and responses required of the
system to accomplish its missions. The following chapters provide a topical foundation for under-
standing HOW systems, products, or services are expected to behave and interact with their OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT.
Chapter 20: Modeling System and Support Operations
Chapter 21: System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation
Chapter 22: The Anatomy of a System Capability

Theme 4: Physical Implementation of the System
Based on an understanding of outcome-based behaviors and responses required of the system to
accomplish its mission, the question is: HOW do we physically implement a system, product, or
service to perform those missions? The following chapters provide a topical foundation for under-
standing HOW systems, products, or services are physically implemented.
Chapter 8:     The Architecture of Systems
Chapter 9:     System Levels of Abstraction and Semantics
Chapter 10:    System of Interest (SOI) Architecture
Chapter 11:    Operating Environment Architecture
Chapter 12:    System Interfaces
By inspection, these themes range from the abstract concepts to the physical implementation; this
is not coincidence. This progression is intended to show HOW SEs evolve a system design solu-
tion from abstract vision to physical realization.
     After examining this list, you may ask: Why did we choose to talk about system architectures
early in an order that puts it last in this list? For instructional purposes, system architectures rep-
resent the physical world most people can relate to. As such, architectures provide the frame of ref-
erence for semantics that are key to understanding Chapters 13–22.
                                      23.2 Introducing the Four Domains of Solution Development    243

23.2 INTRODUCING THE FOUR DOMAINS
OF SOLUTION DEVELOPMENT

If we simplify and reduce these thematic groupings, we ﬁnd that they represent four classes or
domains of solutions that characterize HOW a system, product, or service is designed and devel-
oped, the subject of Part II. Table 23.1 illustrates the mapping between the Part I’s systems analy-
sis concepts themes and the four domain solutions.
     There are several key points to be made about the mapping. First, observe that objectives 1
and 2 employ the User as the “operative” term; Objectives 3 and 4 do not. Does this mean the User
is “out of the loop”? Absolutely not! Table 23.1 communicates that the User, Acquirer, and System
Developer have rationalized and expressed WHAT is required. Given that direction, the system
development contract imposes boundary conditions and constraints on developing the system. This
communicates to the System Developer “Go THINK about this problem and TELL us about your
proposed solution in terms of its operations, behaviors, and cost-effective implementation.” Since
Table 23.1 represents how a system evolves, User involvement occurs explicitly and implicitly
throughout all of the themes. Remember, if the User had the capabilities and resources available,
such as expertise, tools, and facilities to satisfy Objectives 3–4, they would have already inde-
pendently developed the system.
     Second, if: 1) a SYSTEM has four domains of solutions and 2) the SYSTEM, by deﬁnition,
is composed of integrated sets of components working synergistically to achieve an objective
greater that the individual component objectives, deductive reasoning leads to a statement that
each of the components ALSO has four domains of solutions, all LINKED, both vertically and
horizontally.
     The four themes provide a framework for “bridging the gap” between a User’s abstract vision
and the physical realization of the system, product, or service. Thus, each theme builds on
decisions established by its predecessor and expands the level of detail of the evolving system
design solution as illustrated at the left side of in Figure 23.1. This allows us to make several
observations:

Table 23.1 Linking Part I System Analysis Concepts themes into Part II System Design and Development
Practices semantics

ID                         Part I Thematic Objectives                                 Domain Solutions

23.1   Objective 1—WHAT are the boundary conditions and constraints imposed           Requirements
       by the User on a system, product, or service in terms of missions within a     Domain Solution
       prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT?
23.2   Objective 2—Given the set of boundary conditions and constraints, HOW          Operations Domain
       does the User envision deploying, operating, and supporting the system,        Solution
       product, or service to perform its missions within speciﬁc time limitations,
       if applicable?
23.3   Objective 3—Given the deployment, operation, support, and time constraints     Behavioral Domain
       planned for the system, product, or service, WHAT is the set of outcome-       Solution
       based behaviors and responses required of the system to accomplish its
       missions?
23.4   Objective 4—Given the set of outcome-based behaviors and responses             Physical Domain
       required of the system to accomplish its mission, HOW is the deliverable       Solution
       system, product, or service to be physically implemented to perform those
       missions and demonstrate?
244                                       Chapter 23   System Analysis Synthesis

Abstract
                                                                                       Entry           Exit
   Level of Detail Elaborated Expansion



                                                                  The
                                                                 Mission           4                             1

                                                                                        Physical     Reqmts.
                                                              Requirements
                                                                                        Domain       Domain
                                                                Domain
                                                             1                          Solution     Solution
                                                                Solution

                                                               Operations
                                                           2 Domain Solution
                                                                                       Behavioral   Operations
                                                               Behavioral               Domain       Domain
                                                       3                                Solution     Solution
                                                             Domain Solution
                                                                                   3                             2
                                                             Physical Domain
                                                   4
                                                                Solution
Physical
Figure 23.1 Development and Evolution of a SYSTEM’s/Entity’s Solution Domains




                    • The mission (i.e., the opportunity/problem space) forms the basis for the User to establish
                      the Requirements Domain Solution (i.e., the solution space).
                    • The Requirements Domain Solution forms the basis for developing and maturing the Oper-
                      ations Domain Solution.
                    • The evolving Operations Domain Solution forms the basis for developing and maturing the
                      Behavioral Domain Solution.
                    • The evolving Behavioral Domain Solution forms the basis for developing and maturing the
                      Physical Domain Solution based on physical components and technologies available.
From a workﬂow perspective, the design and development of the system solution evolves and
matures from the abstract to the physical over time. However, the workﬂow progression consists
of numerous feedback loops to preceding solutions as System Analysts and SEs mature the solu-
tions and reconcile critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs). As a result, we symbol-
ize the system solution domains as shown at the right side of Figure 23.1.

23.3 SYSTEM DOMAIN SOLUTION SEQUENCING

Figure 23.2 provides a way to better understand how the system domain solutions evolve over time.
As shown, the Requirements Domain Solution is initiated ﬁrst, either in the form of a contract
System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or a System Developer’s item development speciﬁcation.
Here is how the sequencing occurs:
                    • When the Requirements Domain Solution is understood and reaches a level of maturity suf-
                      ﬁcient to develop concepts of operation, initiate the Operations Domain Solution.
                    • When the Operations Domain Solution reaches a level of maturity sufﬁcient to deﬁne
                      relationships and interactions among system capabilities, initiate the Behavioral Domain
                      Solution.
                                                                                                  23.4 Summary   245

                  Entry/Exit
                                       Level of   For each entity at every level of abstraction
                                        Detail

4                                       1         1        Requirements  DomainSolution
                                                            RequirementsDomain  Solution
      Physical             Reqmts.
      Domain               Domain
      Solution             Solution




                                                       2         OperationsDomain
                                                                Operations  DomainSolution
                                                                                   Solution
     Behavioral           Operations
      Domain               Domain
      Solution             Solution

 3                                     2
                                                                3    Behavioral Domain Solution




                                                                           PhysicalDomain
                                                                        4 Physical  DomainSolution
                                                                                           Solution

                                                                                                      Time
Figure 23.2 System Solution Domain Time-Based Implementation



     • When the Behavioral Domain Solution reaches a level of maturity sufﬁcient to allocate the
       behavioral capabilities to physical components, initiate the Physical Domain Solution.
     • Once initiated, the Requirements, Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions
       evolve concurrently, mature, and stabilize.


23.4 SUMMARY

In this chapter we synthesized our discussions in Part I on system analysis concepts and established the foun-
dation for Part II on system design and development. The introduction of the Requirements, Operations,
Behavioral, and Physical Solution Domains, coupled with chapter references in each domain, encapsulate the
key system analysis concepts that enable us to THINK about, communicate, analyze, and organize systems,
products, and services for design and development. With this foundation in place, we are now ready to proceed
to Part II System Design and Development Practices.
Part II

Systems Design and
Development Practices
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Part II, System Design and Development Practices, builds on the foundation established in Part I
System Analysis Concepts and consists of 34 chapters organized into six series of practices. The
six series consist of:
     • System Development Strategies Practices
     • System Speciﬁcation Practices
     • System Design and Development Practices
     • Decision Support Practices
     • System Veriﬁcation and Validation Practices
     • System Deployment, Operations, and Support Practices
As an introductory overview, let’s explore a brief synopsis of each of these practices.

System Development Strategy Practices
Successful system development requires establishing an insightful strategy and supporting work-
ﬂow that employs proven practices to enable a program to efﬁciently progress from contract award
to system delivery and acceptance. The System Development Strategy Practices, which consists of
Chapter 24–27, provide insights for establishing a program strategy.
     Our discussions describe how a program employs veriﬁcation and validation concepts intro-
duced in Part I to create a workﬂow that translates multi-level speciﬁcations into a physical design
solution that leads to delivery of systems, products, or services. We explore various development
methods such as the waterfall approach, incremental development, evolutionary development, and
spiral development. We also dispel a myth that V & V are only performed after a system has been
integrated and tested; V & V are performed continuously from contract award through system deliv-
ery and acceptance.
     Given an understanding of System Development Strategy Practices, we introduce the corner-
stone for system design and development via the System Speciﬁcation Practices.

System Speciﬁcation Practices
System design and development begins with the derivation and development of system speciﬁca-
tions and requirements that bound the User’s solution space subject to technology, cost, schedule,

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
248   Part II Systems Design and Development Practices

support, and risk constraints. The System Speciﬁcation Series, which consist of Chapters 28–33,
explore what a speciﬁcation is; types of speciﬁcations; how speciﬁcations are analyzed and devel-
oped; and how speciﬁcation requirements are analyzed, derived, developed, and reviewed.
    The System Speciﬁcation Practices provide the cornerstone for our next topical discussion,
System Design and Development Practices.

System Design and Development Practices
The design and development of a system requires that the developers establish an in-depth under-
standing of WHAT the user is attempting to accomplish and select a solution from a set of viable
candidates based on decision factors such as technical, technology, support, cost, schedule, and risk.
     The System Design and Development Practices series consists of Chapters 34–46 and cover a
diverse range of system design and development practices. Our discussions include: understanding
the operational utility, suitability, effectiveness, and availability requirements; formulation of
domain solutions; selection of a system architecture; conﬁguration identiﬁcation; system interface
design; standards and conventions; and design and development documentation.
     The System Design and Development Practices require timely data to support informed deci-
sion making that the RIGHT system solution is selected. This brings us to our next topic, Decision
Support Practices, which provide the data.

Decision Support Practices
The design and development of integrated sets of system elements requires analytical support to
provide data and ensure that the system design balances technical, technology, support, cost, sched-
ule, and risk considerations. The Decision Support Practices series, which consist of Chapters
47–52, provide mechanisms that range from analyzes to prototypes and demonstrations to provide
timely data and recommendations.
     Our discussions address analyses; statistical variation inﬂuences on system design; system per-
formance budgets and margins; system reliability, availability, and maintainability; system model-
ing and simulation; and trade study analysis of alternatives.
     System design and development requires on-going integrity assessments to ensure that the
system is being designed correctly and will satisfy the user’s operational need(s). This brings us to
our next topic, Veriﬁcation and Validation Practices, which enable us to assess the integrity of the
evolving system design solution.

Veriﬁcation and Validation Practices
System design and development requires answering two key questions: 1) Is the system being
designed and developed RIGHT—in accordance with the contract requirements and 2) Does the
system satisfy the user’s operational needs? The Veriﬁcation and Validation Practices series, which
consist of Chapters 53 through 55, enable the system users, acquirer, and developers to answer
these questions from contract award through system delivery and acceptance.
     Our discussions explore what veriﬁcation and validation are; describe the importance of tech-
nical reviews to verify and validate the evolving and maturing system design solution; and address
how system integration, test, and evaluation plays a key role in performing V & V. We introduce
veriﬁcation methods such as inspection/examination, analysis, test, and demonstration that are
available for verifying compliance to speciﬁcation requirements.
     Once a system is veriﬁed, validated, and delivered for ﬁnal acceptance, the user is ready to
employ the system to perform organizational missions. This brings us to our next topic, System
Deployment, Operations, and Support Practices.
                                              Part II Systems Design and Development Practices   249

System Deployment, Operations, and Support Practices
People often believe that SE and analysis end with system delivery and acceptance by the user; SE
continues throughout the operational life of the system, product, or service. The System Deploy-
ment, Operations, and Support Practices series, which consist of Chapters 56 and 57, provide key
insights into system and mission applications and performance that require system analyst and SE
assessments, not only for corrective actions to the current system but requirements for future
systems and capabilities.
     Our discussions explore how a system is deployed including site selection, development, and
activation; describe key considerations required for system integration at a site into a higher level
system; address how system deﬁciencies are investigated and form the basis for acquisition require-
ments for new systems, products, or services; and investigate key engineering considerations that
must be translated into speciﬁcation requirements for new systems.
Chapter              24

     System Development
     Workﬂow Strategy

24.1 INTRODUCTION

The award of a system development contract to a System Developer or Services Provider signiﬁes
the beginning of the System Development Phase. This phase covers all activities required to
meet the provisions of the contract, produce the end item deliverable(s), and deploy or distribute
the deliverables to the designated contract delivery site.
     On contract award, the Offeror transforms itself from a proposal organization to a System
Developer or Service Provider organization. This requires the organization to demonstrate that they
can competently deliver the proposed system on time and within budget in accordance with the
provisions of the contract. This transformation is best captured in a business jest: “The good news
is we won the contract! The bad news is WHAT have we done to ourselves?”
     Our discussion of this phase focuses on how a proposed system is developed and delivered to
the User. We explore how the System Developer or Service Provider evolves the visionary and
abstract set of User requirements through the various stages of system development to ultimately
produce a physical system. The “system” may be country, a space shuttle, a mass mailing service,
a trucking company, a hospital, or a symposium. The important point to keep in mind is that the
duration of the System Development Phase may last from a few weeks or months to several years.

Author’s Note 24.1 The System Development Phase described here, in conjunction with the
System Procurement Phase, may be repeated several times before a ﬁnal system is ﬁelded. For
example, in some domains, the selection of a System Developer may require several sequences of
System Development Phase contracts to evolve the system requirements and down select from a
ﬁeld of qualiﬁed contractors to one or two contractors. Such is the case with spiral development.
     For a System Service Provider contract, the System Development Phase may be a preparatory
time to develop or adapt reusable system operations, processes, and procedures to support the con-
tract’s mission, support services for the System Operations Phase. For example, a healthcare insur-
ance provider may win a contract to deliver “outsourced” support services for a corporation’s
insurance program. The delivered services may be a “tailored” version similar to programs the
contractor has administered for other organizations.

Once you have mastered the concepts discussed in this section, you should have a ﬁrm under-
standing of how the SE process should be implemented and how to manage its implementation.



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                               251
252     Chapter 24   System Development Workﬂow Strategy

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What are the workﬂow steps in system development?
       2. What is the veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) strategy for system development?
       3. How does the V&V strategy relate to the system development workﬂow?
       4. Why is the V and V strategy important?
       5. What is the Developmental Conﬁguration?
       6. When does the Developmental Conﬁguration start and end?
       7. What is a ﬁrst article system?
       8. What is developmental test and evaluation (DT&E)?
       9. How is DT&E performed?
      10. When is DT&E performed during the System Development Phase?
      11. Who is responsible for performing DT & E?
      12. What is operational test & evaluation (OT&E)?
      13. When is OT&E performed during the System Development Phase?
      14. What is the objective of OT&E?
      15. Who is responsible for performing OT&E?
      16. What is the System Developer’s role in OT&E?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) “Test and evaluation performed to:
        1. Identify potential operational and technological limitations of the alternative concepts and
            design options being pursued.
        2. Support the identiﬁcation of cost-performance trade-offs.
        3. Support the identiﬁcation and description of design risks.
        4. Substantiate that contract technical performance and manufacturing process requirements
            have been achieved.
        5. Support the decision to certify the system ready for operational test and evaluation.”
            (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908, Section 3.0, Deﬁnitions, p. 12)
      • Developmental Conﬁguration “The contractor’s design and associated technical docu-
        mentation that deﬁnes the evolving conﬁguration of a conﬁguration item during develop-
        ment. It is under the developing contractor’s conﬁguration control and describes the design
        deﬁnition and implementation. The developmental conﬁguration for a conﬁguration item
        consists of the contractor’s released hardware and software designs and associated technical
        documentation until establishment of the formal product baseline.” (Source: MIL-STD-973
        (Canceled), Conﬁguration Management, para. 3.30)
      • First Article “[I]ncludes preproduction models, initial production samples, test samples,
        ﬁrst lots, pilot models, and pilot lots; and approval involves testing and evaluating the ﬁrst
        article for conformance with speciﬁed contract requirements before or in the initial stage of
        production under a contract.” (Source: DSMC—Test & Evaluation Management Guide,
        Appendix B, Glossary of Test Terminology)
      • Functional Conﬁguration Audit (FCA) “An audit conducted to verify that the development
        of a conﬁguration item has been completed satisfactorily, that the item has achieved the per-
        formance and functional characteristics speciﬁed in the functional or allocated conﬁguration
                                   24.2 System Development Veriﬁcation and Validation Strategy   253

      identiﬁcation, and that its operational and support documents are complete and satisfactory.”
      (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990 Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology)
    • Independent Test Agency (ITA) An independent organization employed by the Acquirer
      to represent the User’s interests and evaluate how well the veriﬁed system satisﬁes the User’s
      validated operational needs under ﬁeld operating conditions in areas such as operational
      utility, suitability, and effectiveness.
    • Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) Field test and evaluation activities performed
      by the User or an Independent Test Agency (ITA) under actual OPERATING ENVIRON-
      MENT conditions to assess the operational utility, suitability, and effectiveness of a system
      based on validated User operational needs. The activities may include considerations such
      as training effectiveness, logistics supportability, reliability and maintainability demonstra-
      tions, and efﬁciency.
    • Physical Conﬁguration Audit (PCA) “An audit conducted to verify that a conﬁguration
      item, as built, conforms to the technical documentation that deﬁnes it.” (Source: IEEE
      610.12-1990 Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology)
    • Quality Record (QR) A document such as a memo, e-mail, report, analysis, meeting
      minutes, and action items that serves as objective evidence to commemorate a task-based
      action or event performed.

Phase Objective(s)
The primary objective of the System Development Phase is to translate the contract and System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements into a physical, deliverable system that has been:
    1. Veriﬁed against those requirements.
    2. Validated by the User, if required.
    3. Formally accepted by the User or the Acquirer, as the User’s contract and technical
       representative.


24.2 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT VERIFICATION
AND VALIDATION STRATEGY

During our discussion of system entity concepts in Figure 6.2 we explored the basic concept of
system veriﬁcation and validation. Veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) provides the basis for a con-
ceptual strategy to ensure the integrity of an evolving SE design solution. Let’s expand on Figure
6.2 to establish the technical and programmatic foundation for our discussion in this chapter. Figure
24.1 serves as a navigation aid for our discussion for a closed loop V&V system.

System Deﬁnition and System Procurement Phases V&V
When the User identiﬁes an Operational Need (1), the User may employ the services of an Acquirer
to serve as a contract and technical representative for the procurement action. The operational
needs, which may already be documented in a Mission Needs Statement (MNS), are translated by
the Acquirer into an Operational Requirements Document (ORD) (2) and validated in collabora-
tion with the User. The ORD becomes the basis for the Acquirer to develop a System Requirements
Document (SRD) (3) or Statement of Objectives (SOO). The SRD/SOO speciﬁes the technical
requirements for the formal solicitation—namely the Request for Proposal (RFP)—in an OPEN
competition to qualiﬁed Offerors.
254        Chapter 24     System Development Workﬂow Strategy

                                                  22 Customer Satisfaction               Operational Test & 20
             1                                                                           Evaluation (OT&E)
       Operational                           21     System Validation
         Need                                  Did We Acquire the Right Product?

                            5                                                                              17
      2                                                                   13      14    System 15
                         Contract            Major Technical Reviews                  Verification          PCA              19
           Operational                  11
          Requirements    Award               & Traceability Audits     CDR      TRRs Test (SVT)       FCA        SVR
           Document                                                                               16                    18
             (ORD)          6                         System Development Phase
                                    4
                                                                   12     System
       3
                                      System
                                    Performance
                                                                           SystemVerification
                                                                                 Verification
                                                                         DidWe
                                                                        Did     Buildthe
                                                                             WeBuild      ProductRight?
                                                                                      theProduct  Right?
             System                 Specification
          Requirements                 (SPS)
           Document
             (SRD)
                                                              7

                                8                                            System
              User                  Decision Support
   9
            Feedback                 Analyses, Trade                      Engineering &
                                     Studies, Models,
                                      Simulations, &                       Development
                                        Prototypes


                                                   Developmental Test & Evaluation (DT&E)              10

Figure 24.1 System V & V—Programmatic Perspective



     Offerors analyze the SRD/SOO, derive and develop a System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
(4) from the SRD/SOO (2), and submit the SPS as part of their proposal. When the Acquirer makes
a ﬁnal source selection decision, a System Development Agreement (6) is formally established at
the time of contract award (5).

System Development Phase V&V
The SPS (4) provides the technical basis for developing the deliverable system or product via
System Engineering and Development (6) activities. Depending on the maturity of the require-
ments, the System Developer may employ spiral development and other strategies to develop the
system design solution. In support of the system engineering and development (6) activity, Deci-
sion Support (8) performs analyses and trade studies, among other such activities, with inputs and
preliminary assessments provided from User Feedback (9), such as validation on the implementa-
tion of requirements.
     As the SE design evolves, System Veriﬁcation (12) methods are continually applied to assess
the requirements allocation, ﬂow down, and designs at all levels of abstraction—at the PRODUCT,
SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, and PART levels. Design veriﬁcation activities
include Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) (10) and Major Technical Reviews and Trace-
ability Audits (11). The purpose of these veriﬁcation activities is to assess and monitor the progress,
maturity, integrity and risk of the SE design solution. Baselines are established at critical staging
or control points—using technical reviews—to capture formal baselines of the evolving Develop-
mental Conﬁguration to facilitate decision making.

Author’s Note 24.2 Although it isn’t explicitly shown in Figure 24.1, validation activities con-
tinually occur within the System Developer’s program organization. Owners VALIDATE lower level
design solution implementations in terms of documented use case-based requirements.
                                             24.3 Implementing the System Development Phase    255

Design requirements established at the Critical Design Review (CDR) (13) provide the basis for
procuring and developing components. As each component is completed, the item is veriﬁed for
compliance to its current design requirements baseline.
     Successive levels of components progress through levels of System Integration, Test, and Eval-
uation (SITE) and veriﬁed against their respective item development speciﬁcations (IDSs). Test
Readiness Reviews (TRRs) (14) are conducted at various levels of integration to verify that all
aspects of a conﬁguration and test environment are ready to commence testing with low risk.
     When the SYSTEM level of integration is ready to be veriﬁed against the SPS (4), a System
Veriﬁcation Test (SVT) (15) is conducted. The SVT must answer the question “Did we build the
system or product RIGHT?”—in accordance with the SPS (4) requirements.
     Following the SVT, a Functional Conﬁguration Audit (FCA) (16) is conducted to authenticate
the SVT results, via quality records (QRs), as compliant with the SPS (4) requirements. The FCA
may be followed by a Physical Conﬁguration Audit (PCA) (17) to authenticate by physical meas-
urement compliance of items against their respective design requirements. On completion of the
FCA (16) and PCA (17), a System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR) (18) is conducted to certify the results
of the FCA and PCA.
     Depending on the terms and conditions (T&Cs) of the System Development Agreement (6),
completion of the SVR (18) serves as prerequisite for ﬁnal system or product delivery and accept-
ance (19) by the Acquirer for the User. For some agreements an Operational Test and Evaluation
(OT&E) (20) may be required. In preparation for the OT&E (20), the User or an Independent Test
Agency (ITA) representing the User’s interests may be employed to conduct scenario-based ﬁeld
exercises using the system or product under actual or similar OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
conditions.
     During OT&E (20), Acquirer System Validation (21) activities are conducted to answer the
question “Did we acquire the RIGHT system or product?”—as documented in the ORD or the SOO,
whichever is applicable. Depending on the scope of the contract (5), corrective actions may be
required during OT&E (20) for any design ﬂaws, latent defects, deﬁciencies, and the like. Follow-
ing OT&E (20), the ITA prepares an assessment and recommendations.

Author’s Note 24.3 Although the System Development contract (6) may be complete, the User
performs system veriﬁcation and validation activities continuously throughout the System Devel-
opment and system Operations and Support (O&S) phases of the system product life cycle. V&V
activities expand to encompass organizational and system missions. As competitive and adversar-
ial threats in the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT evolve and maintenance costs increase, “gaps”
emerge in achieving organizational and system missions with existing capabilities. These degree
of urgency to close these gaps subsequently leads to the next system or product development or
upgrade to existing capabilities.

Now that we have established the V&V strategy of system development, the question is: HOW do
we implement it? This brings us to our next topic, Implementing the system development phase.


24.3 IMPLEMENTING THE SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT PHASE

The workﬂow during the system development phase consists of ﬁve sequential workﬂow processes
as illustrated in Figure 24.2. The processes consist of:
    1. System Design Process
    2. Component Procurement and Development Process
256        Chapter 24         System Development Workﬂow Strategy


                                                   System/Product Life Cycle
            System            System                                               System         System               System
           Definition       Procurement                                          Production    Operations &            Disposal
             Phase             Phase                                                Phase      Support Phase            Phase


   1
                                               System Development Phase
           7
                                             Technical Management Process

       2                        3                       4                           5                         6
                                      Component                                                                    Operational
                                                                 System                 Authenticate
               Systems               Procurement                                                                     Test &
                                                            Integration, Test,            System
               Design                     &                                                                        Evaluation
                                                              & Evaluation               Baselines
               Process               Development                                                                    (OT&E)
                                                             (SITE) Process               Process
                                       Process                                                                       Process
                                                                                                                      Process

                          Highly                    Highly                   Highly                     Highly
                         Iterative                 Iterative                Iterative                  Iterative

           8
                                                   Decision Support Process

Figure 24.2 The System Development Process Work ﬂow


       3. System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) Process
       4. Authenticate System Baseline Process
       5. Operational Test, and Evaluation (OT&E) Process
While the general workﬂow appears to be sequential, there are highly iterative feedback loops that
connect to predecessor segements.
     The System Development Phase begins at contract award and continues through deliverable
system acceptance by the Acquirer and User. During this phase the approach that enabled the
System Developer or Service Provider to convince the Acquirer that the organization can perform
on the contract is implemented. Remember those brochureware phrases: well-organized, seamless
organization, highly efﬁcient, highly trained and performing teams; no problem, and so on.
     The System Development Phase includes those technical activities required to translate the
contract performance speciﬁcations into a physical system solution. We refer to the initial system(s)
as the ﬁrst article of the Developmental Conﬁguration. Throughout the phase, the highly iterative
system design solution evolves through a progression of maturity stages. Each stage of maturity
typically consists of a series of design reviews with entry and exit criteria supported by analyses,
prototypes, and technology demonstrations. The reviews culminate in design baselines that capture
snapshots of the evolving Developmental Conﬁguration. When the system design solution is for-
mally approved at a Critical Design Review (CDR), the Developmental Conﬁguration provides the
basis for component procurement and/or development.
     Procured and developed components are inspected, integrated, and veriﬁed against their respec-
tive design requirements-drawings- and performance speciﬁcations at various levels of integration.
The intent of veriﬁcation is to answer the question: “Did we develop the system RIGHT?”—accord-
ing to the speciﬁcation requirements. The integration culminates with a System Veriﬁcation Test
(SVT) against the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). Since the System Development Phase
focuses on development of the system, product, or service, testing throughout SVT is referred to
as Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E).
                                      24.4 Applying V&V to the System Development Workﬂow        257

    When the ﬁrst article system(s) of the Developmental Conﬁguration has been veriﬁed as
meeting its SPS requirements, one of two options may occur, depending on contract requirements.
The system may be deployed to either of the following:
    1. Another location for validation testing by the User or an Independent Test Agency (ITA)
       representing the User’s interests.
    2. The User’s designated ﬁeld site for installation, checkout, integration into the user’s Level
       0 system, and ﬁnal acceptance.
Validation testing, which is referred to as Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E), enables the
User to make a determination if they speciﬁed and procured the RIGHT SYSTEM to meet their
validated operational needs. Any deﬁciencies are documented as discrepancy reports (DRs) and
resolved in accordance with the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract.
     After an initial period of system operational use in the ﬁeld to correct latent defects such as
design ﬂaws, errors and deﬁciencies and collect ﬁeld data to validate system operations, a decision
is made to begin the System Production Phase, if applicable. If the User does not intend to place
the system or product in production, the Acquirer formally accepts system delivery, thereby initi-
ating the System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase.

Technical Management Process
The technical orchestration of the System Development Phase resides with the Technical Manage-
ment Process. The objective of this process is to plan, staff, direct, and control product-based team
activities focused on delivering their assigned items within technical, technology, cost, schedule,
and risk constraints.

Decision Support Process
The Decision Support Process supports all aspects of the System Development Phase process
decision-making activities. This includes conducting analyses, trade studies, modeling, simulation,
testing, and technology demonstrations to collect data to validate models and provide prioritized
recommendations to support informed decision making within each of the workﬂow processes.

Exit to System Production Phase or
System Deployment Phase
When the System Development Phase is completed, the workﬂow progresses to the System Pro-
duction Phase or System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase, whichever is applicable.

Guidepost 24.1 Based on a description of the System Development Phase workﬂow processes,
let’s investigate HOW the V&V strategy is integrated with the workﬂow progression.


24.4 APPLYING V&V TO THE SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT WORKFLOW

So far we have introduced the System Development Phase processes and described the sequential
workﬂow. Each of these processes enables the System Developer to accomplish speciﬁc objectives
such as:
    1. Select and mature a design from a set of viable candidate solutions based on an analysis of
       alternatives.
258         Chapter 24        System Development Workﬂow Strategy

 1
                                              System Validation
     Operational                                                                            20
      Need(s)                                  Design
                                         7    Validation
                         Requirements
      2                   Validation
                        4                Developmental Test & Evaluation (DT&E)                          12
 3                             5                           8                                 11                       18       19
        System                       System                      Component                          System
                                      System                                                      Integration,                      OT&E
     Performance                   Engineering                 Procurement &                                                         OT&E
                                    Engineering                                                     Test, &                         Process
     Specification                   Design                     Development                                                          Process
                                      Design                                                       Evaluation
                                     Process
                                      Process                     Process
                                                                                                    Process

                         6                           9                  10
                 Design Verification
                                                   Design                    Component                                           Verified &
                                                Requirements                 Verification                                    22 Validated
           13 Verification Methods &
               Requirements
                                                                 17                                                                 System
                14                            · Functional Configuration Audit (FCA)
                    System
                  Verification
                                              · Physical Configuration Audit(PCA)                                (18) Not Shown
                                                                                                                 · Authenticate System Baselines
                                                                                                                   Process
                  Procedures
                                         15
                                                 Verification Procedures
                                                                                                                 ··System Delivery Process
                                                                                                                   Install & C.O. System Process
                                                               System Verification
                                                      16

Figure 24.3 Development Process Context System Veriﬁcation and Validation Concept




          2. Procure, fabricate, code, and test PART level components.
          3. Perform multi-level system integration, test, and evaluation.
          4. Verify items at each level of integration satisfy speciﬁcation requirements.
          5. Validate, if applicable, the integrated SYSTEM as meeting User operational needs.
Until the system is delivered and accepted by the Acquirer, the Developmental Conﬁguration, which
captures the various design baselines, is always in a state of evolution. It may require redesign or
rework to correct latent defects, deﬁciencies, errors, and the like. So how do we minimize the
impacts of these effects? This brings us to the need for an integrated veriﬁcation and validation
(V&V) strategy. To facilitate our discussion, Figure 24.3 provides a framework.

System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) V&V Strategy
During the System Procurement Phase, Operational Needs (1) identiﬁed by the User and Acquirer
are documented (2) in the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) (3). This is a critical step. The
reason is that by this point the Acquirer, in collaboration with the User, has partitioned the organi-
zational problem space into one or more solution spaces.
     Each solution space is bounded by requirements speciﬁed in its SPS. If there are any errors in
tactical or engineering judgment, they manifest themselves in the requirements documented in the
SPS. Therefore the challenge question for the Acquirer, User, and ultimately the System Developer
is: Have we speciﬁed the RIGHT system—solution space—to satisfy one or more operational
needs—problem space? How do we answer this question?
     SPS requirements should be subjected to Requirements Validation (4) against the Operational
Need (1) to validate that the right solution space description has been accurately and precisely
bounded by the SPS (3).
                                      24.4 Applying V&V to the System Development Workﬂow         259

Author’s Note 24.4 A word of caution: any discussions with the User and Procurement Team
regarding the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements validation requires tactful pro-
fessionalism and sensitivity. In effect, you are validating that the Acquirer performed their job cor-
rectly. On the one hand they may be grateful for you identiﬁed any potential deﬁciencies in their
assessment. Conversely, you may highly offend! Approach any discussions in a tactful, well-
conceived, professional manner.

SE Design V&V Strategy
When the SPS requirements have been validated, the SPS (3) serves as originating or source
requirements inputs to system design. During the system design, Interim Design Veriﬁcation (6) is
performed on the evolving system design solution by tracing allocated requirements back to the
SPS and prototyping design areas for RISK mitigation and critical operational or technical issue
(COI/CTI) resolution. Design Validation (7) activities should also be performed to conﬁrm that the
User and Acquirer, as the User’s technical representative, agree that the evolving System Design
Solution satisﬁes their needs.

Author’s Note 24.5 The Interim Design Veriﬁcation (6) and Interim Design Validation (7), or
design “veriﬁcation and validation,” are considered complete when the system has been veriﬁed,
validated, and legally accepted by the User via the Acquirer in accordance with the terms of the
contract. Therefore the term “interim” is applied.

Design veriﬁcation and validation occurs throughout the SE Design Process. Validation is accom-
plished via: 1) technical reviews (e.g., SDR, SSR, PDR, and CDR) and 2) technical demonstra-
tions. Communications media such as conceptual views, sketches, drawings, presentations,
technical demonstrations, and/or prototypes are used to obtain Acquirer and User validation accept-
ance and approval, as appropriate. On completion of a system level CDR, workﬂow progresses to
Component Procurement and Development (8).

Component Procurement and Development V&V Strategy
During Component Procurement and Development (8), design requirements from the System
Design (5) serve as the basis for procuring, fabricating, coding, and assembling system compo-
nents. Each component undergoes component veriﬁcation (10) against its Design Requirements (5).
As components are veriﬁed, workﬂow progresses to System Integration, Test, and Evaluation
(SITE) (11).

System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) V&V Strategy
When components complete veriﬁcation, they enter System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (11).
Activities performed during this process are often referred to as developmental test and evaluation
(DT&E) (12). DT&E occurs throughout the entire System Development Phase, from System Design
(5) through SITE (11). The purpose of DT&E in this context is to verify that the system and its
embedded subsystems, HWCIs/CSCIs, assemblies, and parts are compatible and interoperable with
themselves and the system’s external interfaces.
     To accomplish the SITE Process, Veriﬁcation Methods and Requirements (13) deﬁned in the
SPS (3) and multi-level item development speciﬁcations (IDSs) are used to develop Veriﬁcation
Procedures (14). Veriﬁcation methods—consisting of inspection, analysis, test, demonstration, and
similarity—are deﬁned by the SPS for each requirement and used as the basis for verifying com-
pliance. One or more detailed test procedures (14) that prescribe the test environment conﬁgura-
260     Chapter 24   System Development Workﬂow Strategy

tion—such as the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT (initial and dynamic), data inputs, and expected
test results—support each veriﬁcation method.
     During SITE (11), the System Developer formally tests the SYSTEM with representatives of
the Acquirer and User as witnesses. Multi-level system veriﬁcation activities, at appropriate inte-
gration points (IPs) review (15) test data and results against the veriﬁcation procedures (14) and
expected results speciﬁed in the appropriate development speciﬁcations. When the system com-
pletes SITE (11), a formal System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT) corroborates the system’s capabilities
and performance against the SPS.

Authenticate System Baselines V&V Strategy—First Pass
When the SVT is completed, workﬂow progresses to Authenticate System Baselines (18). The
process contains two authentication processes that may be performed at different times, depending
on contract requirements. The ﬁrst authentication consists of a Functional Conﬁguration Audit
(FCA) (17). Using the SPS and other development speciﬁcation requirements as a basis, the FCA
reviews the results of the As-Designed, Built, and Veriﬁed system that has just completed the SVT
to verify that it fully complies with the SPS functional and performance requirements. The FCA
may be conducted at various levels of IPs during the SITE Process.
      On successful completion of the FCA, the system may be deployed to a User’s test range or
site to undergo Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) (19). On completion of OT&E, the system
may reenter the Authenticate System Baselines process for the second pass.

Validate System Process V&V Strategy
Up to this point, the system is veriﬁed by SVT and audited by FCA to meet the SPS requirements.
The next step is to validate that the As-Designed, Built, and Veriﬁed system satisﬁes the User’s
Operational Needs (1) as part of the Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) (20) activities.
     System validation activities (20) demonstrate how well the ﬁelded system performs missions
in its intended operational environment as originally envisioned by the User. Any system latent
defects and deﬁciencies discovered during system validation are recorded as problem reports and
submitted to the appropriate decision authority for disposition and corrective action, if required.

Author’s Note 24.6 During system validation, a determination is made that an identiﬁed deﬁ-
ciency is within the scope of the original contract’s SPS. This is a critical issue. For example, did
the User or Acquirer overlook a speciﬁc capability as an operational need and failed to document
it in the SPS? This point reinforces the need to perform a credible Requirements Validation (4)
activity prior to or immediately after Contract Award to AVOID surprises during system accept-
ance. If the deﬁciency is not within the scope of the contract, the Acquirer may be confronted with
modifying the contract and funding additional design implementation and efforts to incorporate
changes to correct the deﬁciency.

Authenticate System Baselines V&V Strategy—Second Pass
During the second pass through Authenticate System Baselines (18), the As Designed, Built, Ver-
iﬁed, and Validated (20) conﬁguration system is subjected to a Physical Conﬁguration Audit (PCA)
(17). PCA audits the As-Designed, Built, and Veriﬁed physical system to determine if it fully com-
plies with its design requirements such as drawings and parts lists. On successful completion of
the PCA (17), a System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR) is conducted to:
      1. Certify the results of the FCA and PCA.
      2. Resolve any outstanding FCA/PCA issues related to those results.
      3. Assess readiness-to-ship decision.
                                                                                       24.5 Risk Mitigation with DT&E and OT&E                     261

On successful completion of the OT&E Process (19), a Veriﬁed and Validated System (22) should
be ready for delivery to the User via formal acceptance by the Acquirer.

Guidepost 24.2 Integrating the V&V strategy into the System Development Phase workﬂow
describes the mechanics of ensuring the evolving Development Conﬁguration is progressing to a
plan. However, performing to a plan does not guarantee that the system can be completed suc-
cessfully on schedule and within budget. The development, especially for large, complex systems,
must resolve critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs), each with one or more risks.
So how do we mitigate these risks? This brings us to our next topical discussion, the roles of the
Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) and the Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E).

24.5 RISK MITIGATION WITH DT&E AND OT&E

Satisfactory completion of system development requires that a robust strategy be established up
front. We noted earlier that although the workﬂow appears to be sequential, each process consists
of highly iterative feedback loops with each other as illustrated by Figure 24.4. To accomplish this,
two types of testing occur during the System Development Phase: 1) Developmental Test & Eval-
uation (DT & E) and 2) Operational Test & Evaluation (OT & E).

Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E)
Developmental testing (DT) serves as a risk mitigation approach to ensure that the evolving system
design solution, including its components, complies with the System Performance Speciﬁcation
(SPS) requirements. DT focuses on two themes:
       1. Are we building the system or product right—meaning using best practices in compliance
          with the SPS.
       2. Do we have a design solution that represents the best, acceptable risk solution for a given
          set of technical, cost, technology, and schedule constraints?

  1                                   2
       Mission                             Operational                11
        Needs                             Requirements                          Operational Test & Evaluation (OT&E)
      Statement                            Document                               Did We Acquire the RIGHT System to Meet the End User’s
       (MNS)                                 (ORD)                                             Intended Operational Needs?
                                                                           12                     13                        14
                      Requirements                                                Test &                  Conduct
 3                                                   4
                       Verification                                             Evaluation              Operational                OT&E
      Statement                          System
                      & Validation                                                Master               Scenario-Based            Assessment
          of                          Requirements                                 Plan                  Field Tests               Report
      Objectives                       Document                                  (TEMP)
        (SOO)                            (SRD)


10
                                                                                                                                      Verified
                   OR                      Developmental Test & Evaluation (DT&E)                                                       Test
                             Are We Developing the System RIGHT in accordance with the Specification Requirements?                    Article(s)
         5                        6                               7                           8                         9    Multi-Level
               System                                                                              Multi-Level
                                      Multi-Level SE                  Multi-Level SE                                           System
             Performance                                                                           Component
                                       “Design To”                     “Build To”                                            Integration,
             Specification                                                                        Procurement/
                                      Specifications                  Requirements                                             Test, &
                (SPS)                                                                             Development
                                                                                                                              Evaluation

                        Requirements                        Design
                        Verification &                   Verification &               Component Level
                         Validation                       Validation                    Verification
                                                             Multi-Level System Integration Verification & Validation
                                                                  System Level Verification


Figure 24.4 System V & V—Technical Perspective
262     Chapter 24   System Development Workﬂow Strategy

The DSMC T&E Management Guide states that the objectives of DT&E are to:
      1. Identify potential operational and technological capabilities and limitations of the alterna-
         tive concepts and design options being pursued;
      2. Support the identiﬁcation of cost-performance tradeoffs by providing analyses of the capa-
         bilities and limitations of alternatives;
      3. Support the identiﬁcation and description of design technical risks;
      4. Assess progress toward meeting critical operational issues (COIs), mitigation of
         acquisition technical risk, achievement of manufacturing process requirements and system
         maturity;
      5. Assess validity of assumptions and conclusions from the analysis of alternatives (AOA);
      6. Provide data and analysis in support of the decision to certify the system ready for opera-
         tional test and evaluation (OT&E);
      7. In the case of automated information systems, support an information systems security cer-
         tiﬁcation prior to processing classiﬁed or sensitive data and ensure a standards conformance
         certiﬁcation.
(Source: Adapted from DSMC Test & Evaluation Management Guide, App. B, p. B-6)
     DT&E is performed throughout System Design Process, Component and Procurement Process,
and the SITE Process. Each process task veriﬁes that the evolving and maturing system or product
design solution—the Developmental Conﬁguration—fully complies with the SPS requirements.
This is accomplished via reviews, proof of principle and proof of concept demonstrations, tech-
nology demonstrations, engineering models, simulations, brass boards, and prototypes.
     On completion of veriﬁcation, the physical system or product enters OT&E, whereby it is val-
idated against the User’s documented operational need.

Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E)
Operational test and evaluation (OT&E) activities are typically conducted on large, complex
systems such as aircraft and military acquirer activity systems. The theme of OT&E is: Did we
acquire the RIGHT system or product to satisfy our operational need(s)? OT&E consists of sub-
jecting the test articles to actual ﬁeld environmental conditions with operators from the User’s
organization. An Independent Test Agency (ITA) designated by the Acquirer or User typically con-
ducts this testing. To ensure independence and avoid conﬂicts of interest, the contract precludes
the System Developer from direct participation in OT&E; the System Developer may, however,
provide maintenance support, if required.
      Since the OT&E is dependent on how well the system’s Users perform with the new
system or product, the ITA or System Developer train the User’s personnel to safely operate the
system. This may occur prior to system deployment following the SVT or on arrival at the OT&E
site.
      During the OT&E, the ITA trains the User’s personnel in how to conduct various operational
use cases and scenarios under actual ﬁeld OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions. The use
cases and scenarios are structured to evaluate system operational utility, suitability, availability,
and effectiveness. ITA personnel instrument the SYSTEM to record and observe the human–system
interactions and responses. Results of the interactions are scored, summarized, and presented as
recommendations.
      On successful completion of the DT&E and OT&E and the follow-on Authenticate System
Baselines Process, the veriﬁed and validated system or product is delivered to the Acquirer or User
for ﬁnal acceptance.
                                                                   Organizational Centric Exercises    263

24.6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system development workﬂow strategy practices.

Principle 24.1 A system development strategy must have three elements:
    1. A strategy-based roadmap to get from Contract Award to system delivery and acceptance
       supported by incremental veriﬁcation and validation.
    2. A plan of action for implementing the strategy.
    3. Documented objective evidence that you performed to the plan via work product quality
       records.

Principle 24.2 System veriﬁcation and validation applies to every stage of product development
workﬂow beginning at Contract Award and continuing until system delivery and acceptance.

Principle 24.3 Developmental test and evaluation (DT&E) is performed by the System Devel-
oper to mitigate Developmental Conﬁguration risks; Users employ the operational test and evalu-
ation (OT&E) to determine if they acquired the right system.

24.7 SUMMARY

During our discussion of the system development workﬂow strategy we introduced the system development
phase processes. The System Development Phase processes include:
    1. System Design
    2. Component Procurement and Development
    3. System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE)
    4. Authenticate System Baseline
    5. Operational Test, and Evaluation (OT&E)
      Based on the System Development Phase processes, we described an overall workﬂow strategy for ver-
iﬁcation and validation. This strategy provides the high-level framework for transforming a User’s validated
operational need into a deliverable system, product, or service.
      We introduced the concepts of developmental test and evaluation (DT&E) and operational test and eval-
uation (OT&E). Our discussion covered how DT&E and OT&E serve as key veriﬁcation and validation activ-
ities and their relationship to the system development workﬂow strategy.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Using a system listed in Table 2.1, develop a description of the activities for each System Development
   Phase process to be employed and integrated into an overall V & V strategy.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for guidance and direction in implementing the System
   Development Phase from an SE perspective.
   (a) What requirements are levied on SE contributions?
264     Chapter 24     System Development Workﬂow Strategy

   (b) What overall process is required and how do SEs contribute?
   (c) What SE work products and quality records are required?
   (d) What veriﬁcation and validation activities are required?
2. Contact a small, medium, and a large contract program within your organization. Interview the Technical
   Director or Project Engineer to identify the following information:
   (a) Request the individual to graphically depict their development strategy?
   (b) What factors drove them to choose the implementation strategy?
   (c) What were some of the lessons learned from developing and implementing the strategy that would
       inﬂuence their approach next time?
   (d) How was the V & V strategy implemented?


REFERENCES

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998.              MIL-STD-973. 1992. Military Standard: Conﬁguration
  DSMC Test and Evaluation Management Guide, 3rd ed.           Management. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  Defense Acquisition Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.                   (DoD).
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of         MIL-HDBK-1908B. 1999. DoD Deﬁnitions of Human
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-      Factors Terms. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) New York, NY.         (DOD).


ADDITIONAL READING

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.              ASD-100 Architecture and System Engineering. 2003.
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th        National Air Space System—Systems Engineering
  ed. Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.     Manual. Washington, DC: Federal Aviation Administra-
MIL-HDBK-470A. 1997. Designing and Developing Main-             tion (FAA).
  tainable Products and Systems. Washington, DC: Depart-      Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.
  ment of Defense (DoD).                                        Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Defense Acquisition
MIL-STD-1521B (canceled). 1985. Military Standard:              University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.
  Technical Reviews and Audits for Systems, Equipments,
  and Computer Software. Washington, DC: Department of
  Defense (DoD).
Chapter              25

     System Design, Integration,
     and Veriﬁcation Strategy

25.1 INTRODUCTION

Our discussion of the system development workﬂow strategy established a sequence of highly inter-
dependent processes that depict the workﬂow for translating the System Performance Speciﬁcation
(SPS) into a system design solution. The strategy provides a frame of reference to:
     1. Verify compliance with the SPS requirements.
     2. Validate that the deliverable system satisﬁes the User’s validated operational needs.
The workﬂow strategy identiﬁed two key processes that form the basis for designing and devel-
oping a system: the System Design Process and the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE)
Process.
     This section focuses on the strategies for implementing the System Design Process and the
SITE Process. Each strategy expands each process via lower level processes. Finally, we integrate
the two strategies into an overall strategy referred to as the V-Model for system deployment.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What is the basic strategy for implementing the System Design Process of the System
        Development Phase?
     2. What is the basic strategy for implementing the SITE Process of the System Development
        Phase?
     3. What is the V-Model of system design and development?
     4. What is an integration point?
     5. How do the system design process strategy and the SITE Process integrate?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
     • Corrective Action The set of tasks required to correct or rescope speciﬁcation contents,
       errors, or omissions; designs ﬂaws or errors; rework components due to poor workmanship,
       defective materials or parts; or correct errors or omissions in test procedures.
     • Discrepancy Report (DR) A report that identiﬁes a condition in which a document or test
       results indicate a noncompliance with a capability and performance requirement speciﬁed in
       a performance or item development speciﬁcation.

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                265
266     Chapter 25        System Design, Integration, and Veriﬁcation Strategy

      • Integration Point Any one of a number of conﬂuence points during the System Integra-
        tion, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) Process where two or more entities are integrated.
      • V-Model A graphical model that illustrates the time-based, multi-level strategy for (1)
        decomposing speciﬁcation requirements, (2) procuring and developing physical components,
        and (3) integrating, testing, evaluating, and verifying each set of integrated components.


25.2 SYSTEM DESIGN PROCESS STRATEGY

The System Design Process of the System Development Phase employs a highly iterative, top-
down/bottom-up/lateral process. Since the process requires analysis and decomposition/expansion
of abstract, high-level SPS requirements into lower levels of detail for managing complexity, each
lower level design activity subsequently occurs in later time increments. Figure 25.1 illustrates this
sequencing. Each horizontal bar in the ﬁgure:
      1. Represents design activities that may range from very small to very large level of efforts
         (LOEs) over time.
      2. Includes preliminary activities that ramp up with time.
This graphic is representative of most development programs. Some programs may be unprece-
dented and require more maturity at higher levels until lower level design activities are initiated as
evidenced by the white, horizontal bars. Other systems may be precedented and reuse some or most
of an existing design solution. Thus preliminary design activities at all levels may be initiated with
a small effort at Contract Award and ramp up over time. Given this backdrop, let’s describe the
strategy for creating the multi-level design solution.




                              HSRs/
CA      SRR         SDR       SRRs PDR                                                          CDR


                                     SYSTEMLevel
                                    SYSTEM        DesignActivities
                                            LevelDesign  Activities

                                             Highly Iterative V & V                                 PRODUCT
                                                                                                    Level CDRs
 Preliminary                                PRODUCTLevel
                                           PRODUCT        DesignActivities
                                                    LevelDesign  Activities

                                           Highly Iterative V & V                                 SUBSYSTEM
                                                                                                   Level CDRs
      Preliminary                            SUBSYSTEMLevel
                                            SUBSYSTEM        DesignActivities
                                                       LevelDesign  Activities

                                           Highly Iterative V & V                               HWCI/CSCI
                                                                                                Level CDRs
           Preliminary Design                          HWCI/CSCILevel
                                                      HWCI/CSCI        DesignActivities
                                                                 LevelDesign  Activities

                                         Highly Iterative V & V                                SUBASSY/CSC
                                                                                                Level CDRs
                    Preliminary Design                      SUBASSEMBLY/CSC                      (Optional)
                                                                             LevelDesign
                                                             SUBASSEMBLY/CSCLevel  Design

                                         Highly Iterative V & V
                                                                                               PART/CSU
                                                                                               Level CDRs
                          Preliminary Design                           PART/CSULevel
                                                                      PART/CSU  LevelDesign
                                                                                      Design    (Optional)

Figure 25.1 Time-Based Sequencing of SE Design activities
                                             25.3 Implementation of the System Design Process    267

Guidepost 25.1 At this point we have established the theoretical approach for performing
system design. This brings us to the next topic, implementing the System Design Process.


25.3 IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SYSTEM DESIGN PROCESS

The initial implementation of the System Design Process occurs during the System Procurement
Phase of the system/product life cycle. During the System Procurement Phase, the System Devel-
oper proposes solution responses to the Acquirer’s formal Request for Proposal (RFP) solicitation.
     When the System Development Phase begins at Contact Award (CA), the System Design
Process is repeated to develop reﬁnements in the PROPOSED system design solution. These reﬁne-
ments are implemented to accommodate requirements changes that may have occurred as part of
the ﬁnal contract negotiation and maturation of the proposed design solution.
     The actual implementation involves several design approaches. Among these approaches are
Waterfall, Incremental Development, and Spiral Development which are introduced in a later
chapter. The approach selected depends on criteria such as:
    1. Level of understanding of the problem and solution spaces.
    2. The maturity of the SPS requirements.
    3. Level of risk.
    4. Critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs).
Some people may categorize Figure 25.1 as the Waterfall Model for system development. While it
may appear to resemble a waterfall, it is not a true waterfall in design. The Waterfall Model pre-
sumes each level of design to be completed just before the next level is initiated (as illustrated in
Figure 27.1). The fallacy with the Waterfall approach is:
    • You must perform lower level analysis and preliminary design to be able to understand the
      requirements decisions at a higher level and their lower level ramiﬁcations.
    • As a typical entry criterion for the Critical Design Review (CDR), the total system design
      is expected to have a reasonable level of maturity sufﬁcient to commit component procure-
      ment and development resources with acceptable risk. Remember, at CDR most system
      designs solutions are UNPROVEN—that is, as the fully integrated system. Therefore, the
      system level design solution is NOT considered ofﬁcially complete UNTIL the system has
      been formally accepted in accordance with the terms and conditions (T&Cs) of the contract.
As Figure 25.1 illustrates, each level of design occurs concurrently at various levels of effort
throughout the System Design Process. Since every design level incrementally evolves to maturity
over time toward CDR, the level of activity of each design activity bar diminishes toward CDR.
By CDR, the quantity of requirements and performance allocation changes should have diminished
and stabilized as objective evidence of the maturity.

Concurrent, Multi-level Design Activities
Each activity (bar) in Figure 25.1 consists of a shaded Preliminary Design segment followed by a
Design Activity segment.
     Preliminary Design segments are shaded from left to right, with darker shading to represent
increasing level of effort (LOE) work activity. These preliminary design activities may involve
analyses, modeling, and simulation to investigate lower level design issues to support higher level
decision making by one or more individuals on a part-time or full-time basis. Consider the fol-
lowing example:
268    Chapter 25    System Design, Integration, and Veriﬁcation Strategy


 EXAMPLE 25.1
An Integrated Product Team (IPT) may be tasked or subcontractor contracted to perform preliminary analy-
sis and design with the understanding that a task or contract option may be to shift work activities at any level
from feasibility studies to actual design activities.

The distinction between Preliminary Design (shaded) and Design Activities is graphically sepa-
rated for discussion purposes. Within System Developer organizations, there is no break between
segments—just an expansion in LOE from one or two people to ﬁve or ten.

Design Maturation Reviews
Throughout the System Design Process, program formal and informal reviews are conducted to
assess the maturity, completeness, consistency, and risk of the evolving system design solution.

Referral A detailed description of these reviews appears in Chapter 54 Technical Review Prac-
tices used in the veriﬁcation and validation phase of the design process.

Guidepost 25.2 Given an overview of the system design strategy, let’s shift our focus to the
system integration, test, and evaluation (SITE) strategy.

25.4 IMPLEMENTING THE SYSTEM DESIGN
PROCESS STRATEGY

To illustrate HOW the system design activities are implemented, consider the example illustrated
in Figure 25.2. In the ﬁgure the SPS (1) is analyzed, a SYSTEM level Engineering Design (3) is
selected, and requirements are allocated (2) to PRODUCTS A and B. SPS requirements allocated
to PRODUCT B are ﬂowed down (5) and captured via the PRODUCT B Development Speciﬁca-
tion (7). PRODUCT B Development Speciﬁcation requirements are then traced (6) back to the
source or originating requirements of the SPS.
     To fully understand the implications of requirements allocated to PRODUCT B, a design team
initiates PRODUCT B’s Engineering Design (9). PRODUCT B’s Engineering Design (9) is selected
from a set of viable candidates. PRODUCT B’s Development Speciﬁcation requirements are then
allocated (8) to SUBSYSTEMS B1 and B2.
     At each level, formal and informal technical review(s) are conducted to verify (4), (10), (16),
and (22) that the evolving designs comply with the requirements allocated from their respective
speciﬁcations. The process repeats until all levels of abstraction have been expanded into detailed
designs for review and approval at the SYSTEM level CDR.

Guidepost 25.3 At this point we have investigated the strategy that depicts how the SPS is
translated into a detailed design for approval at the CDR. Next we explore the SITE strategy that
demonstrates that the various levels of integrated, physical components satisfy their speciﬁcation
requirements.

25.5 SYSTEM INTEGRATION, TEST, AND
EVALUATION (SITE) STRATEGY

The system design strategy is based on a hierarchical decomposition framework that partitions a
complex system solution space into lower level solution spaces until the PART level is reached.
                                                                               25.5 System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) Strategy                 269


                                                        3                                                 Allocations                               1
                                                                                                                                     System
                                                            SYSTEM Level Engineering Design                         2              Performance
                                                                                                                                   Specification
                                                                  PRODUCT          PRODUCT
                                                                                                                    4                 (SPS)
                                                                     A                B
                                               Design
                    Top-Down/Bottom-Up/LateralDesign




                                                                                                               Verification
                                                                                                   Flow                                  Requirements
                                                                                                          Dow
                                                                                                                n       5                Traceability    6
          IterativeTop-Down/Bottom-Up/Lateral




                                                             9                                            Allocations                               7
                                                                 Product B Engineering Design                                       Product B
                                                                                                                        8          Development
                                                                   Subsystem          Subsystem                                    Specification
                                                                      B1                 B2                         10
                                                                                                                    Verification
                                                                                                   Flo
                                                                                                         wD
                                                                                                              own
                                                                                                                                         Requirements
                                                                                                                        11               Traceability 13
                                                        15                                                Allocations
                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                          Subsystem B2 Engineering Design                               14           Subsystem
                                                                                                                                         B2
                                                                 HWCI          CSCI      CSCI                                       Development
                                                                  B21          B21        B22                       16
   HighlyIterative




                                                                                                                                    Specification
                                                                                                               Verification
                                                                                                   Flow
                                                                                                          Dow                             Requirements
                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                        17                Traceability 19
  Highly




                                                        21
                                                             CSCI B22 Engineering Design                  Allocations                               18
                                                                                                                                    CSCI B22
                                                                 CSC        CSC          CSC
                                                                 B221       B222         B223
                                                                                                                        20           Software
                                                                                                                                   Requirements
                                                                                                                    22             Specification
                                                                                                  23                                  (SRS)
                                                                                                               Verification
                                                                                      CSU Level
Figure 25.2 System Engineering Design Strategy

For system integration we reverse this strategy by integrating the PART level solutions into higher
levels of complexity. Thus we establish the fundamental strategy for SITE.
    The SITE Process is implemented by integrating into successively higher levels physical com-
ponents that have been veriﬁed at a given level of abstraction. We refer to each integration node as
an Integration Point (IP). Figure 25.3 provides an illustrative example of the time-based graphical
sequence of our discussion.

Multi-level Integration and Veriﬁcation Activities
Suppose that we have a system that consists of multiple levels of abstraction. Physical hardware
PARTS and/or computer software units (CSUs) that have been veriﬁed are integrated into higher
level hardware SUBASSEMBLIES and/or computer software components (CSCs). Each SUB-
ASSEMBLY/CSC is then formally veriﬁed for compliance to its respective speciﬁcation or design
requirements. The process continues until SYSTEM level integration and veriﬁcation is completed
via a formal System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT).

Applying Veriﬁcation Methods to SITE
Each integration step employs INSPECTION, ANALYSIS, DEMONSTRATION, or TEST veriﬁ-
cation methods prescribed by the respective development speciﬁcation. Veriﬁcation methods are
implemented via acceptance test procedures (ATPs) formally approved by the program and
Acquirer, if applicable, and maintained under program CM control. Representatives from the
System Developer, the Acquirer, to the User organizations, as appropriate, participate in the formal
event and witness veriﬁcation of each requirement.
270     Chapter 25   System Design, Integration, and Veriﬁcation Strategy

         Level of Integration
      SYSTEM
       SYSTEM                                    SYSTEM Level Verification
                                                                                                      SYSTEM
                                                                                                       SYSTEM
        Level
         Level
                                                                                                                    CA
   PRODUCT
    PRODUCT                                 PRODUCT Level Verification               PRODUCTS
                                                                                      PRODUCTS               Verified
     Level
      Level                                                                                                PRODUCTS
                                                                                                     CA
  SUBSYSTEM
   SUBSYSTEM                     SUBSYSTEM Level Verification       SUBSYSTEMS
                                                                     SUBSYSTEMS
     Level
      Level                                                                                     Verified
                                                                                             SUBSYSTEMS
                                                                                     CA
  ASSEMBLY
   ASSEMBLY          HWCI/CSCI Level Verification
                                                    HWCIs/CSCIs
                                                     HWCIs/CSCIs               Verified
     Level
      Level
                      SUBASSY/CSC                                            HWCIs & CSCIs
                     Level Verification                             CA
                                                                                   Where:
SUBASSEMBLY
 SUBASSEMBLY                  SUBASSYs./CSCs
                               SUBASSYs./CSCs              Verified                  CSC = Computer SW Component
    Level
     Level                                             SUBASSEMBLIES                 CSCI = Computer SW Configuration Item
                                                           & CSCs                    CSU = Computer SW Unit
                                                    CA                               HWCI = Hardware Configuration Item
   PART              PARTs/CSUs
    PARTLevel
         Level        PARTs/CSUs                  Verified
                                               PARTs & CSUs                               Time
                                                                                           Time
                                      CA

Figure 25.3 System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) Sequencing



Author’s Note 25.1 The level of formality required for witnessing veriﬁcation events varies by
contract and organization. For some systems, certiﬁed System Developer testers at lower levels
may be permitted to verify some components without a quality assurance (QA) witness. At higher
levels the Acquirer may elect to participate and invite the User. Consult your contract and orga-
nization’s policies and protocols for speciﬁc guidance. For some systems, critical technologies may
require involvement of all parties in formal veriﬁcation events at lower levels.

Correcting Design Flaws, Errors, Defects, and Deﬁciencies
If discrepancies between actual results and expected results occur, corrective actions are initiated.
Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 25.2
Corrective actions include:
1. Modiﬁcation or updating of the speciﬁcation requirements.
2. Redesign of components.
3. Design changes or error corrections.
4. Replacement of defective parts or materials, etc.
5. Workmanship corrections.
6. Retraining of certiﬁed testers, etc.

When the veriﬁcation results have been approved and all critical Discrepancy Reports (DRs) are
closed, the item is then integrated at the next higher level. In our example, the next level consists
of hardware conﬁguration items (HWCIs) and computer software conﬁguration items (CSCIs).
                                                           25.6 Implementing the Site Process Strategy                       271

25.6 IMPLEMENTING THE SITE PROCESS STRATEGY

Our previous discussions presented the top-down, multi-level, speciﬁcation driven, SE Design
Process. In this chapter we present a bottom-up, “mirror image” discussion regarding HOW the
multi-level SITE Process and system veriﬁcation are accomplished.
     Our discussion of the system integration, test, and veriﬁcation (SITE) strategy uses Figure 25.4
as a reference. Let’s begin by highlighting key areas of the ﬁgure.
      • The left side of the chart depicts the multi-level speciﬁcations used by the System Engi-
        neering (SE) Design Process to create the system design solution.
      • The right side of the chart depicts a hierarchical structure that represents how system com-
        ponents at various levels begin as veriﬁed hardware PARTS or computer software units
        (CSUs) are integrated to form the SYSTEM at the top of the structure.
      • The horizontal gray arrows between these two columns represent the linking of veriﬁcation
        methods, acceptance test procedures (ATPs), and veriﬁcation results at each level.

Author’s Note 25.2 As previously discussed in the SE Design Process, the contents of this chart
serve as an illustrative example for discussion purposes. Attempting to illustrate all the combina-



 1                          System Verification
       System
     Performance                      35                   System
     Specification
        (SPS)                     34
                        Verification Methods & ATPs                 SYSTEM Level
                                                               33
                                                                     Integration
 7                       Product B Verification
      Product B
     Development                      32                  Product         Product
                                                                                                                      Test


     Specification                                           B               A
                                                                                                        Integration&&Test



                                  31
                       Verification Methods & ATPs
                                                               30
                                                                                              Bottom-UpIntegration




                                                                    PRODUCT B Integration
 12                     Subsystem B2 Verification
       Subsystem
           B2                      29                Subsystem          Subsystem
                                                                                             Bottom-Up




      Development                                       B2                 B1
      Specification              28
                       Verification Methods & ATPs
                                                          27
                                                               SUBSYSTEM C Integration
 18                      CSCI B22 Verification
       CSCI B22                                      24
                                   26                     CSCI       CSCI      HWCI
        Software
      Requirements                                         B22        B21       B21
      Specification              25
         (SRS)           Verification Methods
                                & ATPs               CSCs B1 - B3            Assemblies
Figure 25.4 System Integration, & Test Strategy
272       Chapter 25         System Design, Integration, and Veriﬁcation Strategy

tions and permutations for every conceivable system in a single chart can be confusing and imprac-
tical. You, as a practicing Systems Engineer, need to employ your own mental skills to apply this
concept to your own business domain, systems, and applications.

Guidepost 25.4 The preceding discussions focused on the individual system design and SITE
strategies. Next we integrate these strategies into a model.


25.7 INTEGRATING SYSTEM DESIGN AND
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES

Although the system design and SITE strategies represent the overall system development work-
ﬂow, the progression has numerous feedback loops to perform corrective actions for design ﬂaws,
errors, and deﬁciencies. As such, the two strategies need to be integrated to form an overall strat-
egy that enables us to address the feedback loops. If we integrate Figures 25.1 and 25.3, Figure
25.5 emerges and forms what is referred to as the V-Model of system development.
     The V-Model is a pseudo time-based model. In general, workﬂow progresses from left to right
over time. However, the highly iterative characteristic of the System Design Process strategy and
veriﬁcation corrective action aspects of SITE may require returning to a preceding step. Recall
from above that the corrective actions might involve a re-working of lower level speciﬁcations,
designs, and components. So, as the corrective actions are implemented over time, workﬂow does
progress from left to right to delivery and acceptance of the system.

Author’s Note 25.3 This point illustrates WHERE and HOW system development programs
become “bottlenecked,” consuming resources without making earned value work progress because
of re-work. It also reinforces the importance of investing in up-front SE as a means of minimizing
and mitigating re-work risks! Despite all of the rhetoric by local heroes that SE is a non–value-


                                                                                                                 User’s System
      System Design Process                                                                 SITE Process
                                              Requirements     System
                                               Allocations   Performance         Compliance Verification     SYSTEM
            SYSTEMLevel
           SYSTEM  LevelDesign
                         Design                              Specification                                                       CA
                                                                (SPS)                                         Level
               Highly Iterative
                                              Requirements
                                               Allocations   PRODUCT
                                                                               Compliance Verification     PRODUCT
Prelim.      PRODUCTLevel
            PRODUCT  LevelDesign
                           Design
                                                             Development                                                    CA
                                                                Spec.                                        Level
              Highly Iterative
                                              Requirements                       Compliance
                                               Allocations SUBSYSTEM             Verification     SUBSYSTEM
 Prelim.         SUBSYSTEMLevel
                SUBSYSTEM  Level
                                                             Development                                             CA
                                                                Spec.                                Level
              Highly Iterative
                                              Requirements                   Compliance
                                               Allocations       Design      Verification    SUBASSY
 Prelim. Design       SUBASSY.Level
                     SUBASSY.  Level                          Requirements                                  CA
                                                                                               Level
             Highly Iterative
                                              Requirements
                                               Allocations       Design
  Prelim. Design                PART                                                  PART
                                 PART                         Requirements                            CA
                                                                                      Level

                           System       Technical              Component
                          Design           Data              Procurement &
                                         Package              Development
                          Solution
                                          (TDP)                 Process

Figure 25.5 “V” Model of System Development
                                                                                       25.9 Summary       273

added activity, SITE exempliﬁes WHY homegrown ad hoc engineering efforts falter and program
cost and schedule performance reﬂects it.

Final Thought
Although we have not covered it in this chapter, some programs begin work from a very abstract
Statement of Objectives (SOO) rather than an SPS. Where this is the case, spiral development is
employed to reiterate the V-Model for incremental builds intended to mature knowledge about the
SYSTEM requirements. We will discuss this topic in Chapter 27 on system development Models.

25.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system design, integration, and veriﬁcation strategy practices.

Principle 25.1 System design is a highly iterative, collaborative, and multi-level process with
each level dependent on maturation of higher level speciﬁcation and design decisions.

Principle 25.2 A system design solution is not contractually complete until it is veriﬁed as com-
pliant with its Acquirer approved System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). Technically it is not
complete until all latent defects are removed, but most systems exist between these two extremes.

Principle 25.3 The number of latent defects in the ﬁelded system is a function of the thor-
oughness of the effort—time and resources—spent on system integration, test, and evaluation
(SITE).

25.9 SUMMARY

During our discussion of the system design, integration, and veriﬁcation strategy, we described the SE design
strategy that analyzes, allocates, and ﬂows down System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements
through multiple levels of abstraction to various item development speciﬁcations and item architectural
designs. Next we described a strategy for integrating each of the procured or developed items into succes-
sively higher levels of integration. At each level each item’s capabilities and levels of performance are to be
veriﬁed against their respective speciﬁcations.
     1. The SE process strategy provides a multi-level model for allocating and ﬂowing down SPS require-
        ments to lower levels of abstraction.
     2. Unlike the Waterfall Model, the SE Process strategy accommodates simultaneous, multi-level design
        activities including Preliminary Design activities.
     3. Whereas a design at any level may be formally baselined to promote stability for lower level deci-
        sion making, a design at any level is still subject to formal change management modiﬁcation through
        the end of formal acceptance for delivery.
     4. The SE design strategy includes multiple control points to verify and validate decisions prior to com-
        mitment to the next level of design activities.
     5. The SITE Process implements a strategy that enables us to integrate and verify lower level compo-
        nents into successively higher levels until the system is fully assembled and veriﬁed.
     6. The SITE Process strategy includes breakout points to implement corrective actions that often lead
        back to the SE Design Process.
     7. Corrective actions may require revision of lower level speciﬁcations, redesign, rework of components,
        or retraining of test operators to correct for design ﬂaws and errors, deﬁciencies, discrepancies, etc.
274     Chapter 25   System Design, Integration, and Veriﬁcation Strategy

      8. The integration of the System Design Process and SITE Process strategies produces what we refer to
         as the V-Model of system development.
      9. The V-Model, which represents a common model used on many programs, may be performed numer-
         ous times, especially in situations such as spiral development to evolve requirements to maturity.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for direction and guidance in developing SE design and
   system integration, test, and evaluation (SITE) strategies. Report your ﬁndings.
2. Contact a small, medium, and a large program within your organization. Interview the Lead SE or Tech-
   nical Director to understand what strategies the program used for SE design and system integration, test,
   and evaluation (SITE) and sketch a graphic of the strategy. For each type of program:
   (a) How did the strategy prove to be the right decision.
   (b) How would they tailor the strategy next time to improve its performance?
Chapter              26

     The SE Process Model

26.1 INTRODUCTION

If you were to survey organizations to learn about what methods they employ to develop systems,
products, or services, the responses would range from ad hoc methods to logic-based methodolo-
gies. Humans, by nature, generally deplore structured methods and will naively go to great lengths
to avoid them without understanding: 1) WHY they exist and 2) HOW they beneﬁt from them.
While ad hoc methods may be proved successful on simple, small systems and products, the scal-
ability of these methods to large, complex programs employing dozens or hundreds of people results
in chaos and disorder. So, the question is: Does a simple methodology exist that is scalable and
can be applied for all size programs?
     At the beginning of Part II, we introduced the basic workﬂow that System Developers employ
to transform the abstract System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) into a deliverable, physical
system undergo. Although we described that workﬂow in terms of its six processes, the workﬂow
does not capture HOW TO create the system, product, or service. Only how it evolves like a pro-
duction line from conceptualization to delivery over time.
     Our introduction of the system solution domains at the conclusion of Part I presented the
Requirements, Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions, their sequential develop-
ment, and interrelationships. The system solution domains enable us to describe the key elements
of a system, product, or service solution. So the challenge question is: HOW do we create a logical
method that enables us to:
     1. Develop a system, product, or service?
     2. Apply it across all system development phase workﬂow processes?
This chapter introduces the SE Process Model, its underlying methodology, and application to
developing an SE design for a system or one of its components. Our discussion begins with a graph-
ical depiction and accompanying descriptions of the SE Process Model and its methodology. Since
the model is described by two characteristics: highly iterative and recursive, we illustrate how the
model’s internal elements iterate and show how the model applies to multiple levels of abstraction
within the system design process. We provide an example of HOW the model applies to entities at
various levels of abstraction.
     Finally, we illustrate HOW the application of the model produces an integrated framework that
represents the multi-level system design workﬂow progression via the Requirements, Operations,
Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions. The last point illustrates, by deﬁnition, a system com-
posed of integrated elements synergistically working to achieve a purpose greater than their indi-
vidual purpose-focused capabilities.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                275
276     Chapter 26   The SE Process Model

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is the SE Process Model?
      2. What are the key elements of the SE Process Model?
      3. How do the elements of the SE Process Model interrelate?
      4. What are the steps of the underlying SE Process Model methodology?
      5. What is meant by the Process Model’s highly iterative characteristic?
      6. What is meant by the Process Model’s recursive characteristic?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Behavioral Domain Solution A technical design that:
        1. Represents the proposed logical/functional solution to a speciﬁcation.
        2. Describes the entity relationships between an entity’s logical/functional capabilities
           including external and internal interface deﬁnitions.
        3. Provides traceability between speciﬁcation requirements and logical/functional
           capabilities.
        4. Is traceable to the multi-level Physical Domain Solution via physical conﬁguration items
           (PCIs).
      • Iterative Characteristic A characterization of the interactions between each of the SE
        Process Model’s elements as an entity’s design solution evolves to maturity.
      • Operations Domain Solution A unique view of a system that expresses HOW the System
        Developer, in collaboration with the User and Acquirer, envision deploying, operating, sup-
        porting, and disposing of the system to satisfy a solution space mission objectives and, if
        applicable, safely return the system to a home base or port.
      • Physical Domain Solution A technical design that: 1) represents the proposed physical
        solution to a speciﬁcation, 2) describes the entity relationships between hierarchical, physi-
        cal conﬁguration items (PCIs)—namely the physical components of a system—including
        external and internal interface deﬁnitions, 3) provides traceability between speciﬁcation
        requirements and PCIs, and 4) is traceable to the multi-level Behavioral design solution via
        functional conﬁguration items (FCIs).
      • Recursive Characteristic An attribute of the SE Process Model that enables it to be applied
        to any system or entity within a system regardless of level of abstraction.
      • Requirements Domain Solution A unique view of a system that expresses: 1) the hierar-
        chical framework of speciﬁcations—namely a speciﬁcation tree—and requirements, 2)
        requirements to capability linkages, and 3) vertical and horizontal traceability linkages to
        User originating or source requirements and between speciﬁcations and their respective
        requirements.
      • SE Process Model A construct derived from a highly iterative, problem solving-solution
        development methodology that can be applied recursively to multiple levels of system
        design.
      • Solution Domain A requirements, operations, behavioral, or physical viewpoint of the
        development of a multi-level entity or conﬁguration item (CI) required to translate and elab-
        orate a set of User requirements into a deliverable system, product, or service.
                                                           26.3 SE Process Model Methodology      277

26.2 SE PROCESS MODEL OBJECTIVE

The objective of the SE Process Model is enable SEs to transform and evolve a User’s abstract
operational need(s) into a physical system design solution that represents the optimal balance of
technical, technology, cost, schedule, and support solutions and risks.

Brief Background on SE Processes
Since World War II several types of SE processes have evolved. Organizations such as the US
Department of Defense (DoD), the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), Elec-
tronics Industries Alliance (EIA), and the International Council of System Engineers (INCOSE)
have documented a series of SE process methodologies. The more recent publications include US
Army FM 770-78, Mil-Std-499, commercial standards IEEE 1220-1998, EIA-632 and ISO/IEC
15288. Each of these SE process methodologies highlights the aspects its developers considered
fundamental to engineering practice.
     Although the SE processes noted above advanced the state of the practice in SE, in the author’s
opinion, no single SE process captures the actual steps performed in engineering a system, product,
or service. As is the case with a recipe, SEs and organizations often formulate their own variations
of how they view the SE process based on what works for them. This chapter introduces an SE
Process Model validated through the experiences of the author and others. Note the two terms:
process and model.
     In this chapter’s Introduction, we considered a general workﬂow progression that translates a
User’s abstract operational needs into a physical system, product, or service solution. We can state
this progression to be a process. However, the workﬂow process steps required to engineer systems
must involve highly iterative feedback loops to preceding steps for reconciliation actions. The SE
Process is more than simply a sequential end-to-end process. The SE Process is an embedded
element of a problem-solving/solution-development model that transforms a set of inputs and oper-
ating constraints into a deliverable system, product, or service. Therefore, we apply the label SE
Process Model.

Entry Criteria
Entry criteria for the SE process are established by the system/product life cycle phase that imple-
ments the SE Process. In the case of the System Development Phase, the SE Process Model is
applied with the initiation of each entity or conﬁguration item (CI’s) SE design. This includes the
SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, and PART levels.


26.3 SE PROCESS MODEL METHODOLOGY

We concluded Part I with an introduction to the system solution domains, consisting of Require-
ments, Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions. Although the domain solutions
provide a useful means to characterize a system or one of its entities, individually, they do not help
us create the total system solution. So, how do we do this?
     We can solve this challenge by creating a system development model that enables us to trans-
late the User’s vision into a preferred solution. However, the domain solutions are missing two key
elements:
    1. Understanding the opportunity/problem space and the relationship of the solution space.
    2. Optimizing the domain solutions to achieve mission objectives.
278     Chapter 26      The SE Process Model

If we integrate these missing elements with the sequencing of the system solution domains, we can
create a methodology that enables us to apply it to any entity, regardless of level of abstraction.
The steps of the methodology are:
Step 1:      Understand the entity’s opportunity/problem and solution spaces.
Step 2:      Develop the entity’s Requirements Domain Solution.
Step 3:      Develop the entity’s Operations Domain Solution.
Step 4:      Develop the entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution.
Step 5:      Develop the entity’s Physical Domain Solution.
Step 6:      Evaluate and optimize the entity’s total design solution.
When we depict these steps, their initial sequencing, and interrelationships graphically, Figure 26.1
emerges. We will refer to this as the SE Process Model.
    Before we proceed with describing the SE Process Model, let’s preface our discussion with
several key points:
      1. The description uses the term, entity, to denote a logical/functional capability or physical
         item such as PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, and PART. You
         could apply the term, component. However, there may be some unprecedented systems in
         which physical components may not emerge until later in a design process. Therefore, we
         use the term entity.
      2. The act of partitioning a problem space into lower level solution spaces is traditionally
         referred to in SE as decomposition. Since decomposition connotes various meanings, some
         people prefer to use the term expansion.
      3. Since the model applies to any level of abstraction, role-based terms such as Acquirer, User,
         and System Developer are contextual. For example, the Acquirer (role) of a system con-


 1
        Problem                          Systems Engineering Process Model
         Space                       Understand                                                        4
                                                 Opportunity/ /Problem
                                      UnderstandOpportunity               SolutionSpaces
                                                                Problem&&Solution  Spaces
                                                                                                                         11
               3                                                        Highly Iterative
                                                                                                 5         Highly Iterative

          System                           Develop
        Performance                                 RequirementsDomain
                                            DevelopRequirements  DomainSolution
                                                                        Solution
          or Item
        Development                                  Highly                     Highly                   Highly
        Specification                               Iterative                  Iterative                Iterative        Flow
                                 6                               7
                                                                                                                         Down
        Solution                    Develop                        Develop                     Develop                     to
                                     Develop                        Develop                     Develop
                                   Operational                    Behavioral               Physical                       Next
  2      Space                      Operational                    Behavioral               PhysicalDomain
                                                                                                     Domain     8
                                 Domain                                                                                  Lower
                                  DomainSolution
                                         Solution                DomainSolution
                                                                Domain  Solution              Solution
                                                                                                Solution
                                                                                                                         Level
                                                                                                                         Entity
                                                  Highly Iterative            Highly Iterative


                             9                 Evaluate    OptimizeSystem
                                                Evaluate&&Optimize         Design Solution
                                                                    Entity Design Solution



                                          10                DecisionSupport
                                                           Decision  SupportProcess
                                                                             Process                                          1
Figure 26.1 The System Engineering Process Model
                                                           26.3 SE Process Model Methodology      279

       tracts with a System Developer (role). Within the contractor’s (System Developer role)
       program organization, a PRODUCT level team (Acquirer role) allocates requirements to
       Development Team (System Developer role) to develop and deliver a SUBSYSTEM. The
       SUBSYSTEM development team, acting as an Acquirer (role), may procure some of the
       SUBSYSTEM’s components from various vendors (System Developer roles).
    4. For simplicity, the description addresses a one-time procurement for a system, product, or
       service. Some complex system development efforts may consist of a series spiral develop-
       ment deliverables or contracts. In these cases, the requirements may be initially immature
       thereby necessitating stages of development to mature the requirements to a level neces-
       sary and sufﬁcient for ﬁnal system development. Thus the SE Process Model is reapplied
       to all levels of abstraction for each iteration of the spiral. These approaches serve to reduce
       system development risk.

Step 1: Understand the Entity’s Opportunity/Problem and
Solution Spaces
The ﬁrst step of the SE Process Model is to simply understand the entity’s opportunity/problem and
solution spaces. System analysts and SEs need to understand and validate: HOW the User intends
to use the system as well as WHAT expectations are levied on the entity to achieve higher-level
mission objectives. This requires understanding:
    1. The entity’s contextual role in the next higher level solution space—namely the User’s level
       0 system or the deliverable SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, SUBASSEMBLY, and
       other levels.
    2. HOW the User plans to deploy, operate, support, and dispose of the system—namely use
       cases and scenarios.
    3. The system’s interfaces with external systems in its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT such as
       HUMAN-MADE, NATURAL, and INDUCED ENVIRONMENTS.
    4. The system’s mission event timeline (MET) or allocations.
    5. The expected outcomes from system interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
    6. Products, by-products, and services comprising the system outputs required to accomplish
       those outcomes.


Step 2: Develop the Entity’s Requirements Domain Solution
As the understanding of the entity’s opportunity/problem and solution spaces evolves and matures,
the next step is to Develop the Requirements Domain Solution. The requirements, which specify
and bound the entity’s solution space, document the Acquirer’s (role) required system capabilities
via Statement of Objectives (SOO) or System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). Within the System
Developer’s program, lower level PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, or SUBASSEMBLY
item development speciﬁcation (IDS), as applicable, capture the entity’s requirements.
     As illustrated by the SE Process Model in Figure 26.1, the entity’s Requirements Domain
Solution:
    1. Serves as the frame of reference for deriving the Operations, Behavioral, and Physical
       Domain Solutions.
    2. Iterates with understand the opportunity/problem and solution spaces.
    3. Iterates with the Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions.
280     Chapter 26   The SE Process Model

      4. Integrates with a higher level User, SYSTEM, PRODUCT, ASSEMBLY, etc., level Require-
         ments Domain Solution (Figure 26.6).
      5. May be expanded or decomposed into at least two or more lower level entity Requirements
         Domain Solutions and documented in development speciﬁcations.
      6. Provides the decision criteria used by the Evaluate and Optimize the System Design
         Solution step to assess design compliance (e.g., veriﬁcation, consistency, and traceability).
The Requirements Domain Solution consists of a hierarchical set of requirements derived from a
User’s source or originating requirements, typically in a contract System Performance Speciﬁca-
tion (SPS). Any entity requirement that is:
      1. Too abstract and broad.
      2. Complicates implementation and veriﬁcation, is simpliﬁed by decomposing it into two or
         more lower level SIBLING or DERIVED requirements.
Derived requirements more explicitly deﬁne WHAT is required and HOW WELL. Thus they
become more manageable and eliminate the possibility of multiple interpretations. As a result each
derived requirement simpliﬁes and clariﬁes WHAT must be accomplished to satisfy a portion of
the higher parent requirements.
     Since requirements express User (role) expectations for acceptance of each entity, at a
minimum, each requirement is assigned a veriﬁcation method such as inspection, analysis, demon-
stration, or test. Additional veriﬁcation criteria such as the level where a speciﬁc requirement will
be veriﬁed and veriﬁcation conditions may also be added. The set of veriﬁcation methods, levels,
and criteria that serve as the basis for delivery acceptance are documented as a key section of the
entity’s speciﬁcation.

Step 3: Develop the Entity’s Operations Domain Solution
As each entity’s Requirements Domain Solution evolves to maturity, System Developers formulate
and mature the Operations Domain Solution. Operational concepts are synthesized and documented
in the entity’s Concept of Operations (ConOps) document or Theory of Operations. The ConOps:
      1. Identiﬁes the Level 0 User’s operational architecture that includes the MISSION
         SYSTEM(s) and SUPPORT SYSTEM(s).
      2. Identiﬁes friendly, benign, and hostile systems and threats in the OPERATING ENVI-
         RONMENT that interact with the system.
      3. Identiﬁes system operations and tasks required to accomplish the mission.
      4. Synchronizes the tasks with the mission event timeline (MET) or allocations.
      5. Identiﬁes products, by-products, or services required to achieve mission outcomes.
Referring to Figure 26.1, an entity’s Operations Domain Solution:
      1. Implements requirements allocated and derived from the entity’s Requirements Domain
         Solution.
      2. Documents work products that serve as inputs for deriving the entity’s Behavioral Domain
         Solution.
      3. Integrates with a higher level User, SYSTEM, PRODUCT, ASSEMBLY, and SUB-
         ASSEMBLY Operations Domain Solution (Figure 26.6).
      4. May be expanded or decomposed into at least two or more lower level entity
         Operations Domain Solutions (Figure 26.6).
                                                         26.3 SE Process Model Methodology      281

    5. Iterates with the Requirements and Behavioral Domain Solutions for completeness, con-
       sistency, and traceability.
    6. Is assessed for consistency, compliance, and performance by the Evaluate and Optimize the
       System Design Solution.

Step 4: Develop the Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution
As each entity’s Operations Domain Solution evolves to maturity, System Developers formulate
and mature the Behavioral Domain Solution. The Behavioral Domain Solution describes WHAT is
to be accomplished in terms of logical interactions and sequences of tasks or processing required
to produce the desired outcomes. This includes:
    1. Identiﬁcation of the required capabilities—namely functions and performance.
    2. Constructing system interaction and sequence diagrams that depict HOW the SYSTEM is
       envisioned to react and respond to various external stimuli and cues from its OPERATING
       ENVIRONMENT.
    3. Synchronizing those interactions, products, by-products, and services with the MET.
    4. Analyzing, modeling, and simulating capability sequences and performance to ensure com-
       pliance with requirements and balance performance allocations.
Referring to Figure 26.1, an entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution:
    1. Is allocated requirements from and must be traceable to the entity’s Requirements Domain
       Solution.
    2. Documents work products that serve as the inputs for the developing Physical Domain
       Solution.
    3. Integrates with a higher level User, SYSTEM, PRODUCT, ASSEMBLY, and
       SUBASSEMBLY Behavioral Domain Solution (Figure 26.6).
    4. May be expanded or decomposed into at least two or more lower level entity Behavioral
       Domain Solutions (Figure 26.6).
    5. Iterates with the Operations and Physical Domain Solutions.
    6. Is assessed for consistency, compliance, and performance by the Evaluate and Optimize the
       System Design Solution.

Step 5: Develop the Physical Domain Solution
As the entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution evolves to maturity, System Developers formulate and
mature the Physical Domain Solution. This solution describes HOW the Behavioral Domain Solu-
tion is implemented via multi-level physical components. This requires:
    1. Formulating several viable candidate architectures for the entity.
    2. Conducting analyses and trade studies to evaluate and score the merits of each architecture
       relative to a set of pre-deﬁned decision criteria.
    3. Selecting a preferred architecture from a viable set of alternatives.
    4. Establishing performance budgets and safety margins.
    5. Finalizing selection of components to satisfy the entities identiﬁed within the architecture.
    6. Translating the physical architecture into a detailed design—such as assembly drawings,
       schematics, wiring diagrams, and software design.
282     Chapter 26   The SE Process Model

      7. Assessing compatibility and interoperability with external systems in the entity’s OPER-
         ATING ENVIRONMENT.
Referring to Figure 26.1, each entity’s Physical Domain Solution:
      1. Is allocated requirements from and must be traceable to the entity’s Requirements Domain
         Solution.
      2. Integrates with a higher level User, SYSTEM, PRODUCT, ASSEMBLY, and SUB-
         ASSEMBLY Physical Domain Solution (Figure 26.6).
      3. May be expanded or decomposed at least two or more lower level entity Physical Domain
         Solutions (Figure 26.6).
      4. Is assessed for consistency, compliance, and performance by the Evaluate and Optimize the
         System Design Solution.

Step 6: Evaluate and Optimize the Entity’s Total
Design Solution
As the Physical Domain Solution evolves and matures, the next step is to Evaluate and Optimize
the System Design Solution. The purpose of this step is to verify and validate that the entity’s
Requirements, Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Design Solutions:
      1. Are consistent with each other.
      2. Fully comply with and are traceable to its Requirements Domain Solution.
These objectives are accomplished via the following:
      1. Technical reviews.
      2. Technical audits.
      3. Prototype development.
      4. Modeling and simulation.
      5. Proof of concept or technology demonstrations.
You will encounter people who contend that you cannot optimize a system for a diverse set of oper-
ating scenarios and conditions, it can only be optimal: let’s differentiate the two viewpoints.
     For a prescribed set of operating conditions and priorities, you can theoretically optimize a
system. The challenge is that these conditions are often independent and statistically random occur-
rences in the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. As a result a system, product, or service performance
may not be optimized for all sets of random variable conditions. So people characterize the
SYSTEM’s performance as optimal in dealing with these random variables.
     There is an unwritten rule that says that most human attempts fall short of their goals. Assum-
ing you have realistic goals, WHAT you accomplish depends on WHAT you strive to achieve. So
in Step 6, Evaluate and Optimize System Design Solution, we use the term optimize to communi-
cate WHAT we strive to achieve. Given human performance history in goal achievement, striving
to simply be optimal will probably produce a result that is less than optimal, an even less desir-
able outcome.


26.4 DECISION SUPPORT TO THE SE PROCESS MODEL

Decision support practices such as analyses, trade studies, prototypes, demonstrations, models, and
simulations, etc. are employed to provide recommendations for technical decisions that bound the
system’s solution space—such as the Requirements Domain Solution compliance.
                                                        26.7 SE Process Model Characteristics   283

26.5 EXIT CRITERIA

Since the SE Process Model is highly iterative and subject to development time constraints of the
entity, exit criteria are determined by:
    1. Level of maturity required of the entity being designed and its required work products—
       speciﬁcations, designs, veriﬁcation procedures, etc.
    2. Level of criticality and practicality in correcting discrepancies between speciﬁcation
       requirements and veriﬁcation data subject to cost and schedule constraints.


26.6 WORK PRODUCTS AND QUALITY RECORDS

The SE Process Model supports the development of numerous system/product life cycle phase work
products and quality records. When applied to a phase speciﬁc process, the SE Process produces
four categories of work products for each entity: 1) the Requirements Domain Solution, 2) the Oper-
ations Domain Solution, 3) the Behavioral Domain Solution, and 4) the Physical Domain Solution.
     General examples of work products and quality records include speciﬁcations, speciﬁcation
trees, architectures, analyses, trade studies, drawings, technical reports, veriﬁcation records, and
meeting minutes. Refer to Chapters 37–40 for details of each solution description that follows for
speciﬁc work products and quality records.

Author’s Note 26.1 People often confuse the purpose of any SE Process. They believe that the
SE Process is established to create documentation; this is erroneous! The purpose of the SE Process
Model is to establish a methodology to solve problems and produce a preferred solution that sat-
isﬁes contract requirements subject to technical, cost, schedule, technology, and risk constraints.
Work product and quality record documentation are simply enablers and artifacts of the process,
a means to an end, not the primary focus.

Author’s Note 26.2 Remember, if you focus on producing documentation, you get documenta-
tion and a design solution that may or may not meet requirements. If you focus on producing a
design solution via the SE Process Model, you should arrive at a design solution that satisﬁes
requirements supported by documentation artifacts that prove the integrity and validity of the
solution.


26.7 SE PROCESS MODEL CHARACTERISTICS

The SE Process Model is characterized as being highly iterative and recursive. To better under-
stand these characteristics, let’s explore each.

Highly Iterative Characteristic
The SE Process Model, when applied to a speciﬁc entity within a system level of abstraction, is
characterized as highly iterative as illustrated in Figure 26.2. Although each of the multi-level
steps of the methodology has a sequential workﬂow progression, each step has feedback loops that
allow a return to preceding steps and reassess decisions when issues occur later along the work-
ﬂow. As a result the feedback loops establish the highly iterative characteristic as illustrated in
Figure 26.3.
284        Chapter 26          The SE Process Model

System Performance
Specification (SPS)
                                                                                                                                       SYSTEM
                                             To                                                                                         Level
               SYSTEM                        p-                                                                                          CDR
                                                Do           Evolving Maturation
              Level Design                        wn
                                                     /B
                                                       ot                                                                             PRODUCT
                                                          to                                                                            Level
                                                            m
                                                               -U                                                                       CDRs
                                  PRODUCT                         p Evolving Maturation
                                                                     Re
                     V&V          Level Design                          cu
                                                                           rs
                                                                              ive                                                  SUBSYSTEM
                                                                                  Ap                                                Item Level
Highly Iterative                                                                     pl                                                CDRs
  SE Process                                       SUBSYSTEM                            ica
                                                                                  Evolving        Maturation
    Model                         Verification                                              tio
                                  & Validation      Level Design                                n
                                                                                                  of
                                                                                                     th
                                                                                                        eS                      ASSEMBLY
      Highly Iterative                                                                                     E                    Level CDRs
                                                                                                             Pr
     SE Process Model
                                                        Verification      ASSEMBLY                              oc
                                                                                                                   es
                                                       & Validation       Level Design                                s
                    Highly Iterative
                   SE Process Model
                                                                                                                                SUBASSY.
                                                                                                                                  Level
                               Highly Iterative                                            SUBASSEMBLY
                              SE Process Model
                                                                                                                                  CDRs
                                                                          Verification       Level Design                                        2
                                                                          & Validation

Figure 26.2 Multi-Level System Engineering Design




              1                                                                       17                                                    17
                                                   5 Higher Level                              14
Requirements Traceability                                                                                                             Higher Level
                                                        Operations                                                                   Entity Physical
    To Higher Level                     Highly                                             Higher Level Entity
                                                         Domain                                                                         Solution
     Specifications                    Iterative                            Highly         Logical/Behavioral
                                                         Solution
                                                                           Iterative
                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                Solution

       2                                            4                                  8                                   12
                                          3                                  7                                   11
            Requirements
             Requirements                               Operational
                                                        Operational                        Behavioral
                                                                                           Behavioral                           Physical
                                                                                                                                 Physical
           DomainSolution
           Domain    Solution                            Domain
                                                          Domain                            Domain
                                                                                             Domain                             Domain
                                                                                                                                 Domain
            (Specifications)
             (Specifications)                            Solution
                                                          Solution                          Solution
                                                                                             Solution                           Solution
                                                                                                                                 Solution

                                         Highly                            Highly
                                        Iterative                         Iterative
                                                                                                                  Highly
                                              6                              9                                   Iterative
              18                  Highly                     19
                                 Iterative                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                      21
                                                     10                                             20



      Lower Level Entity                               Lower Level                         Lower Level Entity                     Lower Level
        Requirements                                 Entity Operational                    Logical/Behavioral                    Entity Physical
      Domain Solutions                               Domain Solutions                       Design Solutions                    Domain Solutions
                                                                                                                                                     3
Figure 26.3 Entity/Item SE Design Flow
                                                              26.7 SE Process Model Characteristics   285

Recursive Characteristic
Referring to Figure 26.2, observe that the SE Process Model is applied to every level of abstrac-
tion. We call this its recursive characteristic. Thus the same model applies to the SYSTEM level
as its does at the SUBASSEMBLY level. Let’s explore this point further.
     We can simplify Figure 26.3 as shown in Figure 26.4. Note that each system development
program begins with the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) and evolves through all four solu-
tion domains. This graphic with its alternating gray quadrants and R (requirements), O (operations),
B (behavioral), and P (physical) symbols—in short, ROBP—will be used as an icon to symbolize
the four solution domains in our later discussions on system design practices.

Applying the SE Process Model to System Development
Now let’s suppose that we have the system shown in Figure 26.5. The SYSTEM consists of PROD-
UCTS 1 and 2. PRODUCT 1, a large, complex design, consists of SUBSYSTEMs 1 and 2.
PRODUCT 2, a simpler design, consists of hardware conﬁguration item (HWCI) 21 and computer
software conﬁguration item (CSCI) 21. We apply the SE Process Model to each entity as illustrated
by the boxes. Application of the SE Process Model to each entity continues until the SE design is
mature and ready to commit to implementation. Figure 26.6 illustrates the state of the system design
solution at completion.
     Here we see a multi-level framework that depicts the horizontal workﬂow progression over
time. Vertically, the Requirements, Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions are
decomposed into various levels of abstraction. Collectively the framework graphically illustrates a
system, which by deﬁnition, is the integration of multiple levels of capabilities to a higher level
purpose that is greater than their individual capabilities.




                     Requirements                                          Operations
                       Solution                                          Domain Solution
                       Domain



   System
Performance
Specification
   (SPS)




    Deliverable                                                             Behavioral
  System, Product,
     or Service
                     Physical Domain                                          Domain
                         Solution                                             Solution
Figure 26.4 System Solution Development via Multi-Domain Iterations
286          Chapter 26               The SE Process Model


  Where:
   Where:
  R = Requirements Solution Domain
   R = Requirements Solution Domain                                              System
  O = Operations Solution Domain                                            R
   O = Operations Solution Domain                                                                 O                       External Logical &
       LogicalSolution
  BB==Logical  SolutionDomain
                        Domain                                                                                2
  PP==Physical                                                                                                            Physical Interfaces
                Solutiondomain
       PhysicalSolution  domain
                                                                                      1
                          Requirements                    3                                                           4             Requirements
                     Allocation, Flow Down,                                 P                     B                                Allocation, Flow
                           & Linking                                                                                               Down, & Linking
                                                                            SE Process Model
                                   Product #1                                  Application                                Product #2
 External              5                                                                                                                           9       External
                               R                  O                                                                   R                 O                 Logical &
Logical &                                                                         7
 Physical                                                                                                                                                  Physical
Interfaces                              5                                                                                      8                          Interfaces
                                                                      Logical & Physical Interfaces
Requirements                   P                  B                                                                   P                 B               Requirements
 Allocation, 10
 Flow Down,                    SE Process Model
                                                                 13 Requirements Allocation, 15                       SE Process Model           18      Allocation,
                                                                         Flow Down, & Linking                                                            Flow Down,
  & Linking                       Application                                                                            Application
                                                                                                                                                          & Linking

     Subsystem #11                 Logical &
                                                   Subsystem #12                                  HWCI #21                Logical &
                                                                                                                                                CSCI #21
     R           O                  Physical       R           O                              R                   O        Physical         R               O
                                   Interfaces                                                                             Interfaces
                 11                                              14                                   16                                           19

                                       12                                                                                    17
     P                     B                       P                       B                  P                   B                         P               B
 Process Model Application                      Process Model Application             Process Model Application                                               5
                                                                                                                                       Process Model Application

Figure 26.5 Multi-Domain SE Process Iterations



                 Requirements                          Operations                          Behavioral                                Physical
                   Domain                               Domain                              Domain                                   Domain
                   Solution                             Solution                            Solution                                 Solution
SYSTEM




             1                                    2                                   3                                       4
 Level




                        System
                         System                                                                SystemLevel
                                                                                              System  Level                         SystemLevel
                                                                                                                                   System  Level
                                                              System
                                                               System
                     Performance
                      Performance                                                              Behavioral
                                                                                                Behavioral                           Physical
                                                                                                                                      Physical
                                                               Level
                                                                Level
                     Specification
                      Specification                                                              Design
                                                                                                  Design                              Design
                                                                                                                                       Design
                                                              ConOps
                                                              ConOps
                         (SPS)
                          (SPS)                                                                 Solution
                                                                                                 Solution                            Solution
                                                                                                                                      Solution
                                                                                                                                                                    6
PRODUCT




                                                                                                                                                                            Configuration


                 5                                    6                                   7                                    8
                                                                                                                                                              DevelopmentalConfiguration
  Level




                                                                                              PRODUCT
                                                                                               PRODUCT                             PRODUCT
                                                                                                                                    PRODUCT
                      PRODUCT
                       PRODUCT                            PRODUCT
                                                           PRODUCT                               Level
                                                                                                  Level                               Level
                                                                                                                                       Level
                         Item
                          Item                               Level
                                                             Level                            Behavioral
                                                                                               Behavioral                            Physical
                                                                                                                                      Physical
                     Development
                      Development                           ConOps
                                                            ConOps                              Design
                                                                                                 Design                               Design
                                                                                                                                       Design
                     Specification
                      Specification                                                            Solutions
                                                                                                Solutions                           Solutions
                                                                                                                                     Solutions
SUBSYSTEM




                 9                                10                                  11                                      12
                                                                                                                                                              Developmental




                                                                                           SUBSYSTEM                           SUBSYSTEM
                  SUBSYSTEM                        SUBSYSTEM                                SUBSYSTEM                            SUBSYSTEM
                   SUBSYSTEM                        SUBSYSTEM
   Level




                                                                                               Level                                Level
                     Item                              Level                                    Level                                Level
                       Item                             Level                               Behavioral                            Physical
                  Development                        Theory                                  Behavioral                            Physical
                   Development                        Theoryofof                              Design                               Design
                  Specification                     Operations                                 Design                               Design
                   Specification                     Operations                              Solutions                            Solutions
                                                                                              Solutions                            Solutions


             13                                   14                                  15                                      16
HWCI/CS




                  HWCI/CSCI                                                                   HWCI/CSCI                         HWCI/CSCI
CI Level




                   HWCI/CSCI                          HWCI/                                   HWCI/CSCI                          HWCI/CSCI
                  Requirements                        HWCI/CSCI
                                                              CSCI                             Behavioral                         Physical
                  Requirements                         Theory                                  Behavioral                          Physical
                  Specification                         Theoryof
                                                               of                                Design                            Design
                   Specification                       Operations                                 Design                            Design
                   (HRS/SRS)                           Operations                               Solutions                         Solutions
                    (HRS/SRS)                                                                    Solutions                         Solutions

Figure 26.6 System Design Framework
                                                                                                                                                        26.9 Guiding Principles       287


            Requirements
              Domain                                                                                                                                                     Operations
              Solution                                                                                                                                                    Domain
                                                                                                                                                                          Solution
                                                                                                                                                       ittyy
                                                                                                                                                   biilli
                                                                                                                                                 eaab
                                                                                                                                              acce
                                                                                                                                           TTrra
                                                                                                                                        &&
                                                                                                                                    nss
                                                                                                                                tiioon
                                                                                                                            raacct
                                                                                                                             r
                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                       ntte
                                                                                                                    l IIn
                                                                                                                  veel
                                                                                                               Leev
                                                                                                        llttii--L
   System                                                                                           M
                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                      uu
Performance
Specification    CA   SRR SDR        SSR             PDR                   IPRs               CDR
   (SPS)                                                                                            M
                                                                                                    Muu
                                                                                        ty             lltti-
                                                                                    illiity                 i-LLe
                                                                                 abbi                            evvee
                                                                            a cceea                                  llI
                                                                                                                        Innte
                                                                          r
                                                                        TTr  a                                              terra
                                                                   &&                                                           accti
                                                               nss                                                                  tioon
                                                           tiioon                                                                       nss&
                                                        acct                                                                               &
                                                 n tteerra                                                                                     TTr
                                                                                                                                                  raacc
                                              l IIn                                                                                                   eeaa
                                           veel                                                                                                           bbiil
                                         Leev                                                                                                                  liittyy
                                     ti--L
                                  uullti
                                M
                                M
                  Physical                                                                                                                                               Behavioral
                  Domain                                                                                                                                                  (Logical)
                  Solution                                                                                                                                                 Domain
                                                                                                                                                                          Solution
Figure 26.7 The System Development Spiral




26.8 EVOLVING AND REVIEWING THE SYSTEM SOLUTIONS

Based on the highly iterative and recursive characteristics, System Developers evolve the system
design solution over time from the SPS into a series of workﬂow progressions through each level
of abstraction until the system design solution is initially complete. Figure 26.7 illustrates how the
total system design solution evolves through the domain solutions at each level of abstraction and
culminates with the Critical Design Review (CDR).
     Symbolically, the inner loops of the spiral represent increasing levels of detail until; the CDR
is conducted. Each loop of the spiral culminates in a technical review that serves as a critical staging
or control point for commitment to the next level of detail. Each loop includes a breakout point to
permit reconciling changes with previous levels and to continue to evolve and mature the higher
level solutions until CDR.

Author’s Note 26.3 The context of Figure 26.7 is for the period between Contract Award and
CDR when the total design solution is approved and released for component procurement and devel-
opment. However, the system design solution IS NOT ﬁnalized until the ﬁrst article system or
product has been integrated, tested, veriﬁed, validated (optional), and accepted by the Acquirer or
User.


26.9 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern the implementation of the SE Process Model.
288    Chapter 26    The SE Process Model

Principle 26.1 Problem solving and solution development lead to an optimal design solution;
simply creating a point design solution does not always indicate problem solving.

Principle 26.2 An entity’s design solution is composed of four domain solutions: Requirements,
Operations, Behavioral, and Physical.

Principle 26.3 As a workﬂow, system design is the highly iterative, multi-level, transformation
of an entity’s requirements into operations, behavior, and physical implementation.

26.10 SUMMARY

This section introduced the SE Process Model and its structure. In our discussion we described how the model
integrates the Requirements, Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions into a highly iterative
framework that can be applied to the design of entities at all levels of abstraction. We noted that the SE Process
Model’s multi-level application attribute is referred to as its recursive characteristic.
     The ﬁrst step of the model is to Understand the Opportunity/Problem and Solution Spaces to appreciate
the context of the requirements allocated to each entity. As a highly iterative model, we described how the
model incorporates the workﬂow from the Requirements Domain to the Operations Domain to the Behavioral
Domain to the Physical Domain. Since design solutions must be traceable to their requirements allocations as
documented in the entity’s speciﬁcation, we illustrated how the Requirements Domain Solution links to the
Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions. Since every design solution must be evaluated and
optimized, we illustrated how the Evaluate and Optimize the Entity’s Design Solution activity supports the
Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercise or a new system, selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical dis-
   cussions. Describe how the SE Process Model is applied to identify the following:
   (a) The system’s opportunity/problem space and solution space(s).
   (b) The Requirements Domain Solution.
   (c) The Operations Domain Solution.
   (d) The Behavioral Domain Solution.
   (e) The Physical Domain Solution.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your local command media for SE process requirements.
   (a) Does your organization have a standard SE Process?
   (b) How are SEs within the organization trained to apply the SE Process?
   (c) Compare and contrast the organization’s SE process with the one described here.
   (d) How are multidisciplined SEs trained to apply the process?
2. Research the following SE processes created over several decades. Develop a paper that describes each SE
   process, compare and contrast the differences; note evolutionary changes over time, and contrast with your
   own experiences.
   (a) US Army Field Manual FM-770-78
   (b) MIL-STD-499
                                                                                         Additional Reading      289

   (c) IEEE 1220–1998
   (d) International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE)
   (e) ANSI/EIA 632
3. Contact technical programs within your organization and interview personnel concerning what SE
   process or methodology they employed to develop their systems or products. Report your ﬁndings and
   observations.


ADDITIONAL READING

ANSI/EIA 632-1999. 1999. Processes for Engineering a           FM-770-78. 1979. Field Manual: System Engineering.
   System. Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA). Arlington,      Washington, DC: US Army.
   VA.                                                         MIL-STD-499B (cancelled draft). 1994. Systems Engineer-
IEEE 1220-1998. 1998. IEEE Standard for the Application          ing. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
   and Management of the Systems Engineering Process.          Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.
   Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).      Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Defense Acquisition
   New York, NY.                                                 University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.
International Council on System Engineering (INCOSE).          Sheard, Sarah A. The Frameworks Quagmire, A Brief Look,
   2000. INCOSE System Engineering Handbook, Version             1997, Software Productivity Consortium, Herndon, VA.
   2.0. Seattle, WA.
ISO/IEC 15288. System Engineering—System Life Cycle
   Processes. International Organization for Standardization
   (ISO). Geneva, Switzerland.
Chapter              27

      System Development Models

27.1 INTRODUCTION

Our discussions up to this point have viewed the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) as an
ideal requirements document with mature, well-deﬁned requirements. In reality, however, require-
ments range from those that are well deﬁned to those that are very immature, or ambiguous. So,
how does an SE deal with this wide variety of requirements maturity? Actually there are several
system development models that provide a basis for dealing with the requirements maturity
problems.
     This chapter introduces and investigates various system development models that represent
various methodologies for developing systems. The models include:
      1. The Waterfall Development Model
      2. The Evolutionary Development Model
      3. The Incremental Development Model
      4. The Spiral Development Model
Our discussions describe each model, identify how each evolved, highlight ﬂaws, and provide illus-
trative, real world examples.
     You may ask why topics such these are worthy of discussion in an SE book. There are two
good reasons:
      • First, you need a toolkit of system development approaches that enables you to address a
        variety of requirements deﬁnition and maturity challenges.
      • Second, you need to fully understand each of these models, their origin, attributes and ﬂaws
        to make sure you have the RIGHT approach to speciﬁc types of system development.
As an SE, you need to fully understand HOW the models are applied to various system develop-
ment scenarios. You will encounter people throughout industry that refer to these models via buzz-
words but often lack an understanding of each type of model’s background and application.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is a system development model?
      2. What are the four primary system development models?
      3. What is the Waterfall Development Model, its characteristics, and shortcomings?
      4. What is the Evolutionary Development Model, its characteristics, and shortcomings?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

290
                                                                          27.1 Introduction   291

  5. What is the Incremental Development Model, its characteristics, and shortcomings?
  6. What is the Spiral Development Model, its characteristics, and shortcomings?
  7. How is the SE Process Model applied to these development models?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Evolutionary Development Strategy A development strategy used to develop “a system
    in builds, but differs from the Incremental Strategy in acknowledging that the user need is
    not fully understood and all requirements cannot be deﬁned up front. In this strategy, user
    needs and system requirements are partially deﬁned up front, then are reﬁned in each suc-
    ceeding build.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-498, para. G.3)
  • Grand Design Development Strategy A development strategy that is “essentially a ‘once-
    through, do-each-step-once’ strategy. Simplistically: determine user needs, deﬁne require-
    ments, design the system, implement the system, test, ﬁx, and deliver.” (Source: Former
    MIL-STD-498, para. G.3)
  • Incremental Development “A software development technique in which requirements def-
    inition, design, implementation, and testing occur in an overlapping, iterative (rather than
    sequential) manner, resulting in incremental completion of the overall software product.”
    (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
  • Incremental Development Strategy A development strategy that “determines user needs
    and deﬁnes the overall architecture, but then delivers the system in a series of increments
    (“software builds”). The ﬁrst build incorporates a part of the total planned capabilities, the
    next build adds more capabilities, and so on, until the entire system is complete.” (Source:
    Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
  • Spiral Development Strategy A development strategy that “develops and delivers a system
    in builds, but differs from the incremental approach by acknowledging that the user need is
    not fully formed at the beginning of development, so that all requirements are not initially
    deﬁned. The initial build delivers a system based on the requirements as they are known
    at the time development is initiated, and then succeeding builds are delivered that meet
    additional requirements as they become known.” (Source: Glossary: Defense Acquisition
    Acronyms and Terms)
  • Spiral Model “A model of the software development process in which the constituent activ-
    ities, typically requirements analysis, preliminary and detailed design, coding, integration,
    and testing, are performed iteratively until the software is complete.” (Source: IEEE
    610.12-1990)
  • Waterfall Model “A model of the software development process in which the constituent
    activities, typically a concept phase, requirements phase, design phase, implementation
    phase, test phase, and installation and checkout phase, are performed in that order, possibly
    with overlap but with little or no iteration.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
  • Waterfall Development Strategy A strategy in which “development activities are per-
    formed in order, with possibly minor overlap, but with little or no iteration between activi-
    ties. User needs are determined, requirements are deﬁned, and the full system is designed,
    built, and tested for ultimate delivery at one point in time.” (Source: Glossary: Defense
    Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
292    Chapter 27   System Development Models

27.2 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT MODELS

The trends of increasing technical complexity of the systems, coupled with the need for repeatable
and predictable process methodologies, have driven System Developers to establish development
models.

Background Leading to System Development Models
Systems and products prior to the 1950s were hardware intensive systems. Processing was accom-
plished via electromechanical devices that implemented logical and mathematical computational
processes. By the 1960s, analog and digital small-, medium-, and large-scale integrated circuits,
coupled with modular design methods, enabled developers to improve the reliability and accuracy
of the computations with some limited software involvement. During these years when design
errors or changes occurred, the cost of making corrections in mechanical hardware and electronic
circuitry was becoming increasingly expensive and time-consuming.
     With the introduction of microprocessor technologies in the early 1970’s, software became a
viable alternative to system development. Conceptually, capabilities that had to be implemented
with hardware could now be implemented more easily and quickly in software. As a result system
design evolved toward ﬂexible, reconﬁgurable systems that enable System Developers and main-
tainers to target unique ﬁeld applications simply by tailoring the software.
     The shift toward software intensive systems advanced faster than the methods used to produce
the software. As the software applications became larger and more complex, so did the risks and
problem areas. System Developer organizations became more sensitive to the challenges and risks
associated with meeting contract cost, schedule, and technical performance criteria and the risks of
failure to meet those criteria. Additionally the costs of rework and poor quality became central
issues, especially in areas such as reliability, safety, and health. The need for repeatability and pre-
dictability in development process was also a critical issue.
     To meet these challenges, system development models began evolving in the software domain
and have since expanded to the broader engineering of systems domain as overall system devel-
opment approaches.

System Development Models
System and product development approaches generally follow four commonly used models or
hybrids. The most common models include the: 1) Waterfall Development Model, 2) Evolutionary
Development Model, 3) Incremental Development Model, and 4) Spiral Development Model. Dr.
Barry Boehm, who has written numerous technical books and articles about software development,
provides some key insights regarding the evolution, strengths, and weaknesses of the models. To
facilitate our discussion, we will reference some of Dr. Boehm’s observations.

Author’s Note 27.1 Historically, you will ﬁnd many instances of problem solving–
solution-development methodologies that emerge within a discipline and are equally applicable to
other disciplines. In the discussions that follow, you will discover how software development, as an
emerging discipline, tackled a problem space and produced an evolving set of methodologies that
are equally applicable to SE and hardware engineering.

27.3 THE WATERFALL DEVELOPMENT MODEL

The Waterfall Development Model represents one of the initial attempts to characterize software
development in terms of a model. Today, the Waterfall Model exempliﬁes how many organizations
develop systems and products. Figure 27.1 provides an illustration of this model.
                                                                                               27.4 The Evolutionary Development Model                                293

 System
 Feasibility
          Validation

                       Plans &
                       Reqmts.
                              Validation

                                           Product
                                           Design
                                                  Verification

                                                                 Detailed
                                                                 Design
                                                                        Verification


                                                                                 Code, Fabrication,
                                                                                 Assy.
                                                                                          Verification


                                                                                                         Integration
                                                                                                                   Product
                                                                                                              Verification


                                                                                                                             Implementation

                                                                                                                                   System Test


                                                                                                                                                 Operations &
                                                                                                                                                 Maintenance

                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                       Revalidation


Figure 27.1 “Waterfall” Development Model
Source: Figure 1, “A Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement” by Dr. Barry boehm, IEEE
Computer May 1988, p. 62.



Author’s Note 27.2 The term “waterfall” has always been a misnomer and tends to confuse
many people. The term reﬂects the graphical top-down, diagonal representation rather than the
actual implementation. As we will see in a later chapter, the earlier stages do represent expansion
of levels of design detail over time. The latter stages, beginning with “Integration,” represent the
“upside” of the V-Model discussed in Figure 25.5. Unlike the Waterfall Model, the V-Model is
implemented with highly iterative and recursive feedback loops within and between levels of
abstraction.

In the Waterfall approach, “development activities are performed in sequential order, with possi-
bly minor overlap, and minimal or no iteration between activities. User needs are determined,
requirements are deﬁned, and the full system is designed, built, and tested for ultimate delivery at
one point in time. Some people refer to this as a stage-wise model.” (Source: Glossary: Defense
Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)


27.4 THE EVOLUTIONARY DEVELOPMENT MODEL

In general, the Evolutionary Development Model is based on the premise that “stages consist of
expanding increments of an operational software product, with the directions of evolution being
determined by operational experience.” (Source: Boehm, p. 63) This conception is based on an evo-
lutionary strategy of a system or product development through a series of pre-planned product
improvement (P3I) releases.
     Evolutionary development provides a potential solution for Acquirers, Users, and System
Developers. As discussed in an earlier section, some systems/products are single-use items; others
are longer term, multi-application items. For some mission and system applications, you generally
know at system acquisition what the requirements are. In other applications, you may be able to
294     Chapter 27   System Development Models

deﬁne a few up-front objectives and capabilities. Over time, the ﬁelded system/product requires
new capabilities as problem/opportunity spaces evolve.
     Some systems, such as computers, become obsolete in a very short period of time and are dis-
carded. From a business perspective, the cost to upgrade and maintain the devices is prohibitive
relative to purchasing a new computer. In contrast, some Users, driven by decreasing budgets and
slow changes in the external environments, may use systems and products far beyond their origi-
nal intended service lives. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 27.1
The US Air Force B-52 aircraft is postured to achieve the longest service life of any aircraft. During its life-
time, the aircraft’s systems and missions have evolved from their initial operational capability (IOC) when
the aircraft was ﬁrst introduced to the present via capability upgrades. The projected service lifespan far
exceeds what the aircraft’s innovators envisioned.

The Evolutionary Development Model is based on the premise that a system’s capabilities evolve
over time via a series upgrades.


Fallacies of the Evolutionary Development Model
Conceptually, the Evolutionary Development Model may be suited for some applications; however,
it, too, has its fallacies. Dr. Boehm (p. 63) notes the following points:
Fallacy 1: The Evolutionary Development Model is difﬁcult to delineate from the build, test, and
           ﬁx approaches “whose spaghetti code and lack of planning were the initial motivation
           for the “waterfall model.”
Fallacy 2: The Evolutionary Development Model stemmed from the “often unrealistic” assump-
           tion that the system would always provide the ﬂexibility to accommodate unplanned
           evolution paths.
Regarding fallacy 2, Dr. Boehm (p. 63) states “This assumption is unjustiﬁed in three primary
circumstances:
      1. Circumstance in which several independently evolved applications must subsequently be
         closely integrated.
      2. Information sclerosis” cases, in which temporary work-around for software deﬁciencies
         increasingly solidify into unchangeable constraints on evolution, . . .
      3. Bridging situations, in which the new software is incrementally replacing a large existing
         system. If the system is poorly modularized, it is difﬁcult to provide a good sequence of
         ‘bridges’ between old software and the expanding increments of new software.”


27.5 THE SPIRAL DEVELOPMENT MODEL

Because of inherent ﬂaws in the Evolutionary Development Model, coupled with a lack of under-
standing, maturity, and risk in system requirements up front, Dr. Boehm introduced the Spiral
Development Model illustrated in Figure 27.2.
     Spiral development employs a series of highly iterative development activities whereby the
deliverable end product of each activity may not be the deliverable system. Instead, the evolving
set of knowledge and subsequent system requirements that lead to development of a deliverable
                                                                                   27.5 The Spiral Development Model                295

                                         Cumulative
                                           Costs                     Progress
               Quadrant 1                                         through Steps                                Quadrant 2
          Determine Objectives,                                                                           Evaluate Alternatives,
         Alternatives, Constraints                                                         Risk
                                                                                                          Identify, Resolve Risks
                                                                                          Analysis
                                                                                Risk
                                                                               Analysis
                                                                       Risk
                                                                      Analysis

                                                            Risk                                            Operational
                                                                    Prototype      Prototype   Prototype
         Commitment                                        Analysis                                          Prototype
                                                                        1              2           3
Review                               • Requirements Plan                             Simulations, Models, & Benchmarks
         Partition
                                     • Life Cycle Plan
                                                                         Software
                                                                                             Software            Detailed
                                                                       Requirements                              Design
                                            Development    Requirements                      Product
                                               Plan         Validation                        Design
                                                                                                          Unit     Code
                                                                                                          Test
                                         Integration and   Design Validation
                                            Test Plan      and Verification                 Integration
                                                                          Acceptance          & Test
                                                           Implementation    Test                             Quadrant 3
                         Quadrant 4
                     Plan for Next Phases                                                                    Develop. Verify,
                                                                                                            Next-level Product


Figure 27.2 Boehm’s Spiral Development Model
Source: Figure 2, “A Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement” by Dr. Barry Boehm, IEEE
Computer May 1988, p. 64. Reprinted with permission.




system contribute to the maturing design solution. The knowledgebase evolves via technology or
proof of concept demonstrations to a level of maturity worthy of: 1) introduction to the market-
place and 2) production investments from an acceptable risk perspective.
     DSMC describes the model in this manner. “The spiral approach also develops and delivers a
system in builds, but differs from the incremental approach by acknowledging that the user need
is not fully formed at the beginning of development, so that all requirements are not initially deﬁned.
The initial build delivers a system based on the requirements, as they are known at the time devel-
opment is initiated, and then succeeding builds are delivered that meet additional requirements as
they become known. (Additional needs are usually identiﬁed and requirements deﬁned as a result
of user experience with the initial build).” (Source: Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and
Terms)

Spiral Model Description
The development spiral consists of four quadrants as shown in Figure 27.2:
Quadrant 1:          Determine objectives, alternatives, and constraints.
Quadrant 2:          Evaluate alternatives, identify, resolve risks.
Quadrant 3:          Develop, verify, next-level product.
Quadrant 4:          Plan next phases.
Although the spiral, as depicted, is oriented toward software development, the concept is equally
applicable to systems, hardware, and training, for example. To better understand the scope of each
spiral development quadrant, let’s brieﬂy address each one.
296     Chapter 27   System Development Models

Quadrant 1: Determine Objectives, Alternatives,
and Constraints
Activities performed in this quadrant include:
      1. Establish an understanding of the system or product objectives—namely performance, func-
         tionality, and ability to accommodate change. (Boehm, p. 65)
      2. Investigate implementation alternatives—namely design, reuse, procure, and procure/
         modify.
      3. Investigate constraints imposed on the alternatives—namely technology, cost, schedule,
         support, and risk.
Once the system or product’s objectives, alternatives, and constraints are understood, Quadrant 2
(Evaluate alternatives, identify, and resolve risks) is performed.

Quadrant 2: Evaluate Alternatives, Identify, Resolve Risks
Engineering activities performed in this quadrant select an alternative approach that best satisﬁes
technical, technology, cost, schedule, support, and risk constraints. The focus here is on risk miti-
gation. Each alternative is investigated and prototyped to reduce the risk associated with the devel-
opment decisions. Boehm (p. 65) describes these activities as follows:
      . . . This may involve prototyping, simulation, benchmarking, reference checking, administering user
      questionnaires, analytic modeling, or combinations of these and other risk resolution techniques.

The outcome of the evaluation determines the next course of action. If critical operational and/or
technical issues (COIs/CTIs) such as performance and interoperability (i.e., external and internal)
risks remain, more detailed prototyping may need to be added before progressing to the next quad-
rant. Dr. Boehm (p. 65) notes that if the alternative chosen is “operationally useful and robust
enough to serve as a low-risk base for future product evolution, the subsequent risk-driven steps
would be the evolving series of evolutionary prototypes going toward the right (hand side of the
graphic) . . . the option of writing speciﬁcations would be addressed but not exercised.” This brings
us to Quadrant 3.

Quadrant 3: Develop, Verify, Next-Level Product
If a determination is made that the previous prototyping efforts have resolved the COIs/CTIs, activ-
ities to develop, verify, next-level product are performed. As a result, the basic “waterfall” approach
may be employed—meaning concept of operations, design, development, integration, and test of
the next system or product iteration. If appropriate, incremental development approaches may also
be applicable.

Quadrant 4: Plan Next Phases
The spiral development model has one characteristic that is common to all models—the need for
advanced technical planning and multidisciplinary reviews at critical staging or control points.
Each cycle of the model culminates with a technical review that assesses the status, progress, matu-
rity, merits, risk, of development efforts to date; resolves critical operational and/or technical issues
(COIs/CTIs); and reviews plans and identiﬁes COIs/CTIs to be resolved for the next iteration of
the spiral.
      Subsequent implementations of the spiral may involve lower level spirals that follow the same
quadrant paths and decision considerations.
                                                                                           27.6 The Incremental Development Model   297

27.6 THE INCREMENTAL DEVELOPMENT MODEL

Sometimes the development of systems and products is constrained by a variety of reasons. Reasons
include:
                          1. Availability of resources (expertise, etc.)
                          2. Lack of availability of interfacing systems
                          3. Lack of funding resources
                          4. Technology risk
                          5. Logistical support
                          6. System/product availability
When confronted by these constraints, the Users, the Acquirer, and the System Developer may be
confronted with formulating an incremental development strategy. The strategy may require estab-
lishing an Initial Operational Capability (IOC) followed by a series of incremental development
“builds” that enhance and reﬁne the system or product’s capabilities to achieve a Full Operational
Capability (FOC) by some future date. Figure 27.3 illustrates how incremental development is
phased.
     The DoD Glossary of Terms characterizes incremental development as follows: “The incre-
mental approach determines user needs and deﬁnes the overall architecture, but then delivers the
system in a series of increments—i.e., software builds. The ﬁrst build incorporates a part of the
total planned capabilities, the next build adds more capabilities, and so on, until the entire system
is complete.” (Source: Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
    Level of Capability




                                                                                              s
                                  Full Operational Capability (IOC)
                                                                                        ilitie
                                                                                  pab
                                                                             l Ca                                    Build “n”
                                                               em     enta
                                                          Incr

                          Initial Operational                                                     Build 3
                           Capability (IOC)                                                Build 2
                                                                                   Build 1

                                         t1        t2       t3                                                  tn
                                                                                        Time
“Build” Releases




                             Build 1
                                        Build 2
                                                Build 3




                                                                                                    Build “n”

Figure 27.3 Incremental Development Model Concept
298         Chapter 27              System Development Models

Implementation
Implementation of the Incremental Development Model requires that a sound “build” strategy be
established “up front.” As each build cycle is initiated, development teams establish unique system
requirements for each build—either by separate speciﬁcation or by delineated portions of the System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). Each build is designed, developed, integrated, and tested via a
series of overlapping V-Models, as illustrated in Figure 27.4.

The Challenge for Systems Engineering
When implementing the Incremental Development Model approach, SEs, in collaboration with other
disciplines, must:
      1. Thoroughly analyze and partition each “build’s” system requirements based on a core set
         of requirements.
      2. Flow down and allocate the requirements to PRODUCTS, SUBSYSTEMS, or
         ASSEMBLIES.
      3. Schedule the “builds” over time to reﬂect User priorities (capability “gaps, resources,
         schedules, etc.).
Incremental “builds” may include integrating new components into the system and upgrading exist-
ing components. The challenge for SEs is to determine how to establish and partition the initial set
of functional capabilities and integrate other capabilities over time without disrupting existing
system operations. Intensive interface analysis is required to ensure the “build” integration occurs
in the proper sequence and the support tools are available.




Contract                                  Initial Operational                    Follow-On                             Full Operational
 Award                                     Capability (IOC)                      Capability                            Capability (FOC)



           Build #1 “V” Development Model
                           Specs.




                                            Build #2 “V” Development Model
                                                                Specs.




    BUILD #1
    Requirements
    Allocations

                       BUILD #2                                          Build #n “V” Development Model
                       Requirements
                       Allocations                BUILD #n                                    Build #n “V” Development Model
                                                  Requirements
                                                  Allocations
             System
                                                                                                            Specs.




           Performance
             or Item
           Development
           Specification


Figure 27.4 Incremental Development Model Concept
                                                                               27.8 Guiding Principles     299

27.7 SYSTEM VERSUS COMPONENT
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES

Recognize that any system development programs may employ several different development
strategies, depending on the SYSTEM or entity. You may ﬁnd instances where the SYSTEM is
developed using incremental development of which one or more of its “builds” may employ another
development strategy such as spiral development.
     If you analyze most systems, you will ﬁnd SUBSYSTEMS, ASSEMBLIES, and SUB-
ASSEMBLIES that:
     1. Have well-deﬁned requirements.
     2. Employ mature, off-the-shelf technologies and design methods that have been around for
        years.
     3. Are developed by highly experienced developers.
Other SUBSYSTEMS and ASSEMBLIES may have the opposite situation. They may have:
     1. Ill-deﬁned or immature requirements.
     2. Employ immature technologies and design methods.
     3. Inexperienced developers.
     4. Or, all of these.
Where this is the case, you may have to select a speciﬁc development strategy that enables you to
reduce the risk of development. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 27.2
Over the years automobile technology has evolved and increased in complexity. Today, we enjoy the beneﬁts
of new technologies such as fuel injection systems, anti-lock braking systems (ABS), front wheel drive, air
bag safety restraint systems (SRS), crumple zones, GPS mapping, and so on. All facets of automobile design
have changed over the years. However, for illustration purposes, imagine for a moment that the fundamental
automobile at higher levels of abstraction did not change drastically. It still has four doors, a passenger com-
partment, trunk, windshield, and steering. However, the maturation of the major technologies noted earlier
required strategies such as spiral development that enabled them to mature and productize technologies
such as ABS and SRS for application and integration into Evolutionary Development Model of the basic
automobile.


27.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system development strategy practices.

Principle 27.1 Select a development strategy based on the maturity of the SYSTEM/entity
requirements, risk, budgeted schedule and costs, and User delivery needs.

Principle 27.2 A SYSTEM level development strategy may be different from an entity’s devel-
opment strategy, depending on the maturity of the requirements, technologies, processes, and expe-
rience and skill levels of the developers.
300    Chapter 27    System Development Models                                      General Exercises    300

Principle 27.3 Each development strategy selection should include rationale for: 1) its selection
and 2) for not selecting other strategies.

Principle 27.4 A system development program may consist of a mixture of development models,
each chosen to uniquely satisfy SYSTEM or component development requirements and develop-
ment constraints.


27.9 SUMMARY

Our discussion in this chapter provided an orientation on the various System Development Strategy practices.
System and product development approaches require implementing a smart strategy that enables you to meet
technical, cost, and schedule requirements with acceptable risk as well as User operational needs. Selecting
the RIGHT system or product development strategy is a key competitive step. From an SE perspective, you
should be familiar with the basic attributes of each type of model and understand how to apply it to meet your
speciﬁc application’s needs.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercise or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions.
   (a) What type of system development model would you recommend for developing the system?
   (b) For each of the other models not selected, provide supporting rationale on their degree of relevance
       and why they should not be used.
3. Identify three types of systems or system upgrades that may be ideal candidates for a Spiral Development
   Model strategy.
4. Identify three types of systems or system upgrades that may be ideal candidates for a Waterfall Develop-
   ment Model strategy.
5. Identify three types of systems or system upgrades that may be ideal candidates for Incremental Develop-
   ment Model.
6. In your own words and experiences, pick a system and describe how any of the following approaches might
   apply for someone who is unfamiliar with the methods?
   (a) Waterfall Approach
   (b) Evolutionary Approach
   (c) Incremental Approach
   (d) Spiral Approach


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact two or three contract development programs within your organization.
   (a) Interview key personnel to discuss the type(s) of development strategies that were employed and the
       rationale for each.
   (b) Document and report your results.
                                                                                          Additional Reading       301

REFERENCES

Boehm, Barry W. 1998. A Spiral Model of Software               IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of
  Development and Enhancement. IEEE Computer Society             Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-
  Press.                                                         trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY.
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.               MIL-STD-498 (cancelled). 1994. Military Standard: Soft-
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th         ware Development and Documentation. Washington, DC:
  ed. Defense Acquisition University Press. Ft. Belvoir, VA.     Department of Defense (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

Boehm, Barry W. 1982. Software Engineering Economics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Chapter              28

      System Speciﬁcation Practices

28.1 INTRODUCTION

The formal mechanism for specifying WHAT capabilities a system is required to provide and HOW
WELL the capabilities are to be performed is the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). The SPS
establishes the formal technical requirements of the contract between the Acquirer, as the User’s
contract and technical representative, and the System Developer.
    Many people erroneously believe speciﬁcations are documents used on the “front end” of a
program to design the system; this is only partially true. Speciﬁcations serve as the basis for deci-
sion making throughout the System Development Phase. They:
      1. Represent human attempts to translate, bound, and communicate the User’s prescribed solu-
         tion space into a language of text and graphics for capability (i.e., functional and perform-
         ance) requirements to produce a physical system, product, or service that satisﬁes the
         intended operational need.
      2. Serve as a frame of reference for decision making by establishing the thresholds for eval-
         uating and verifying technical compliance as a precursor for ﬁnal system acceptance and
         delivery.
Speciﬁcation development requires support from a multi-level system analysis process. The analy-
sis decomposes bounded solution space capabilities into manageable, lower level speciﬁcations for
the SUBSYSTEMS, PRODUCTS, and ASSEMBLIES that ultimately form the totality of the
system.
     This section introduces speciﬁcation practices that establish the multi-level, integrated frame-
work of speciﬁcations required to develop a system, product(s), or services. Our discussions intro-
duce the various types of speciﬁcations, what they contain, and how they relate to one another. The
discussion includes a general speciﬁcation outline that can be used as reference model.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is a speciﬁcation?
      2. What makes a “good” speciﬁcation?
      3. Describe the evolution of speciﬁcations from initial system concept to System Performance
         Speciﬁcation (SPS).
      4. What are the basic types of speciﬁcations?
      5. How does each type of speciﬁcation apply to system development?
      6. What is a speciﬁcation tree?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

302
                                                                            28.1 Introdution   303

  7. How is the speciﬁcation tree structured?
  8. What is the standard format for most speciﬁcations?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Detail speciﬁcation “A speciﬁcation that speciﬁes design requirements, such as materials
    to be used, how a requirement is to be achieved, or how an item is to be fabricated or con-
    structed. A speciﬁcation that contains both performance and detail requirements is still con-
    sidered a detail speciﬁcation.” (Source: MIL-STD-961D, para. 3.9, p. 5)
  • Development Speciﬁcation “A document applicable to an item below the system level
    which states speciﬁcation performance, interface, and other technical requirements in
    sufﬁcient detail to permit design, engineering for service use, and evaluation.” (Source:
    Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering, p. 447)
  • Deviation “A written authorization, granted prior to the manufacture of an item, to depart
    from a particular performance or design requirement of a speciﬁcation, drawing or other doc-
    ument for a speciﬁc number of units or a speciﬁed period of time.” (Source: DSMC, Defense
    Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, Appendix B Glossary of Terms)
  • Interface Speciﬁcation “A speciﬁcation, derived from the interface requirements, that
    details the required mechanical properties and/or logical connection between system ele-
    ments, including the exact format and structure of the data and/or electrical signal commu-
    nicated across the interface.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering, p. 449)
  • Performance Speciﬁcation “A speciﬁcation that states requirements in terms of the
    required results with criteria for verifying compliance, but without stating the methods for
    achieving the required results. A performance speciﬁcation deﬁnes the functional require-
    ments for the item, the environment in which it must operate, and interface and inter-
    changeability characteristics.” (Source: MIL-STD-961D, para. 3.29, p. 7)
  • Source or Originating Requirements The set of requirements that serve as the publicly
    released requirements used as the basis to acquire a system, product, or service. In general,
    a formal Request for Proposal (RFP) solicitation’s Statement of Objectives (SOO) or System
    Requirements Document (SRD) are viewed as source or originating requirements.
  • Speciﬁcation A document that describes the essential requirements for items, materials,
    processes, or services of a prescribed solution space, data required to implement the require-
    ments, and methods of veriﬁcation to satisfy speciﬁc criteria for formal acceptance.
  • Speciﬁcation Tree “The hierarchical depiction of all the speciﬁcations needed to control
    the development, manufacture, and integration of items in the transition from customer needs
    to the complete set of system solutions that satisfy those needs.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-
    499B Draft (cancelled), Appendix A, Glossary, p. 39)
  • Tailoring “The process by which individual requirements (sections, paragraphs, or sen-
    tences) of the selected speciﬁcations, standards, and related documents are evaluated to deter-
    mine the extent to which they are most suitable for a speciﬁc system and equipment
    acquisition and the modiﬁcation of these requirements to ensure that each achieves an optimal
    balance between operational needs and cost.” (Source: MIL-STD-961D, para. 3.40, p. 8)
  • Waiver “A written authorization to accept a conﬁguration item (CI) or other designated
    item, which, during production, or after having been submitted for inspection, is found to
    depart from speciﬁed requirements, but nevertheless is considered suitable “as is” or after
    rework by an approved method.” (Source: DSMC, Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms,
    Appendix B, Glossary of Terms)
304     Chapter 28   System Speciﬁcation Practices

28.2 WHAT IS A SPECIFICATION?

Development of any type of requirements requires that you establish a ﬁrm understanding of:
      1. WHAT is a speciﬁcation?
      2. WHAT is the purpose of a speciﬁcation?
      3. HOW does a speciﬁcation accomplish a speciﬁc objective?
If you analyze the deﬁnition of a speciﬁcation provided in this chapter’s Deﬁnition of Key Terms,
there are three key parts of this deﬁnition. Let’s brieﬂy examine each part.
      • First—“. . . essential requirements for items, materials, processes, or services . . .” Speciﬁ-
        cations are written not only for physical deliverable items but also for services and multi-
        level components, materials that compose those components, and procedural processes
        required to convert those materials into a usable component.
      • Second—“. . . data required to implement the requirements . . .” System development is often
        constrained by the need to adhere to and comply with other statement of objectives (SOO),
        design criteria, speciﬁcations, and standards.
      • Third—“. . . methods of veriﬁcation to satisfy speciﬁc criteria for formal acceptance.” Spec-
        iﬁcations establish the formal technical agreement between the Acquirer and System Devel-
        oper regarding HOW each requirement will be formally veriﬁed to demonstrate the physical
        SYSTEM/entity has fully achieved the speciﬁed capability and associated level of perform-
        ance. Note that verifying the achievement of a requirement may only satisfy incremental cri-
        teria required by contract for formal Acquirer acceptance. The contract may require other
        criteria such as installation and checkout in the ﬁeld; ﬁeld trails and demonstrations; opera-
        tional test and evaluation (OT&E); resolution of outstanding defects, errors, and deﬁcien-
        cies. Remember, System Performance Speciﬁcations (SPS) are subordinate elements of the
        contract and represent only a portion of criteria for deliverable system acceptance and sub-
        sequent contract completion.
Given these comments concerning the deﬁnition of a speciﬁcation, let’s establish the objective of
a speciﬁcation.

Objective of Speciﬁcations
The objective of a speciﬁcation is to document and communicate:
      1. WHAT essential operational capabilities are required of an item (SYSTEM, PRODUCT,
         SUBSYSTEM, etc.)?
      2. HOW WELL the capabilities must be performed?
      3. WHEN the capabilities are to be performed?
      4. By WHOM?
      5. Under WHAT prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT (i.e., bounded ranges of
         ACCEPTABLE inputs and environmental conditions)?
      6. WHAT desirable or acceptable results or outcomes (e.g., behavior, products, by-products,
         and services) are expected?
      7. WHAT undesirable or unacceptable results or outcomes are to be minimized or avoided?
                                                         28.3 Why Do We Need Speciﬁcations?      305

Delineating Speciﬁcations and Contract
Statements of Work (CSOWs)
People often have problems delineating a speciﬁcation from a Contract Statement of Work (CSOW).
As evidence of this confusion, you will typically see CSOW language such as activities, tasks, and
work products written into speciﬁcations. So, what is the difference between the two types of
documents?
     The CSOW is an Acquirer’s contract document that speciﬁes the work activities to be accom-
plished and work products to be delivered by the System Developer, subcontractor, or vendor to
fulﬁll the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract. In contrast, the speciﬁcation speciﬁes and
bounds the capabilities, characteristics, and their associated levels of performance required of the
deliverable system, product, or service.

Requirements versus Speciﬁcation Requirements
Some people often use the term “requirements” while others refer to “speciﬁcation requirements.”
What is the difference? The answer depends on the context. The contract, as the overarching doc-
ument, speciﬁes requirements that encompass, among other things speciﬁcation requirements,
schedule requirements, compliance requirements, and cost requirements. For brevity, people often
avoid saying speciﬁcation requirements and shorten the form to simply “requirements.” As we will
see, for systems with multiple levels of speciﬁcations and speciﬁcations within levels, general usage
of the term “requirements” must be cast in terms of context—of which speciﬁcation is the frame
of reference.


28.3 WHY DO WE NEED SPECIFICATIONS?

A common question is: WHY do we need speciﬁcations. The best response is to begin with an old
adage: If you do not tell people WHAT you WANT, you can’t complain about WHAT they deliver.
“But that’s not WHAT we asked for” is a frequent response, which may bring a retort “we deliv-
ered what you put on a piece of paper . . . [nothing!].” There is also another adage, which raises
grammarians’ eyebrows, that states: If it isn’t written down, it never happened!
    In any case, if the technical wrangling continues, legal remedies may be pursued. The legal
community seeks to unravel and enlighten:
    1. WHAT did you specify via the contract, meeting minutes, ofﬁcial correspondence, conver-
       sations, etc.?
    2. WHO did you talk to?
    3. WHERE did you discuss the matter?
    4. WHEN did you discuss it?
    5. HOW did you document WHAT you agreed to?
The best way to avoid these conﬂicts is to establish a mechanism “up front” prior to Contract Award
(CA). The mechanism should capture the technical agreements between the Acquirer and the
System Developer to the mutual satisfaction and understanding of both parties. From a technical
perspective, that mechanism is THE System Speciﬁcation Performance (SPS).
     The conﬂicts discussed above, which characterize the Acquirer and System Developer/Services
Provider—Subcontractor—Vendor interfaces, are not limited to organizations. In fact, the same
issues occur vertically within the System Developer’s program organization between the SYSTEM,
PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, and PART levels of abstraction. As a
306     Chapter 28   System Speciﬁcation Practices

result, the allocation and ﬂow down of requirements from the System Performance Speciﬁcation
(SPS) to lower levels requires similar technical agreements between SE design teams. This occurs
as each allocated and assigned problem space is decomposed into lower level solution spaces
bounded by speciﬁcations.
    Therefore, WHY do we need speciﬁcations? To explicitly articulate and communicate in a lan-
guage that:
      1. Employs terms that are simple and easy for the Acquirer, User, and System Developer stake-
         holders to understand.
      2. Expresses essential features and characteristics of the deliverable product.
      3. Avoids the need for “open” interpretation or further clariﬁcation that may lead to potential
         conﬂict at ﬁnal system, product, or service acceptance.


28.4 WHAT MAKES A GOOD SPECIFICATION?

People commonly ask What constitutes a GOOD speciﬁcation? “Good” is a relative term. What is
GOOD to one person may be judged as POOR to someone else. Perhaps the more appropriate ques-
tion is “What makes a well-deﬁned speciﬁcation ‘good’?”
     SEs often respond to this question with comments such as “It’s easy to work with,” “we didn’t
have to make too many changes to get it RIGHT,” “we didn’t have any problems with the Acquirer
at acceptance,” and so on. However, some explicit characteristics make well-deﬁned speciﬁcations
standout as models. So let’s examine two perspectives of well-written speciﬁcations.

General Attributes of Speciﬁcations
Well-written speciﬁcations share several general attributes that contribute to the speciﬁcation’s
success.

Standard Outline. Well-written speciﬁcations are based on standard outline topics that are rec-
ognized by industry as best practices. The outline should cover the spectrum of stakeholder engi-
neering topics to ensure all aspects of technical performance are addressed. We will address this
topic in more detail later in this chapter.

Ownership Accountability. Well-written speciﬁcations are assigned to and owned by an indi-
vidual or a team that is accountable for the implementation of the speciﬁcation requirements, main-
tenance, veriﬁcation, and ﬁnal acceptance of the deliverable system, product, or service of the
speciﬁcation.

Baseline Control and Maintenance. Speciﬁcations are baselined at a strategic staging or
control points when all stakeholders are in mutual agreement with its contents.

Referral For more information about event-based control points for speciﬁcation review,
approval, and release, refer to Chapter 46 System Design and Development Documentation Prac-
tices (refer to Figure 46.2) and Chapter 54 on Technical Review Practices.

Once the baseline is established, speciﬁcations are updated and veriﬁed through a stakeholder
review agreement process (i.e., conﬁguration control) that ensures that the document properly
reﬂects the current consensus of stakeholder requirements.
                                                     28.6 Putting Speciﬁcations into Perspective   307

Traceable to User Needs. Well-written speciﬁcations should be traceable to a User’s prescribed
solution space and fulﬁll validated operational needs derived from a problem space relative to the
organization’s mission and objectives.

Written in a Language and Terms That Are Simple and Easy to Understand. Well-
written speciﬁcations are written in a language that uses terms that are well deﬁned and are easy
to understand. In general, many qualiﬁed people should independently read any requirement
statement and emerge with the same interpretation and understanding of technical performance
requirements.

Feasible to Implement. A well-deﬁned speciﬁcation must be feasible to implement within real-
istically achievable technologies, skills, processes, tools, and resources with acceptable technical,
cost, schedule, and support risk to the Acquirer and the System Developer or Services Provider.

28.5 UNDERSTANDING TYPES OF SPECIFICATIONS

When SEs specify the items, materials, and processes required to support system, product, or service
development, how is this accomplished? These work products are speciﬁed via a hierarchical set
of speciﬁcations that focus on:

    1. Deﬁning the requirements for multi-level system items.
    2. Supporting speciﬁcations for materials and processes to support development of those
       items.

The hierarchical set of speciﬁcations is documented via a framework referred to as the speciﬁca-
tion tree. We will discuss the speciﬁcation tree later in this section. To understand the hierarchical
structure within the speciﬁcation tree, we need to ﬁrst establish the types of speciﬁcations that may
appear in the framework.
     The classes of speciﬁcations include the following:

    • General or performance speciﬁcations
    • Detail or item development speciﬁcations
    • Design or fabrication speciﬁcations
    • Material speciﬁcations
    • Process speciﬁcations
    • Product speciﬁcations
    • Procurement speciﬁcations
    • Inventory item speciﬁcations
    • Facility interface speciﬁcations

Figure 28.1 illustrates the primary types of speciﬁcations.

28.6 PUTTING SPECIFICATIONS INTO PERSPECTIVE

To place all of these various types of speciﬁcations into perspective, let’s use the example illus-
trated in Figure 28.2. Requirements for a SYSTEM, as documented in the System Performance
Speciﬁcation (SPS), are allocated and ﬂowed down one or more levels to one or more items—such
308     Chapter 28      System Speciﬁcation Practices


                                                  System
                                                Performance
                                                Specification             Where:
                                                   (SPS)
                                                                                    = One-to-Many entity Relationship
                                                                                    = May or May Not Consist of
                                                            Consists of


                                                    Item
                                                Development
                                                Specifications
                                                    • PRODUCT
                                                  • SUBSYSTEM
                                                   • HWCI/CSCI
                                                       • Etc.



                         Supported by                                      Supported by


                                                                                                       Fabrication
                                                                                                      Specifications
   Facility               Product                   Process                  Material                    • Design
Specifications          Specifications           Specifications            Specifications               Requirements/
                                                                                                         • Assembly
                                                                                                        Requirements


Figure 28.1 Entity Relationships of for Various types of Speciﬁcations




    System
  Performance                             Supports
  Specification
     (SPS)                                                                                             ItemProduct
                                                                                                      Item   Product
                                          ItemDesign/
                                         Item   Design/                                               Specifications
                                          Fabrication                                                  Specifications
            Supported     Supported
                                           Fabrication                        Item
                                         Specifications
                                          Specifications
            by                   By          • PRODUCT        Supports
                                                                          Procurement/
                                               • PRODUCT                  Development
                                           • SUBSYSTEM
                                             • SUBSYSTEM
      Item                                  • ASSEMBLY
                                              • ASSEMBLY
                                                                             Process
  Development                           • SUBASSEMBLY
                                          • SUBASSEMBLY
                                                 • •PART
                                                     PART                   • Fabrication
  Specifications                                                               • Coding
    • PRODUCT            Supported
                                By                                           • Assembly
    • SUBSYSTEM                                               Supports
 • HWCI/CSCI/CWCI                         ItemProcess
                                         Item   Process                      • Inspection
        • Etc.                           Specifications                          • Test
                                          Specifications
                        Supported
                           By            Item                 Supports
                                          ItemMaterial
                                               Material
                                         Specifications
                                          Specifications
                                                                                    Review and
                                                                                   Coordination
                        Supported
                           By            Item                 Supports
                                          ItemFacility
                                                Facility                   Facility(s)
                                         Specifications
                                          Specifications                  Development

Figure 28.2 Application of Various Types of Speciﬁcations to Item Development
                                                                                             28.7 The Speciﬁcation Tree            309

as PRODUCTS, SUBSYSTEMS, ASSEMBLIES. Requirements for these items are captured
in their respective development or procurement speciﬁcations that document the “As Speciﬁed”
conﬁguration.
     As the highly iterative, multi-level, and recursive design effort evolves, SEs develop one or
more design or fabrication speciﬁcations to capture the attributes and characteristics of the physi-
cal PARTS to be developed. In the design effort one or more process speciﬁcations and material
speciﬁcations are developed to aid in the procurement, fabrication, coding, assembly, inspection,
and test of the item. The collective set of baselined speciﬁcations represent the “As Designed”
Developmental Conﬁguration that documents HOW to develop or procure the item.
     The set of speciﬁcations generated for each item or conﬁguration item (CI) serve as the basis
for its development, as well as facilities, either internally or via external subcontractors or vendors.
When the CI completes the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) phase that includes
system veriﬁcation, the “As Veriﬁed” conﬁguration is documented as the product baseline and
captured as the CI’s product speciﬁcation.

28.7 THE SPECIFICATION TREE

The multi-level allocation and ﬂow down of requirements employs a hierarchical framework that
logically links SYSTEM entities vertically into a structure referred to as the speciﬁcation tree. The
right side of Figure 28.3 provides an example of a speciﬁcation tree.

Speciﬁcation Tree Ownership and Control
The speciﬁcation tree is typically owned and controlled by a program’s Technical Director or a
System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT). The SEIT also functions as a Conﬁguration
Control Board (CCB) to manage changes to the current baseline of a speciﬁcation.



 System Design Solution               Specification                              System
                                                                                  System
         SYSTEM Level                     Tree                         PerformanceSpecification
                                                                      Performance  Specification
          Architecture

        A          C                                       PRODUCT
                                       SYSTEM               PRODUCTAA                  PRODUCTBB
                                                                                      PRODUCT                     PRODUCTCC
                                                                                                                 PRODUCT
                                                            Development               Development                 Development
                                        IRS/ICD              Development                Development                Development
               B                                            Specification              Specification              Specification
                                                             Specification              Specification              Specification



                                                              SUBSYSTEMB1
                                                            SUBSYSTEM        B1                        SUBSYSTEM B2
         PRODUCT B                                                                                      SUBSYSTEM B2
                                                          RequirementsSpecification
                                                         Requirements  Specification                 DevelopmentSpecification
                                                                                                    Development  Specification
         Architecture

         B1        B4       C                                 SUBSYSTEMB3
                                                             SUBSYSTEM       B3                       SUBSYSTEM
                                                                                                        SUBSYSTEMB4    B4
                                                          Development Specification                Requirements Specification
                                                           Development Specification                Requirements Specification
         B2        B3
                                                                                       PRODUCTBB
                                                                                      PRODUCT
                                                                                        ICD/IRS
                                                                                         ICD/IRS

        SUBSYSTEM B3                         ASSEMBLY B3                                    CSCI B31
          Architecture                        ASSEMBLY B3                                    CSCI B31
                                                ICD/IRS
                                                 ICD/IRS                          SWRequirements
                                                                                 SW               Specification(SRS)
                                                                                     RequirementsSpecification  (SRS)
B2       HWCI B31         B4
                                                                                            HWCI B31
                                                                                             HWCI B31
                                       Where:                                     HWRequirements
                                                                                 HW               Specification(HRS)
                                                                                     RequirementsSpecification  (HRS)
            CSCI B31
                                         ICD = Interface Control Document                 HWCI = HW Configuration Item
                                         IRS = Interface Requirements Document            CSCI = Computer SW Configuration Item

Figure 28.3 Correlating the System Architecture to the Speciﬁcation Tree
310    Chapter 28         System Speciﬁcation Practices

Linking the Speciﬁcation Tree to the CWBS
and System Architecture
People often mistakenly develop the speciﬁcation tree as an independent activity unrelated to the
system architecture and contract work breakdown structure (CWBS). This is a serious error! The
speciﬁcation tree and the CWBS should reﬂect the primary structure of the system architecture and
be linked accordingly. To illustrate this point, consider the graphic shown in Figure 28.3.

Guidepost 28.1 Now that we have established the speciﬁcation tree as the framework for
linking SYSTEM entity speciﬁcations, let’s shift our focus to understanding the structure of most
speciﬁcations.


28.8 UNDERSTANDING THE BASIS FOR
SPECIFICATION CONTENT

The learning process for most engineers begins with a speciﬁcation outline. However, most engi-
neers lack exposure and understanding as to HOW the speciﬁcation outline was derived. To elim-
inate the gap in this learning process, let’s back away from the details of outlines and address WHAT
speciﬁcations should specify. Let’s begin by graphically depicting a system entity and the key
factors that drive its form, ﬁt, and function. Figure 28.4 serves this purpose.

Author’s Note 28.1 Remember, the term SYSTEM or entity is used here in a generic sense.
By deﬁnition, SEGMENTs, PRODUCTs, SUBSYSTEMs, ASSEMBLIES, HWCIs, and CSCIs are
SYSTEMs. Thus, the discussion here applies to any level of abstraction.




                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                       System Engineering Practices
  2                3                                                  5                                • Electrical     • Reliability
                                                4                         Verification
                                                                           Verification                • Mechanical     • Maintainability
                       Specifications                 Notes &               Methods
                                                                              Methods                  • Software       • System Safety
  Operational
   Operational               &                      Assumptions            • •Inspection
                                                                               Inspection              • Chemical       • Environmental
    Need(s)             Standards                                             • •Analysis              • Civil          • Producibility
     Need(s)                                                                      Analysis
                                                                          • Demonstration
                                                                            • Demonstration            • Aerospace      • Logistics
                                                                                 • Test                • Optical        • System Security
                                                                                   • Test
                                                                                                       • Nuclear        • Vulnerability
                                                                                                       • Software       • Survivability
                                                              Clarified            Satisfies           • Materials
                                References
                                                              With
                          1
         Scopes & Bounds
                                                System/Entity
                              • Operational Characteristics       • Products and Services             Implemented By
                              • Physical Characteristics          • By-Products
                              • Modes & States                    • Quality Factors                   Constrain
          Complies With       • Interfaces                        • Documentation
 12                           • Growth Capacity                                                                   7
                                                                                                                         Design &
                                                                                                   Satisfies           Preservation,
                                                                                                                       Construction
   Design
                                     Performs                  Operated &                      Supported
                                                                                                                        Packaging
                                                                                                                       Constraints&
                                     Within                   Maintained by                    By
                                                                                                                          Delivery
 Performance
                       11                           10                       9
   Criteria                  Operating
                              Operating                                          Support                          8
                            Environment                  Personnel                SupportSystem
                                                                                          System
                             Environment                  Personnel                 Elements                           Preservation,
                                                                                                                        Preservation,
                             Conditions                                              Elements
                              Conditions                                                                                Packaging&&
                                                                                                                       Packaging
                                                                                                                         Delivery
                                                                                                                          Delivery
                              Where:                                                                                    Constraint
                                              = May or May Not Consist of
                                                                                                                         Constraints s

Figure 28.4 Key Elements of Speciﬁcation Development
                                           28.8 Understanding the Basis for Speciﬁcation Content    311

Specifying the System of Interest (SOI)
The SYSTEM entity, for which the speciﬁcation is to be written, is shown in the central part of the
ﬁgure. If we analyze systems, we will ﬁnd there are several key attributes that characterize a system
entity or item. These attributes include: 1) operational characteristics, 2) physical characteristics,
3) modes and states, 4) interfaces, 5) growth capacity, 6) products and services, 7) by-products,
8) mass properties, 9) quality factors, and 10) documentation. The intent here is to characterize
the entity’s behavioral and physical characteristics and properties.
     The challenge question is, however, HOW do we arrive at this set of attributes? The answer
resides in a variety of external factors that inﬂuence and constrain the entity. Let’s investigate these
external factors.


External Factors That Drive SYSTEM Requirements
The process of specifying a SYSTEM entity’s requirements is driven by external factors that bound
and constrain the entity’s solution.

Operational Need (2). The purpose of a SYSTEM entity is to satisfy a User(s) operational
needs. Thus, the speciﬁcation must specify requirements for capabilities and level of performance
that have been derived from and are traceable to the User’s operational needs.

Speciﬁcations, Standards, and Statutory Constraints (3). The design of any SYSTEM
entity often requires strict compliance with existing speciﬁcations, standards, and statutory
constraints that may include interfacing systems, workmanship, and materials.

Notes and Assumptions (4). Since requirements are speciﬁed with text and graphics, they
often call for contextual clariﬁcations. Where some requirements are unknown, assumptions may
be used. Additionally graphical conventions may have to be clariﬁed. Therefore, speciﬁcations
should include Notes and Assumptions to provide a deﬁnition, context and usage information, and
terms and conventions.

Veriﬁcation Methods (5). Requirements that specify key attributes of a SYSTEM entity are
often written in language and terms the system designers understand. The challenge is, however,
HOW do you verify and validate that the physical entity complies with the requirements? To solve
this dilemma, speciﬁcations include a section that speciﬁes requirements for entity veriﬁcation and
validation (User option).

System Engineering Practices (6). Successful system development requires that best
practices derived from lessons learned and engineering discipline be consistently applied to
minimize risk. Therefore, speciﬁcations invoke system engineering practices to ensure that the
deliverable product will achieve SYSTEM requirements.

Design and Construction Constraints (7). Speciﬁcations do more than communicate WHAT
and HOW WELL a SYSTEM/entity must be accomplished. They communicate the constraints that
are levied on the SYSTEM and development decisions related to SYSTEM operations and
capabilities. We refer to these as design and construction constraints. In general, design and
construction constraints consist of nonfunctional requirements such as size, weight, color, mass
properties, maintenance, safety restrictions, human factors, and workmanship.
312   Chapter 28   System Speciﬁcation Practices

Preservation, Packaging, and Delivery (8). When the SYSTEM is to be delivered, care must
be taken to ensure that it arrives fully capable and available to support operational missions.
Preservation, packaging, and delivery requirements specify how the deliverable SYSTEM/entity is
to be prepared, shipped, and delivered.

SUPPORT SYSTEM Element Requirements (9). MISSION SYSTEMS require sustainable
pre-mission, mission, and postmission support test equipment (STE) at critical staging events and
areas. This may require the use of existing facilities and support equipment such as common support
Equipment (CSE) or peculiar support Equipment (PSE) or the need to develop those items.
Therefore, speciﬁcations include SUPPORT SYSTEM element requirements.

PERSONNEL Element Requirements (10). Many SYSTEMs typically require the
PERSONNEL Element for “hands-on” operation and control of the SYSTEM during pre-mission,
mission, and postmission operations. Additionally, human-machine trade-offs must be made to
optimize system performance. This requires delineating and specifying WHAT humans do best
versus WHAT the EQUIPMENT element does best. Therefore, speciﬁcations identify the skill and
training requirements to be levied on the PERSONNEL Element to ensure human-system
integration success.

Operating Environment Conditions (11). Every entity must be capable of performing
missions in a prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT at a level of performance that will ensure
mission success. Therefore, speciﬁcations must deﬁne the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
conditions that drive and bound entity capabilities and levels of performance.

Design Performance Criteria (12). SYSTEM entities are often required to operate within
performance envelopes, especially when simulating the performance of or interfacing with the
physical SYSTEMs. When this occurs, the speciﬁcation must invoke external performance
requirements that are characterized as design criteria. In these cases a Design Criteria List (DCL)
for the interfacing systems or system to be simulated is produced to serve as a reference.

28.9 UNDERSTANDING THE GENERALIZED
SPECIFICATION STRUCTURE

We discussed earlier in this practice the need to employ a standard outline to prepare a speciﬁca-
tion. Standard speciﬁcations typically employ a seven-section outline. The basic structure includes
the following elements:
Front Matter
Section 1.0:   Introduction
Section 2.0:   Referenced Documents
Section 3.0:   Requirements
Section 4.0:   Qualiﬁcation Provisions
Section 5.0:   Packaging, Handling, Storage, and Delivery
Section 6.0:   Requirements Traceability
Section 7.0:   Notes
We will address these requirements in more detail in Chapter 32 Speciﬁcation Development
Practices.
                                                                                                                                                                28.12 Summary                                          313

Author’s Note 28.2 As is ALWAYS the case, consult your contract for guidance on perform-
ance speciﬁcation formats—and your Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) item formats. If
guidance is not provided, confer with the Program’s Technical Director or organization’s Con-
tracting Ofﬁcer (ACO).

28.10 SPECIFICATION DEVELOPMENT
EVOLUTION AND SEQUENCING

To better understand the development and sequencing of speciﬁcations, we use the structure of the
System Development Process workﬂow as illustrated in Figure 24.2. If we generalize the System
Development Process in time, Figure 28.5 illustrates HOW the family of speciﬁcations evolves
over time from Contract Award through System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT).

28.11 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern speciﬁcation approaches.

Principle 28.1 Speciﬁcations state WHAT the SYSTEM/entity is to accomplish and HOW
WELL; CSOWs specify tasks that the System Developer is to perform and the work products to
be delivered. Preserve and protect the scope of each document.

28.12 SUMMARY

In our discussion of the speciﬁcation practices we identiﬁed key challenges, issues, and methods related to
developing system speciﬁcations. As the ﬁnal part of the concept, we introduced the structure for a general
speciﬁcation. Given a fundamental understanding of speciﬁcations, we are now ready to explore types of
requirements documented in a speciﬁcation via the next topic on understanding system requirements.

                                                                                               HSR/
CA               SRR                                              SDR                          SRR PDR                                       CDR               TRRs               SVT

                                                         System Engineering Design Segment                                                                  SITE Segment

                                                • SEGMENTs                                                         Component Procurement & Development Segment
    System                                      • PRODUCTS
                                                                  Allocated Baseline




 Performance                                    • SUBSYSTEMs                            Material &
                                                • ASSEMBLIES                              Process
                                                                                                                                          “As Designed”
 Specification
                                                                                                                                                                                      “As Verified” Product Baseline




    (SPS)                                                                              Specifications                                       Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                  Multi-Level
                                                  Multi-Level                                                                                                         CI
                                                     Item                                                                                                          Product
                                                 Development                                                 Hardware Design &                                   Specifications
                                                 Specifications                                            Fabrication Specifications
                                                                                        Hardware
                 System Requirements Baseline




                                                                                       Requirements
                                                                                       Specifications
                                                                                                                                                                    HWCI
                                                                                          (HRS)
                                                                                                                                                                   Product
                                                                                                                                                                 Specifications
                                                                                                                                                   HWCIs
                                                                                                                 Level 1
                                                                                                           Control & Data Flow
                                                                                           CSCI
                                                                                         Software                                  Software                          CSCI
                                                                                       Requirements
                                                                                                                                    Design                         Product
                                                                                       Specifications
                                                                                                                                 Specifications                  Specifications
                                                                                          (SRS)
                                                                                                                                                    CSCIs

                                                                                                   Developmental Configuration
                                                                                                                                                                                  5
Figure 28.5 Speciﬁcation Development Sequencing
314     Chapter 28     System Speciﬁcation Practices

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercise or a new system, selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical dis-
   cussions. If you were a consultant to an Acquirer that had ample resources:
   (a) What types of speciﬁcations would you recommend as Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) items.
       Provide rationale for your decisions.
   (b) Annotate each of the speciﬁcation outline topics with a brief synopsis of what you would recommend
       the Acquirer’s SEs address in the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).


ORGANIZATION CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for guidance concerning development of speciﬁcations.
   (a) What requirements do the command media impose on contract programs?
   (b) What does the media specify about timing for developing and approving speciﬁcations?
2. Contact a contract program within your organization.
   (a) What speciﬁcations are required to be delivered as Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) items?
   (b) What delivery requirements are levied on the program speciﬁcation CDRL deliveries during the System
       Development Phase?
   (c) Does the program have a speciﬁcation tree?
   (d) Contrast the speciﬁcation tree structure with the multi-level system architecture. Do they identically
       match? How do they differ? What is the program’s rationale for the difference?
   (e) What speciﬁcations are required that are viewed as unnecessary?
   (f) What speciﬁcation did the program develop that were not required by contract?


REFERENCES

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.              MIL-STD-499B (cancelled dRAFT). 1994. Systems Engi-
  DSMC Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and              neering. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
  Terms, 10th ed. Defense Acquisition University Press. Ft.   MIL-STD-961D. 1995. DOD Standard Practice for
  Belvoir, VA.                                                 Speciﬁcation Practices. Washington, DC: Department of
Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, N. William 2003.             Defense (DoD).
  Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:
  Wiley-InterScience.


ADDITIONAL READING

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998.              MIL-STD-480B (canceled). 1988. Military Standard: Con-
  DSMC Test and Evaluation Management Guide, 3rd ed.            ﬁguration Control: Engineering Changes, Deviations,
  Defense Acquisition Press. Ft. Belvoir, VA.                   and Waivers. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of           (DoD).
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-     MIL-STD-490A (canceled). 1985. Military Standard: Spec-
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY.         iﬁcation Practices. Washington, DC: Department of
MIL-HDBK-245D. 1996. Handbook for Preparation of                Defense (DoD).
  the Statement of Work. Washington, DC: Department of        SD-15. 1995. Performance Speciﬁcation Guide.
  Defense (DoD).                                                Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
Chapter              29

     Understanding Speciﬁcation
     Requirements

29.1 INTRODUCTION

Speciﬁcations establish the agreement of the technical capabilities and levels of performance
required for a system to achieve its mission and objectives within a prescribed solution space. As
such, speciﬁcations represent human attempts to specify and bound the prescribed solution space
that will enable the User to accomplish their organizational mission and objectives.
     This chapter provides the foundation for specifying system, product, or service requirements.
We explore the various categories and types of stakeholder and speciﬁcation requirements—such
as operational, capability, nonfunctional, interface, veriﬁcation, and validation requirements. We
expand the discussion of operational requirements and link them to the fours modes of operation—
such as NORMAL, ABNORMAL, EMERENCY, and CATASTROPHIC.
     Speciﬁcation requirements that bound a solution space are hierarchical and interrelated. We
discuss the hierarchical structure and relationships among the various types of requirements. We
illustrate why speciﬁcations prepared in an ad hoc manner are prone to problems of missing,
misplaced, conﬂicting, and duplicated requirements. These problems represent risk areas that SEs
need to understand and recognize.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is a requirement?
      2. What is a source or originating requirement?
      3. What is a stakeholder requirement?
      4. What is an objective requirement?
      5. What is a threshold requirement?
      6. What are the categories of speciﬁcation requirements?
      7. What are operational requirements?
      8. What are capability requirements?
      9. What are nonfunctional requirements?
     10. What are interface requirements?
     11. What are veriﬁcation requirements?
     12. What are validation requirements?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                              315
316     Chapter 29   Understanding Speciﬁcation Requirements

      13. What are requirement priorities?
      14. What are the four types of operational requirements?
      15. What are four common problems with requirements?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Nonfunctional Requirement A statement of a static, nonbehavioral requirement that char-
        acterizes an attribute—such as appearance, and weight, dimensions—of an entity.
      • Objective Requirement The objective value is that value desired by the user, which the
        PM is contracting for or otherwise attempting to obtain. The objective value could represent
        an operationally meaningful, time critical and cost-effective increment above the threshold
        for each program parameter. (Adapted from the DoD Acquisition Program Preparation
        Instruction; Source: DoD 5000.2R Draft, Jan. 1, 2001, Section 1.2)
      • Operational Requirement A statement of a required capability the represents an integrated
        set of operations needed to satisfy a speciﬁc mission objective and outcome within a speci-
        ﬁed time frame and prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
      • Performance Requirement “A criterion that identiﬁes and quantiﬁes the degree to which
        a particular attribute of a function must be accomplished, and the conditions under which
        this capability is to be achieved.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering,
        p. 451)
      • Threshold Requirements Requirements stated with a minimum acceptable value that, in
        the user’s judgment, is necessary to satisfy the need. If threshold values are not achieved,
        program performance is seriously degraded, the program may be too costly, or the program
        may no longer be timely. (Adapted from the DoD Acquisition Program Preparation Instruc-
        tion; Source: DoD 5000.2R Draft, Jan. 1, 2001, Section 1.2)
      • Requirement Elicitation The act of identifying and collecting stakeholder requirements
        through understanding of the problem and solution spaces such as via personal interviews
        and observation.
      • Requirement Stakeholder Anyone who has a stake or vested interest in identifying, deﬁn-
        ing, specifying, prioritizing, verifying, and validating system capability and performance
        requirements. Requirements stakeholders include all personnel responsible for system deﬁ-
        nition, procurement, development, production, operations, support, and retirement of a
        system, product or service over its life cycle.
      • Requirement “Any condition, characteristic, or capability that must be achieved and is
        essential to the end item’s ability to perform its mission in the environment in which it must
        operate is a requirement. Requirements must be veriﬁable.” (Source: SD-15 Performance
        Speciﬁcation Guide, p. 9)
      • Veriﬁcation Requirement A statement of a method and conditions for demonstrating suc-
        cessful achievement of a system, product, or service capability and its minimum/maximum
        level of performance.
      • Validation Requirement A statement of an approach and/or method to be employed to
        demonstrate and conﬁrm that a system, product, or service satisﬁes a User’s documented
        operational need.
                                                                  29.2 What Is a Requirement?    317

29.2 WHAT IS A REQUIREMENT?

The heart of a speciﬁcation resides in the requirements. Each requirements statement serves to
specify and bound the deliverable system, product, or service to be developed or modiﬁed. The pre-
requisite to developing requirements is to ﬁrst identity WHAT capability is required. Therefore,
you need to understand HOW requirements are categorized.

Understanding Types of Requirements
People often think of requirements in a generic sense and fail to recognize that requirements also
have speciﬁc missions and objectives. If you analyze the requirements stated in the speciﬁcations,
you will discover that requirements can be grouped into various categories. This discussion
identiﬁes the types of requirements and delineates usage of terms that sometimes complicate the
application.

Source or Originating Requirements
When an Acquirer formally releases a requirements document that speciﬁes and bounds the system
or entity for procurement, the speciﬁcations are often referred to as the SOURCE or ORIGINAT-
ING requirements. These requirements can encompass multiple categories of requirements in a
single document or several documents, such as a System Requirements Document (SRD) and a
Statement of Objectives (SOO).
     One of the problems in applying the term source or originating requirements is that it is rela-
tive. Relative to WHOM? From an Acquirer’s perspective, the source or originating requirements
should be traceable to the User’s validated operational need. These needs may evolve through a
chain of decision documents that culminate in a procurement speciﬁcation as illustrated earlier in
Figure 24.5.
     From a System Developer’s perspective, source or originating requirements are applied to the
Acquirer’s procurement speciﬁcation such as the Request for Proposal (RFP), SRD, or SOO used
to acquire the system, product, or service.

Stakeholder Requirements
A speciﬁcation captures all essential and prioritized stakeholder requirements that FIT within User’s
budget and development schedule constraints.

Requirements Stakeholder Objectives. The primary objectives of the requirements stake-
holders are to ensure that:
    1. All requirements essential to their task domain are identiﬁed, analyzed, and documented in
       a System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
    2. Speciﬁc requirements are accurately and precisely speciﬁed and given an equitable prior-
       ity relative to other stakeholder requirements.
    3. Domain/disciplinary requirements are clear, concise, easy to understand, unambiguous,
       testable, measurable, and veriﬁable.

Requirements Stakeholder Elicitation and Documentation. Since stakeholder require-
ments reside on both sides of the contract interface boundary, each organizational entity—User,
Acquirer, and System Developer—is accountable for stakeholder requirements identiﬁcation. So,
HOW does this occur?
318   Chapter 29   Understanding Speciﬁcation Requirements

    The Acquirer is typically accountable for establishing a consensus of agreement, preferably
before the contract is awarded, of all User operational stakeholders. Speciﬁcally, stakeholders with
accountability for the system outcomes and performance during the System Production, System
Deployment, System Operations and Support (O&S), and System Disposal Phases of the system/
product life cycle.

Author’s Note 29.1 The System Developer also has contract stakeholder performance and
ﬁnancial interests in clarifying any internal stakeholder requirements that relate to the System
Development and System Production, if applicable, Phases of the contract. Thus, the System Devel-
oper stakeholder requirements must be addressed prior to submitting the SPS as part of a proposal
as well as during contract negotiations.

Warning! Read, fully understand, and comprehend WHAT you are signing the contract to
perform.


29.3 SPECIFICATION REQUIREMENTS CATEGORIES

Requirements can be organized into various categories to best capture their intended use and objec-
tives. Typical categories include: 1) operational requirements, 2) capability and performance
requirements, 3) nonfunctional requirements, 4) interface requirements, 5) design and construction
requirements, 6) veriﬁcation requirements, and 7) validation requirements. Let’s brieﬂy describe
each of these categories of requirements.

Operational Requirements
Operational requirements consist of high-level requirements related to system mission objectives
and behavioral interactions and responses within a prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and
conditions. In general, WHAT is the entity expected to accomplish?

Capability Requirements
Capability requirements specify and bound a solution space with functional/logical and perform-
ance actions each system entity or item must be capable of producing such as outcome(s), prod-
ucts, by-products, or services. Traditionally these requirements were often referred to as functional
requirements and focused on the function to be performed. Capability requirements, however,
encompass both the functional/logical substance and level of performance associated with HOW
WELL the function must be performed.

Nonfunctional Requirements
Nonfunctional requirements relate to physical system attributes and characteristics of a system or
entity. Nonfunctional requirements DO NOT perform an action but may inﬂuence a speciﬁc oper-
ational outcome or effect. For example, does bright yellow paint (nonfunctional requirement)
improve safety?

Interface Requirements
Interface requirements consist of those statements that specify and bound a system’s direct or indi-
rect connectivity or logical relationships with external system entities beyond its own physical
boundary.
                                                                         29.4 Requirements Priorities    319

Veriﬁcation Requirements
Veriﬁcation requirements consist of requirements statements and methods to be employed to assess
system or entity compliance with a capability, performance parameter, or nonfunctional require-
ment. Veriﬁcation requirements are typically stated in terms of veriﬁcation methods such as inspec-
tion, analysis, demonstration, and test.

Validation Requirements
Validation requirements consist of mission-oriented, use case scenario statements intended to
describe WHAT must be performed to clearly demonstrate that the RIGHT system has been built
to satisfy the User’s intended operational needs. Validation requirements are typically documented
in an Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) Plan prepared by the User or an Independent Test
Agency (ITA) representing the User. Since use cases represent HOW the User envisions using the
SYSTEM, a use cases document would serve a comparable purpose. In general, validation should
demonstrate that critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs) have been resolved or
minimized.


29.4 REQUIREMENTS PRIORITIES

When requirements of elicited, each stakeholder places a value on the importance of the require-
ment to enable them to achieve their organizational missions. We refer to the value as a priority.
The realities of system development are that EVERY requirement has a cost to implement and
deliver. Given limited resources and stakeholder values, bounding the solution space requires rec-
onciling the cost of the desired requirements with the available resources. As a result, requirements
must be prioritized for implementation.

Threshold and Objective Requirements
One method of expressing and delineating requirements priorities is to establish threshold and
objective requirements.
    • Threshold requirements express a minimum acceptable capability and level of performance.
    • Objective requirements express goals above and beyond the threshold requirements level that
      the Acquirer expects the System Developer to strive to achieve.


 EXAMPLE 29.1
A User may require a minimum level of acceptable SYSTEM performance—threshold requirement—with an
expressed desire to achieve a speciﬁed higher level. Achievement of a higher level objective requirement may
be dependent on the maturity of the technology and a vendor’s ability to consistently and reliably produce the
technology.

Threshold and objective requirements must be consistent with the Operational Requirements Doc-
ument (ORD) and the Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP).
    When you specify threshold and objective requirements, you should explicitly identify as such.
There are several ways of doing this.
Option 1: Explicitly label each threshold or objective requirement using parenthesis marks such
          as XYZ Capability (Threshold) and ABC Capability (Objective).
320   Chapter 29   Understanding Speciﬁcation Requirements

Option 2: Specify “up front” in the speciﬁcation that unless speciﬁed otherwise, all requirements
          are “threshold requirements.” Later in the document when objective requirements are
          stated, the following label might be used “. . . ABC Capability (Objective). . . .”
In any case, you should ALWAYS deﬁne the terms (i.e., threshold and objective) in the appropri-
ate section of the speciﬁcation. A third option might involve a summary matrix of threshold and
objective requirements. A shortcoming of the matrix approach is that it is physically located away
from the stated requirement. This approach, which may be confusing to the reader, creates extra
work ﬂipping back and forth between text and the matrix. KEEP IT SIMPLE and tag the statement
(threshold or objective) with the appropriate label.

29.5 TYPES OF OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS

When speciﬁcation developers derive and develop requirements, human tendencies naturally focus
on the SYSTEM operating ideally—meaning normally and successfully. In the ideal world this
may be true, but in the real world systems, products, and services have ﬁnite reliabilities and life
cycles. As such, they may not always function normally. As a result, speciﬁcations must specify
use case requirements that cover phases and modes for a prescribed set of OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT scenarios and conditions.

Phases of Operation Requirements
Systems, products, and services perform in operational phases. As such, SEs must ensure that the
requirements that express stakeholder expectations for each phase are adequately addressed. At a
minimum, this includes pre-mission phase, mission phase, and postmission phase operations.

Modes of Operation Requirements
Each phase of operation includes at least one or more modes of operation that require a speciﬁed
set of capabilities to support achievement of mission phases of operation objectives. If you inves-
tigate and analyze most MISSION SYSTEM operations, you will discover that the SYSTEM must
be prepared to cope with four types of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT scenarios and conditions:
(1) NORMAL, (2) ABNORMAL, (3) EMERGENCY, and (4) CATASTROPHIC. Let’s deﬁne the
context of each of these conditions:

NORMAL Operations
NORMAL operations consist of the set of MISSION SYSTEM activities and tasks that apply to
SYSTEM capabilities and performance operating within their speciﬁed performance limits and
resources.

ABNORMAL Operations. ABNORMAL operations consist of a set of SYSTEM operations and
tasks that focus on identifying, troubleshooting, isolating, and correcting a functional or physical
capability condition. These conditions represent levels of performance that are outside the tolerance
band for NOMINAL mission performance but may not be critical to the safety of humans, property,
or the environment.

EMERGENCY Operations. EMERGENCY operations consist of a set of SYSTEM operations
and tasks that focus exclusively on correcting and eliminating a threatening, hazardous to safety,
physical capability condition that has the potential to pose a major health, safety, ﬁnancial, or
security risk to humans, organizations, property, or the environment.
                                                             29.5 Types of Operational Requirements   321

CATASTROPHIC Operations. CATASTROPHIC operations consist of a set of operations or
tasks performed following a major SYSTEM malfunction event that may have adversely affected
the health, safety, ﬁnancial, and security of humans, organizations, property, and the environment
in the immediate area.

Relationships between Operating Condition Categories
Requirements for SYSTEM operating conditions must not only scope and bound the use case sce-
nario or the condition but also the transitory modes and states that contributed to the conditions.
To better understand this statement, refer to Figure 29.1.
     As indicated in the ﬁgure, a SYSTEM operates under NORMAL operations. The challenge for
SEs is to derive reliability, availability, maintainability, and spares requirements to support onboard
preventive and corrective maintenance operations to sustain NORMAL operations. If a condition
or event occurs prior to, during, or after a mission, the SYSTEM may be forced to transition (1)
to ABNORMAL operations. NORMAL operations can conceivably encounter an emergency and
transition (3) immediately to EMERGENCY operations. Analytically, Figure 29.1 assumes some
ABNORMAL conditions precede the EMERGENCY.
     During ABNORMAL operations, a SYSTEM or its operators institute recovery operations,
correct or eliminate the condition, and hopefully return to NORMAL operations (2). During
ABNORMAL operations, an emergency condition or event may occur forcing the SYSTEM into a
state of EMERGENCY mode operations (3). Depending on the system and its post emergency
health condition, the SYSTEM may be able to shift back to ABNORMAL operations (4).
     If EMERGENCY operations are unsuccessful, the SYSTEM may encounter a catastrophic
event, thereby requiring CATASTROPHIC mode operations (6).




Initial
            NORMAL
             NORMAL
 State
             Scenario
              Scenario
            Operations
             Operations                 1
           Requirements
            Requirements                                                                Final
                                                                                        State
                                        ABNORMAL
                                         ABNORMAL
                         2                Scenario
                                           Scenario
                                         Operations
                                          Operations    3
                                        Requirements
                                         Requirements


                           5                            EMERGENCY
                                                         EMERGENCY
                                                   4       Scenario
                                                            Scenario
                                                          Operations
                                                           Operations
                                                        Requirements
                                                         Requirements
          Where:

            #      = Triggering Event                                      CATASTROPHIC
                                                                            CATASTROPHIC
                                                                6              Scenario
                   = May or may not be allowable                                Scenario
                                                                              Operations
                                                                               Operations
                                                                             Requirements
                                                                              Requirements


Figure 29.1 System Operations Requirements Coverage
322    Chapter 29   Understanding Speciﬁcation Requirements

How Do These Categories Relate to SYSTEM Requirements?
Depending on the SYSTEM and its mission applications, the System Performance Speciﬁcation
(SPS) must specify capability and performance requirements that cover these conditions to ensure
the safety of humans, property, and the environment. Will you ﬁnd a section in the SPS titled
NORMAL, ABNORMAL, EMERGENCY, or CATASTROPHIC operations? Generally, no. Instead,
requirements for these types of conditions are distributed throughout the SPS. As a matter of good
practice, however, it is recommended that Acquirer and System Developers maintain some type of
documentation that links SPS requirements to these conditions to ensure proper coverage and
consideration.

Failure to Deﬁne Requirements for these Categories
History is ﬁlled with events that exemplify a SYSTEM’s inability to COPE with physical condi-
tions in its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT simply because these conditional and scenario require-
ments were ignored, overlooked, or assumed to have only a remote probability of occurrence.

Allocation of Conditional sRequirements to System Elements
When you develop the SPS, keep in mind that the SYSTEM must be capable of accommodating
all types of NORMAL, ABNORMAL, EMERGENCY, or CATASTROPHIC conditions within the
practicality of budgets. Note the operative word “SYSTEM” here. Remember, a SYSTEM encom-
passes ALL system elements. Ultimately, when EQUIPMENT is speciﬁed, SEs also allocate respon-
sibility and accountability for some conditional requirements to the PROCEDURAL DATA,
PERSONNEL, MISSION RESOURCES, or SUPPORT SYSTEM elements that satisfy safety
requirements and reduce development costs.

29.6 UNDERSTANDING THE REQUIREMENTS HIERARCHY

System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements generally begin with high-level, mission-
oriented requirements statements. These high-level statements are then elaborated into successively
lower level requirements that explicitly clarify, specify, and bound the intent of the higher level
requirements. In effect, a hierarchical structure of requirements emerges.
     Contrary to what many people believe, requirements should not be stated as random thoughts
or wish lists. Objective evidence of this mindset is illustrated in the way speciﬁcations are often
written. We will discuss this point later in Speciﬁcation Development Practices. Instead, speciﬁca-
tions should be structured and organized via a framework of hierarchical links. Thus, the frame-
work provides a referential mechanism to trace requirements back to one or more source or
originating requirements.
     We can depict the hierarchical structure of these requirements graphically as shown in Figure
29.2. Note that each of the requirements is labeled using a convention that depicts its lineage and
traceability to higher level requirements.


 EXAMPLE 29.2
Parent capability requirement, R1, has three SIBLING capability requirements, R11, R12, and R13. The label-
ing convention simply adds a right-most digit for each level and begins the numerical sequence with “_1.”
Thus, you can follow the “root lineage” for each requirement by decoding the numerical sequence of digits.
The lineage of requirement, R31223, is based on the following decompositional “chain”: R3 ﬁ R31 ﬁ R312
ﬁ R3122 ﬁ R31223.
                                                           29.7 Common Problems with Speciﬁcation Requirements                 323

   R##     = Conflicting Requirements
                                                                                         R##      = Misplaced Requirements
    R##    = Missing Requirements                           System Mission



                            R1                                   R2                                R3



           R11              R12            R13
                                            R13            R21         R22
                                                                        R22       R31              R32         R33




 R111      R112     R113
                     R113         R131     R132     R133              R13213
                                                                       R13213     R312     R313       R331
                                                                                                       R331    R332     R333




   R1121          R1122           R1321           R1322
                                                   R1322                  R3121          R3122           R3321
                                                                                                          R3321       R3322




                   R13211         R13212     R311
                                              R311                       R31221         R31222       R31223

Figure 29.2 Requirements Hierarchy Tree Illustrating Conﬂicting Requirements

Author’s Note 29.2 The hierarchy shown is best described as ideal—meaning all requirements
are properly aligned to higher level requirements. For discussion purposes, we will restrict the sim-
plicity of this diagram to generic requirements. Requirements are derived from and must be trace-
able to measures of effectiveness (MOEs), measures of suitability (MOSs), and measures of
performance (MOPs) at the system and mission levels.

Referral For more information about MOEs, MOS, and MOPs, refer to the Operational Utility,
Suitability, and Effectiveness Practices discussion in Chapter 34.

The SYSTEM’s mission represents the highest level requirement in Figure 29.2. The mission is
scoped, bounded, and described by three high-level capability requirements, R1, R2, and R3. When
a single requirement, such as R12, R32, and R33, effectively ends the chain, the term “leaf” require-
ment is sometimes used.

Guidepost 24.1 From this basic understanding of a theoretical capability requirement hierar-
chy we are now ready to investigate common problems with speciﬁcation requirements.


29.7 COMMON PROBLEMS WITH
SPECIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

Speciﬁcations often have imperfections and are unintentionally released with a number of errors,
defects, and deﬁciencies. To illustrate these conditions, let’s identify a series of undesirable condi-
tions that commonly plague speciﬁcations.
      We noted earlier that some people develop speciﬁcations as random sets of thoughts or wish
lists organized to a standard outline structure. Speciﬁcations of this type typically evolve from infor-
mal to formal brainstorming sessions. Requirements captured during the session are published for
review. During the session reviewers lobby other reviewers to support additions of their respective
desires to the structure.
324     Chapter 29   Understanding Speciﬁcation Requirements

Author’s Note 29.3 Requirements should NOT be added to a speciﬁcation unless budgetary
resources are provided. Remember, each requirement costs money to implement—be it hardware
or software. At the SPS level, requirements changes should be managed as contract modiﬁcations.
Within the System Developer’s organization, any additional requirements should include com-
mensurate cost and schedule modiﬁcation considerations.

If you analyze speciﬁcation work products, you will discover they typically exhibit at least four
major types of problems:
Problem 1:     Missing capability requirements
Problem 2:     Misplaced capability requirements
Problem 3:     Conﬂicting speciﬁcation requirements
Problem 4:     Duplicated requirements
Figure 29.2 illustrates these conditions that often result in errors, defects, and deﬁciencies.
    These four conditions exemplify a few of the common problems speciﬁcation analysts and SEs
encounter. This further illustrates two key points:
      • WHY it is important to formally train SEs, speciﬁcation requirements analysts, and stake-
        holders in HOW to analyze, prepare, and review the speciﬁcations before you contractually
        commit to their implementation.
      • WHY it is important to conduct speciﬁcation reviews with all stakeholders. People who casu-
        ally read speciﬁcations in a linear “front to back” or sectional manner for proper grammar
        and text usage typically overlook or fail to assimilate and recognize these conditions.


29.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, our discussions in this section provide the basis with which to establish the several
guiding principles that govern speciﬁcation requirements practices.

Principle 29.1 Every speciﬁcation must specify requirements that address four types of system
conditions:
      1. Normal operations
      2. External system failures
      3. Degraded operations
      4. Internal system failures


29.9 SUMMARY

Our discussion of speciﬁcation requirements provided an introduction into the types of requirements contained
within speciﬁcations statements. Later, chapters will use this foundation to determine the requirements for
internally developed conﬁguration items (CIs) or the procurement of nondevelopmental items (NDIs) from
external vendors.
                                                                                             References     325

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Identify and describe the four types operations—NORMAL, ABNORMAL, EMERGENCY,
   and CATASTROPHIC, as applicable—that apply to the selected system.


ORGANIZATION CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact several contract programs within your organization. Request an opportunity to analyze the System
   Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) for each program and answer the following questions:
   (a) Identify ﬁve examples of operational requirements.
   (b) Identify ﬁve examples of capability requirements.
   (c) Identify ﬁve examples of nonfunctional requirements
   (d) Identify ﬁve different examples of veriﬁcation requirements.
   (e) Identify ﬁve examples of design and construction constraints.
   (f) Are threshold and objective requirements identiﬁed?
2. Interview program technical management and SEs. How were requirements in the System Performance
   Speciﬁcation (SPS) elicited and collected from stakeholders? Document your ﬁndings and observations?
3. What lessons learned did program personnel learn in the following areas and how did they resolve the
   issue?
   (a) Missing requirements
   (b) Misplaced requirements
   (c) Conﬂicting requirements
   (d) Duplicated requirements
   (e) Nonfunctional requirements
   (f) Veriﬁcation requirements
4. What types of metrics are used to track speciﬁcation defects and deﬁciencies?
5. Select a speciﬁcation on a contract program for analysis. Using the concepts discussed in this chapter, as
   a consultant to the speciﬁcation developer, identify defects and deﬁciencies in the speciﬁcation and suggest
   recommendations for improvement.
6. Research contract speciﬁcations and identify those that specify the precedence of requirements for deci-
   sion making.
7. For a contract program, identify who the SPS stakeholders are based on the speciﬁed requirements. Based
   on those stakeholders, prioritize them in terms of an estimate based on requirements count.


REFERENCES

DoD 5000.2R (Interim Regulation). 2000. Mandatory        Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.
  Procedures for Major Defense Acquisition Programs        Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:
  (MDAPs) and Major Automated Information System           Wiley-InterScience.
  (MAIS) Acquisition Programs. Washington, DC: Depart-   SD-15. 1995. Performance Speciﬁcation Guide. Washington,
  ment of Defense (DoD).                                   DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
326    Chapter 29    Understanding Speciﬁcation Requirements

ADDITIONAL READING

IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary        Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.
  of Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of      Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms,
  Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York,     10th ed. Defense Acquisition University Press. FT,
  NY.                                                       BELVOIR, VA
Chapter              30

     Speciﬁcation Analysis

30.1 INTRODUCTION

When systems, products, and services are acquired, the Acquirer typically provides a System
Requirements Document (SRD) or Statement of Objectives (SOO) with the formal Request for Pro-
posal (RFP) solicitation. The SRD/SOO expresses the required set of capabilities and performance
Offerors use as the basis to submit solution-based proposals. The challenge for Acquirers and
System Developers is to formulate, derive, and negotiate a System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
that:
     1. Concisely and completely bounds the solution space.
     2. Is well understood by all stakeholders.
     3. Establishes the basis for deliverable system, product, or service technical acceptance.
     Our discussion in this chapter describes various Speciﬁcation Analysis Practices. We explore
various methods and techniques used to analyze speciﬁcation requirements for completeness from
several perspectives. We introduce common speciﬁcation practice deﬁciencies and investigate
methods for identifying, tracking, and resolving these deﬁciencies. We also consider semantic ambi-
guities such as comply versus conform versus meet that Acquirers and System Developers employ
that do have signiﬁcance in interpretation.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. How do you methodically analyze a speciﬁcation?
     2. What are some common types of speciﬁcation requirements deﬁciencies?
     3. When requirements deﬁciencies are identiﬁed, how should you resolve them?
     4. What does it mean to comply with a requirement?
     5. What does it mean to conform to a requirement?
     6. What does it mean to meet a requirement?

30.2 ANALYZING EXISTING SPECIFICATIONS

Our previous discussion focused on HOW an Acquirer might develop their procurement System
Requirements Document (SRD) or the System Developer might developer lower level item devel-
opment speciﬁcations. However, WHAT if a speciﬁcation already exists? HOW does the Acquirer


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                  327
328     Chapter 30   Speciﬁcation Analysis

or a System Developer candidate analyze the speciﬁcation for completeness, reasonableness, and
feasibility?
     There are two key contexts regarding analysis of speciﬁcations:
      1. Acquirer veriﬁcation PRIOR TO formal solicitation.
      2. System Developer analysis during the proposal process and following Contract Award (CA).
Let’s investigate these contexts further.

Acquirer Perspective
Acquirers start by reducing the risk of the procurement action. How can this be accomplished? It
is by releasing a high-quality draft speciﬁcation that accurately, precisely, and completely speci-
ﬁes and bounds the solution space system, product, or service. Before release, the Acquirer must
thoroughly review the speciﬁcation for accuracy, completeness, speciﬁcity, and legal purposes. Key
review questions to ask might include:
      1. Have all User System Deployment Phase, System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase,
         and System Disposal Phase stakeholder requirements been adequately identiﬁed, priori-
         tized, scoped, and speciﬁed?
      2. Have we bounded the CORRECT solution space within the problem space?
      3. Have we identiﬁed the RIGHT system to ﬁll the prescribed solution space and cope with
         OPERATING ENVIRONMENT?
      4. Does this speciﬁcation adequately, accurately, and precisely specify the selected solution
         space?
      5. If we procure a system based on these requirements, will the deliverable product satisfy the
         User’s intended operational needs?
      6. Can the system speciﬁed be developed within the total life cycle cost—such as acquisition,
         operations and support (O&S), and retirement costs—budgets that are available?
What happens if you inadequately address these and other questions? Later, if it is determined that
the requirements have latent defects such as errors, deﬁciencies, or omissions, the cost to modify
the contract can be very expensive. To minimize speciﬁcation risk, Acquirers often release a pre-
solicitation draft speciﬁcation for qualiﬁed candidate Offeror comments.

System Developer Perspective
In contrast, the System Developer must reduce contract cost, schedule, and technical risk. To do
this, speciﬁcation analysis must answer many questions. Key review questions might include:
      1. Do we fully understand the scope of the effort we are signing up to perform?
      2. Do the system requirements, as stated, specify a system that satisﬁes the User’s operational
         needs? If not, what approach must we use to inform them?
      3. Have we thoroughly investigated and talked with a representative cross section of the User
         community to validate their requirements and needs?
      4. Do we understand the problem the User is attempting to solve by procuring this system?
         Does the speciﬁcation bound the problem or a symption of the problem?
      5. Can the requirements, as stated, be veriﬁed within reasonable expectations, cost, schedule,
         and risk?
      6. Do these requirements mandate technologies that pose unacceptable risks?
                                                                  30.3 Speciﬁcation Analysis   329

30.3 SPECIFICATION ANALYSIS

Given the Acquirer and System Developer perspectives, HOW do they approach analysis of the
speciﬁcation? The answer encompasses the methods and techniques identiﬁed in earlier questions
in Chapters 3 to 29. Due to the broad scope of this answer, we will brieﬂy address some high level
approaches you can apply to speciﬁcation analysis.

Visually “Inspect” the Speciﬁcation Outline
Examine the outline STRUCTURE for missing sections and topics that are crucial to developing
a system of the type speciﬁed.

Perform System Requirements Analysis (SRA)
Perform a System Requirements Analysis (SRA) to understand WHAT the system is expected to
do. Ask key questions such as:
    1. Do the list of requirements appear to be generated as a feature-based “wish list” or reﬂect
       structured analysis?
    2. Do the requirements follow standard guidelines discussed later in Requirements Statement
       Development Practices?
    3. Do the requirements appear to have been written by a seasoned subject matter expert (SME)
       or semi-knowledgeable person?
    4. Do the requirements adequately capture User operational needs? Are they necessary and
       sufﬁcient?
    5. Do the requirements unnecessarily CONSTRAIN the range of viable solutions?
    6. Are all system interface requirements identiﬁed?
    7. Are there any TBDs remaining in the speciﬁcation?
    8. Are there any critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs) that require resolution
       or clariﬁcation?

Perform Engineering Graphical Analysis
    1. Based on the requirements, as stated, can we draw a simple graphic of the system and its
       interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT?
    2. Are there any obvious “holes” in the graphic that are not speciﬁed as requirements in the
       speciﬁcation?

Hierarchical Analysis
    1. Are there any misplaced, overlapping, duplicated, or conﬂicting requirements?
    2. Are the requirements positioned and scoped at the right levels?
    3. Are there any “holes” in the set of requirements?

Technology Analysis
Do the speciﬁcation requirements indicate a willingness or unwillingness by the Acquirer to con-
sider and accept new technologies or solutions?
330     Chapter 30   Speciﬁcation Analysis

Competitive Analysis
Do the speciﬁcation requirements favor or target a competitor’s products, services, or organiza-
tional capabilities?

Modeling and Simulation Analysis
If appropriate, is it worthwhile to develop models and simulations as decision aids to analyze system
performance issues?

Verifying Speciﬁcation Requirements
      1. Are there any requirements that are unreasonable, unveriﬁable, or cost prohibitive using the
         veriﬁcation methods speciﬁed?
      2. Does veriﬁcation require any special test facilities, tools, equipment, or training?

Validating Speciﬁcation Requirements
When SEs analyze speciﬁcations, especially those prepared by external organizations, most engi-
neers presume the speciﬁcation has been prepared by someone who:
      1. Understands the User’s problem space and solution space(s).
      2. Accurately analyzes, translates, and articulates the solution space into requirements that
         can be implemented economically with acceptable risk, and so forth.
   Exercise CAUTION with this mindset! AVOID assuming anything UNTIL you have VALI-
DATED the speciﬁcation requirements.

30.4 DEALING WITH CONTRACT
SPECIFICATION DEFICIENCIES

Human systems, even with the best of intentions, are not perfect. Inevitably, every contract System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) has blemishes, degrees of goodness, strong and weak points.
Although the degree of goodness has an academic connotation, “goodness” resides in the minds
and perceptions of the Acquirer and System Developer. Remember, one person’s work of art may
be viewed by another person as unorganized rambling.
     Discussions by both parties reach a point whereby willingness to entertain contract modiﬁca-
tion to eliminate speciﬁcation blemishes or deﬁciencies are rejected. The Acquirer may want
changes but is reluctant to request changes due to the System Developer taking advantage of the
situation via cost changes.
     Conversely, the System Developer may WANT changes but the Acquirer is unwilling to allow
any changes for FEAR of the unknown that may result from the changes. Even when both parties
agree, there may be latent SPS deﬁciencies that lie dormant and go undiscovered until late in the
System Development Phase of the contract. The best that can occur is for both parties to accom-
modate each other’s wishes at no cost, assuming that is the appropriate and reasonable solution.
     Regardless of the scenario you may have a situation where the System Performance Speciﬁ-
cation (SPS) contains defects, deﬁciencies, or errors and the Acquirer refuses to modify the con-
tract. What do you do?
     One solution is to create an electronic System Design Notebook (SDN); some people refer to
this as a Design Rationale Document (DRD). Why do you need an SDN or DRD? You need a mech-
anism to record design assumptions and rationale for requirements allocations and design criteria.
                                                     30.5 Common Speciﬁcation Deﬁciencies    331

Under the Terms and Conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract, the System Developer must perform to
the SPS requirements that are ﬂowed down to lower level development speciﬁcations. Therefore,
lacking a deﬁnitive set of SPS requirements, you may want to consider an AT RISK solution that
expresses your organization’s interpretation of the ambiguous requirements. A copy of the docu-
ment should be provided through contracting protocol to the Acquirer’s Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO).

Author’s Note 30.1 The point above highlights the need to THINK SMARTLY “up front” about
requirements and AVOID this situation. You will ﬁnd executives and impatient people who insist
that you move on and not worry about interpretations. “Besides, it’s perfectly clear to me!”
BEWARE! Any time investment and energy spent up front clarifying SPS requirements BEFORE
they become contract obligations will be signiﬁcantly less costly than after Contract Award.

When you conduct the System Requirements Review (SRR), SPS defects and deﬁciencies should
be addressed with the Acquirer. The requirements defects and deﬁciencies discussion and decisions
should be recorded in the SRR meeting minutes. If the Acquirer refuses to allow corrections via
contract modiﬁcation, they may acknowledge via the Acquirer Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO) your
chosen approach. Therefore, document your design assumptions and include open distribution or
accessibility of that portion of the SDN to the Acquirer.

Author’s Note 30.2 Every contract and situation is different and requires decision making on
its own merits. Professionally and technically speaking, the Acquirer and System Developer should
emerge from the SRR with no outstanding issues. The reality is:
    1. The Acquirer may have to settle for a negotiated acceptance of the system AS IS with known
       deﬁciencies at system delivery.
    2. The System Developer may be UNABLE to perform to the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of
       the contract.
All stakeholders need to emerge from the contract as winners! Therefore, AVOID this problem and
resolve it up front during the proposal phase or not later than the SRR and throughout the System
Development Phase, as appropriate.


30.5 COMMON SPECIFICATION DEFICIENCIES

If you analyze speciﬁcation requirements practices in many organizations, there are a number of
deﬁciencies that occur frequently. These include:
Deﬁciency 1:    Failure to follow a standard outline
Deﬁciency 2:    Speciﬁcation reuse risks
Deﬁciency 3:    Lack of speciﬁcation and requirements ownership
Deﬁciency 4:    Specifying broad references
Deﬁciency 5:    Reference versus applicable documents
Deﬁciency 6:    Usage of ambiguous terms
Deﬁciency 7:    Missing normal, degraded, and emergency scenario requirements
Deﬁciency 8:    Speciﬁcation change management
Deﬁciency 9:    Over-underspeciﬁcation of requirements
Deﬁciency 10:   References to unapproved speciﬁcations
332     Chapter 30    Speciﬁcation Analysis

Deﬁciency 11:        Failure to track speciﬁcation changes and updates
Deﬁciency 12:        Failure to appropriate time for speciﬁcation analysis
Deﬁciency 13:        Requirements applicability–conﬁguration effectivity
Deﬁciency 14:        Dominating personality speciﬁcation writers

Deﬁciency 1: Failure to Follow a Standard
Speciﬁcation Outline
Many speciﬁcation issues are traceable to a lack of commitment to establish and employ standard
speciﬁcation development outlines and guidelines. Standard outlines represent organized lessons
learned that reﬂect problem areas or issues that someone else has encountered and must be cor-
rected in future efforts. Over time they incorporate a broad spectrum of topics that may or may not
be applicable to all programs. The natural tendency of SEs is to delete nonapplicable sections of a
standard speciﬁcation outline. Additionally, management often dictates that speciﬁc topics are to
be deleted because “We don’t want to bring it to someone’s attention that we are not going to
perform (topic).”
     The reality is standard outlines include topics that are intended to keep you out of trouble!
A cardinal rule of system speciﬁcation practices requires you to provide rationale as to WHY a
standard outline topic is not applicable to your program. The rationale communicates to the reader
that you:
      1. Considered the subject matter.
      2. Determined the topic is not relevant to your system development effort for the stated
         rationale.
Thus, if someone more knowledgeable determines later that “Yes, it is relevant,” you can correct
the applicability statement. This is true for plans, speciﬁcations, and other types of technical
decision-making documents.
     Problems arise when SEs purposefully delete sections from a standard outline. Once deleted,
the section is “out of sight, out of mind.” Since contract success is dependent on delivering a prop-
erly designed and developed SYSTEM on schedule and within budget, you are better off identify-
ing a topical section as “Not Applicable.” Then, if others determine that it is applicable, at least
you have some lead time to take corrective action BEFORE it is too late.
     If you follow this guideline and go into a System Requirements Review (SRR), any non-
applicability issues can be addressed at that time. All parties emerge with a record of agreement
via the conference minutes concerning the applicability issue.

Author’s Note 30.3 Remember, the cost to correct speciﬁcation errors and omissions require-
ments increases almost exponentially with time after Contract Award.

Deﬁciency 2: Speciﬁcation Reuse Risks
Some engineers pride themselves in being able to quickly “assemble a speciﬁcation” by duplicat-
ing legacy system speciﬁcations without due operational, mission, and system analysis. Guess
what? Management takes great pride in the practice, as well. AHEAD of schedule, LIFE is ROSY!
Later SEs discover that key requirements were overlooked or ignored, were not estimated, and have
signiﬁcant cost to implement. Guess what? Management is very unhappy!
     Where precedented systems exist and are used as the basis to create new speciﬁcations with
only minor modiﬁcations, the practice of plagiarizing existing speciﬁcations may be acceptable.
However, be cautious of the practice. Learn WHEN and HOW TO apply speciﬁcation REUSE
effectively.
                                                      30.5 Common Speciﬁcation Deﬁciencies     333

Deﬁciency 3: Lack of Speciﬁcation
and Requirements Ownership
Speciﬁcation requirements are often ignored due to a lack of ownership. Two SEs argue that each
thought the other was responsible for implementing the requirement. Every requirement in every
speciﬁcation should have an OWNER who either generated the requirement or is accountable for
its implementation and veriﬁcation.

Deﬁciency 4: Specifying Broad References
Speciﬁcation writers spend the bulk of their time wordsmithing and correcting documents and very
limited time, if any time, on systems analysis—even less on speciﬁcation references. References
are often inserted at the last minute. Why?
     Typically, those same SEs do not have the time to thoroughly research the references. They
make broad references such as “in accordance with MIL-STD-1472 Human Engineering” because:
    1. Management is demanding completion.
    2. We’ll “clean it up” later.
    3. We don’t understand WHAT the reference means, but it sounds GOOD; “saw it in another
       spec one time so let’s use it,” etc.
Since this is a speciﬁcation and the System Developer is required by contract to implement the pro-
visions of the SPS, are you prepared to PAY the bill to incorporate ALL provisions of Mil-Std-1472,
for example? Absolutely not! With luck, the problem may work itself out during the proposal phase
via the Offeror formal question and answer process.
     This problem is a challenge for the Acquirer and System Developers.
    1. The referenced document may be outdated or obsolete. Professionally speaking, this can be
       embarrassing for the organization and speciﬁcation developer.
    2. Unskilled speciﬁcation writers—despite 30 years of experience in other nontopic areas—
       may inadvertently make technical decisions that may have legal, safety, and risk
       ramiﬁcations.
    3. System Developers often fail to properly research Request for Proposal (RFP) references,
       thereby costing signiﬁcant amounts of money to implement the reference as stated in the
       System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
Do yourself and your organization a favor. Thoroughly research RFP references, REQUEST
Acquirer (role) clariﬁcations or conﬁrmations, and then document in brief form WHAT the refer-
ence EXPLICITLY requires. Remember, UNDOCUMENTED Acquirer comments are magically
FORGOTTEN when things go WRONG!

Deﬁciency 5: Reference versus Applicable Documents
Referenced documents refer to those documents—namely speciﬁcations and standards—explicitly
speciﬁed in the Section 3.0 requirements and listed in Section 2.0 Referenced or Applicable Doc-
uments of the speciﬁcation. In contrast, Applicable Documents are those containing relevant infor-
mation to the topic but are not REQUIRED or REFERENCED by the speciﬁcation. AVOID listing
these documents in a speciﬁcation’s Section 2.0 Referenced Documents.

Deﬁciency 6: Usage of Ambiguous Terms
Speciﬁcation writers are notorious for writing requirements statements that employ ambiguous
words that are subject or open to interpretation. In accordance with speciﬁcation practices that
334     Chapter 30   Speciﬁcation Analysis

promote explicitness, ambiguous words and terms should be avoided or deﬁned. Consider the fol-
lowing example:


 EXAMPLE 30.1
Simulation community speciﬁcations often include terms such as realistic representation and effective
training.

The challenge for the Acquirer and System Developer is: How do you know WHEN a “realistic
representation” or “effective training” has been successfully achieved? The answer is to explic-
itly deﬁne the terms. WHAT subjective criteria will the User, subconsciously in their minds and
perceptions, use to determine successful achievement of the requirements?

Deﬁciency 7: Missing Scenario Requirements
Most SEs prepare speciﬁcations for the “ideal” world. The reality is systems and interfaces fail,
sometimes with CATASTROPHIC consequences. When speciﬁcations are written, make sure the
requirements are speciﬁed to address NORMAL, DEGRADED, EMERGENCY, and, if appropri-
ate, CATASTROPHIC operations.

Author’s Note 30.4 Remember, system safety design issues demand proper consideration
to minimize risk to the SYSTEM and its personnel (people). This includes direct or indirect im-
pacts by the system and its operation or lack thereof on the public, physical property, and the
environment.

Deﬁciency 8: Speciﬁcation Change Management
Once a speciﬁcation is approved, baselined, and released, changes must be formally approved and
communicated to stakeholders—among them management and SE designers. Because of a lack of
communications, two problems can occur.
     First, program and technical management often lack an appreciation of the need to communi-
cate speciﬁcation changes to program personnel. Ironically, the technical integrity of the program
is at risk, which is the very topic management seems to be averse to. Second, when management
does communicate changes, Program personnel often IGNORE announcements about speciﬁcation
changes and continue to work with a previous version. Programs need to learn how to better com-
municate! Verify that program documentation communications are clearly communicated and
understood!

Deﬁciency 9: Over-Underspeciﬁcation of Requirements
Speciﬁcation developers are often confronted with uncertainty regarding the adequacy of the
requirements. Speciﬁcation requirements can be overspeciﬁed or underspeciﬁed.
    The way to AVOID over-underspeciﬁcation involves three criteria:
      1. Focus on specifying the system item’s performance envelope—meaning boundaries for
         capabilities and performance.
      2. AVOID details that specify HOW the capability-performance envelope is to be implemented.
      3. AVOID specifying capabilities more than one level below the entity’s level of abstraction.
                                                       30.5 Common Speciﬁcation Deﬁciencies      335

Deﬁciency 10: References to Unapproved Speciﬁcations
When the System Developer’s organization plans to develop several multi-level item development
speciﬁcations, the efforts must be synchronized. One of the ironies of speciﬁcation writing is a per-
ception that multi-level speciﬁcations can be written simultaneously to cut development time. This
is an erroneous perception that ultimately leads to technical CHAOS—conﬂicts and inconsisten-
cies! The sequencing and approval of speciﬁcation development at lower levels is dependent on
maturation and approval of higher level speciﬁcations. There are ways of accomplishing this,
assuming teams at multiple levels communicate well and mature decisions quickly at higher levels.

Deﬁciency 11: Failure to Track Speciﬁcation
Changes and Updates
System integrity demands change management process discipline: track approved speciﬁcation
updates, incorporate changes immediately, and notify all stakeholders of the latest changes. This
includes proper versioning to enable stakeholders to determine currency.

Deﬁciency 12: Failure to Appropriate Time for
Speciﬁcation Analysis
One of the ironies of system development is failure to allocate the proper amount of time to analyze
or develop speciﬁcations.

Wasson’s Law. The time allocated by management for most program and technical decision
making tasks is inversely proportional to the signiﬁcance of the tasks or decision to the deliverable
product, User, or organization.
    Three of the most crucial speciﬁcation analysis tasks during a proposal effort are
understanding:
    1. WHAT problem the User is trying to solve.
    2. WHAT system, product, or service does the Acquirer’s formal solicitation’s SRD/SOO
       specify.
    3. WHAT you have committed yourself and your organization to via the draft System Perfor-
       mance Speciﬁcation (SPS) submitted as the proposal response.
Despite their signiﬁcance, these three tasks often fall back in the priority list behind multi-level
managerial brieﬁngs, which are important, and other “administrative” tasks.

Deﬁciency 13: Requirements Applicability—
Conﬁguration Effectivity
Some speciﬁcation requirements may only be applicable to speciﬁc conﬁgurations and units—that
is, conﬁguration effectivity. Where this is the case, label the requirement as only applicable to the
conﬁgurations A, B, C, etc., or serial numbers XXXX to YYYY. If this occurs, include a statement
to the reader on the cover and in the Section 1.0 Introduction that this speciﬁcation applies to con-
ﬁgurations A, B, and C and serial number effectivity XXXX through YYYY. Then, list the serial
numbers.

Deﬁciency 14: Dominating Personality Speciﬁcation Writers
As much as we aspire to objectively neutralize the personality factor in speciﬁcation writing, per-
sonalities sometimes have a dominating inﬂuence over speciﬁcation development. There are ego-
336    Chapter 30   Speciﬁcation Analysis

tists whom programs defer to because of their personalities rather than their technical competence.
If you allow this practice to occur on your program, you may be jeopardizing your own success as
well as that of the program.
      There are times when dominating personalities will “bully” requirements through that do not
make sense—“Makes sense to me . . . why can’t you see the same?” As a result there may be highly
competent reviewers who have a “gut instinct” that something is not right yet are unable to artic-
ulate or identify the problem for corrective action. If this scenario occurs, view it as a risk indica-
tor, take notice, and get the situation corrected technically. Level the playing ﬁeld. Keep the team
focused on technical solutions and resolving issues!


30.6 CLARIFYING AND RESOLVING SPECIFICATION
ISSUES AND CONCERNS

Speciﬁcations often contain requirements that require clariﬁcation to ensure the proper interpreta-
tion and understanding of the requirement. Some requirements, however, raise critical operational
issues (COIs) or critical technical issues (CTIs), that present major challenges to implementation.
The issues may reﬂect technical, technology, cost, schedule, or support risks as well as TBDs, and
so on.
     Requirements issues and the need for clariﬁcations occur BEFORE and AFTER Contract
Award. Let’s brieﬂy explore the handling of issues during these two time frames.

Issue Resolution Prior to Contract Award
Acquirers often release the draft version of a formal solicitation—such as a Request for Proposal
(RFP)—for review and comment. The draft SRD may contain various speciﬁcation requirements
issues and the need for clariﬁcations.
     The ﬁrst step of any speciﬁcation analysis should be to identify and tag all requirements requir-
ing clariﬁcation—technical, cost, schedule, technology, and support risks, and so on. Remember,
publicly surfacing issues and clariﬁcations during the RFP process may potentially tip competitors
regarding your proposal strategy. Therefore, the proposal team must make a decision regarding
which issues to submit for clariﬁcation and which to give additional internal analysis and/or
follow-up.
     The key point is that Offerors (System Developers) must thoroughly analyze, scrutinize, and
resolve all requirements issues and clariﬁcations BEFORE they submit their speciﬁcation as part
of the proposal and sign a contract.

Issue Resolution after Contract Award (ACA)
Requirements issue resolution after Contract Award (ACA) varies by contract and Acquirer. The
WILLINGNESS to modify speciﬁcation requirements language may depend on how recently the
Contract Award has occurred.

Prior to the System Requirements Review (SRR)
If the System Requirements Review (SRR) has not been conducted, there may be an opportunity
to address the need for clariﬁcations or to correct deﬁciencies. Even then, some Acquirers may be
reluctant to agree to speciﬁcation changes via contract modiﬁcations.
     From the Acquirer’s perspective, the need to change always goes back to the proposal response
prior to Contract Award “. . . WHY wasn’t the matter addressed at that time or during contract nego-
tiations?” The problem is exacerbated if the Offeror (System Developer) voluntarily proposed spec-
                                               30.7 Requirements Compliance and Conformance       337

iﬁcation requirements language without adequate analysis or consideration. The situation poten-
tially has degrees of organizational, professional, and technical embarrassment.

Post–SRR Requirements Issues
There are occasions when latent speciﬁcation requirements defects go undiscovered until after SRR,
generally due to poor analysis. Acquirers may reluctantly consider and accept engineering change
proposals (ECPs) for requirements changes. Depending on the situation, the only workable solu-
tion may be to request a deviation to the speciﬁcation requirements.

Final Points
When speciﬁcation requirements issues are discovered, surfacing the issue to the surprise of the
Acquirer program manager in a major technical review may have consequences. People, in general,
do not like surprises, especially in public forums. Although the handling of an issue depends on
the personnel and organizations involved, the best advice may be for the System Developer’s
program or technical director to informally introduce the issue off-line—meaning in private con-
versation—with the Acquirer program manager prior to a review. Depending on the outcome and
response, the System Developer may choose to address the issue formally through normal pro-
curement channels.
     Finally, the reluctance and willingness of the Acquirer to entertain the idea of speciﬁcation
requirements changes may be driven by having to implement a contract modiﬁcation that requires
numerous approvals and justiﬁcations, a laborious and career risk process. It also challenges the
initiator(s) to explain to your management WHY you failed to recognize this situation and rectify
it during contract negotiations.

Tracking Requirements Issues and Clariﬁcations
When speciﬁcation requirements issues and clariﬁcations are identiﬁed, it is critical to bring all of
them to closure quickly. One mechanism for tracking closure status is to establish a metric that rep-
resents the number of outstanding COIs, CTIs, TBDs, TBSs, and clariﬁcations.


30.7 REQUIREMENTS COMPLIANCE AND CONFORMANCE

As a System Developer, one of the most common questions posed by management to SEs is: Can
we meet the speciﬁcation’s requirements? The response typically involves words such as comply,
conform, and meet. Since SEs often lack training on the proper usage of the terms, you will ﬁnd
these terms are used interchangeably. So, what do the terms mean?
     If you delve into the deﬁnitions of comply, conform, or meet in most dictionaries, you may
emerge in a state of confusion. The reason is that most dictionary deﬁnitions of these terms employ
either of the other two terms as part of the deﬁnition, resulting in circular references. So, to bring
some clarity to this confusion, consider the following explanations.


Compliance
The term, compliance, is often used in references to requirements compliance, process compliance,
and regulatory compliance. In general, compliance infers STRICT adherence or obedience to the
“letter” of a requirement with no exceptions. Despite the term’s intent you will often ﬁnd degrees
of compliance. Within the system development contracting domain, there is an expectation that any
organization that refuses to or is unable to comply with speciﬁcation requirements formally noti-
338    Chapter 30   Speciﬁcation Analysis

ﬁes the Acquirer and documents the exception, its supporting rationale, and proposed remedy.
Failure to achieve full compliance often results in contract performance penalties or a negotiated
reduction in contract payments.


 EXAMPLE 30.2
People are expected to comply with the letter of the law or requirement regarding statutes and
regulations established by international, federal, state, and local governmental authority.


Conformance
We often hear the phrase “We will conform to your requirements.” The response communicates,
“We have standard organizational practices—such as processes, methods, and behavioral patterns—
that we use on a regular basis. However, to promote harmony among team members and a posi-
tive relationship, we will ADAPT or ADOPT—that is, to conform to—a set of processes, methods,
and behavioral patterns to be mutually acceptable to the other party.”


 EXAMPLE 30.3
You visit a foreign country and discover their eating habits are different from yours. You have a choice:
1) conform to their practices, 2) go without food supply, or 3) bring your own chef and food.

“Meet” Requirements
You often hear someone say they or their organization can meet the requirements. What does this
mean? In general, the term meet carries a minimum threshold connotation. In effect they are stating,
“We will meet your MINIMUM requirements.”
    To summarize our discussion in an SE context, a subcontractor might tell a System Developer,
“For this subcontract, we will conform to your documentation system’s review and approval
process. When we submit our documents for review and approval, we will comply with the sub-
contract’s instructions for document format and submittal via the Contracting Ofﬁcer.”

30.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern speciﬁcation analysis practices.

Principle 30.1 Undocumented verbal agreements vaporize when either party in an agreement
gets into trouble.

30.9 SUMMARY

We began our discussion of speciﬁcation analysis by addressing Acquirer and System Developer perspectives
for a speciﬁcation. We introduced various methods that System Developers employ to provide a high-level
assessment of the “goodness” of the speciﬁcation.
     Next we introduced common deﬁciencies such as missing, misplaced, overlapping, or duplicated require-
ments that plague many speciﬁcations. We described how speciﬁcation issues and concerns should be resolved
between the System Developer and Acquirer prior to and after Contract Award.
                                                                     Organizational Centric Exercises    339

     Last, we delineated three terms—comply, conform, and meet—that contractors express interchangeably
but have different connotations.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media. What guidance or requirements are levied on contract pro-
   grams concerning speciﬁcation analysis? Document your ﬁndings.
2. Contact several contract programs within your organization. Interview the Technical Director, Project Engi-
   neer, or Lead SEs to answer the following questions:
   (a) How were system requirements analyzed during the proposal effort that culminated in the develop-
       ment of the program’s System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)?
   (b) What deﬁciencies—missing, misplaced, conﬂicting, or duplicated requirements—did personnel ﬁnd in
       the Acquirer’s System Requirements Document (SRD) provided with the solicitation? How were the
       deﬁciencies resolved?
   (c) Were there any requirements issues and or requirements that required clariﬁcation? Did the System
       Developer or the Acquirer write these requirements? How were these resolved? Did the Acquirer refuse
       to make changes to the SPS to resolve or clarify issues? How did the program deal with the refusal to
       modify SPS requirements?
Chapter              31

      Speciﬁcation Development

31.1 INTRODUCTION

Performance and development speciﬁcations serve as the formal mechanism for an Acquirer (role)
to:
      1. Specify WHAT capabilities a system or entity is required to provide.
      2. Bound HOW WELL the capabilities are to be performed.
      3. Identify external interfaces the SYSTEM/entity must accommodate.
      4. Levy constraints on the solution set.
      5. Establish criteria concerning HOW the System Developer is to demonstrate compliance as
         a precursor for delivery and acceptance.
At the highest level, the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or Statement of Objectives (SOO)
establish a contract’s technical agreement between the Acquirer, as the User’s technical represen-
tative, and the System Developer. This section introduces Speciﬁcation Development Practices and
expands on the standard outline discussion in Chapter 28 System Speciﬁcation.
     When tasked to write a speciﬁcation, most engineers have a tendency to approach speciﬁca-
tion development as if it were a test.
      1. Identify the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI).
      2. What is the system’s mission?
      3. What are its modes and states of operation?
      4. What functions should the SYSTEM/entity perform?
      5. Identify the system’s interfaces?
      6. Any weight restrictions?
      7. Any special considerations about safety?
      8. Any other constraints concerning the way the SYSTEM/entity is to be designed and
         constructed?
      9. What about training?
     This chapter introduces and explores some of the more common approaches to speciﬁcation
development. Our discussion introduces a logical strategy that provides the basis for structuring a
speciﬁcation. Using this strategy, you can create an outline that best ﬁts your organization.
     Based on an understanding of methods for creating a speciﬁcation and its topical outline, we
shift our focus to investigating an example approach for creating a meaningful speciﬁcation. We

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

340
                                        31.2 Understanding What a Speciﬁcation Communicates     341

leverage our discussions in Chapter 18 System Operations Model and use it as an analytical tool
to organize requirements within the speciﬁcation outline structure via model-based structured
analysis. We conclude with a suggested a checklist for developing speciﬁcations and conducting
speciﬁcation reviews.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
    1. What are some common approaches to developing speciﬁcations?
    2. What is the architecture-based speciﬁcation development approach?
    3. What is the performance-based speciﬁcation development approach?
    4. What is the feature-based speciﬁcation development approach?
    5. What is the reuse speciﬁcation development approach?
    6. What is the model-based development approach to speciﬁcation development?
    7. How are speciﬁcation reviews performed?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Architecture-Based Approach A structured analysis approach that employs: 1) conceptual
      system phases and modes of operation and 2) a multi-level logical architecture (i.e., entities
      and interfaces) as the framework for specifying system capabilities and performance
      requirements.
    • Performance-Based Approach A speciﬁcation development approach that analytically
      treats a system or entity as a box and speciﬁes condition-based inputs, outputs, behavioral
      capabilities and responses, and constraints for developing speciﬁcation requirements.
    • Speciﬁcation Review A technical review by stakeholders, peers, and subject matter experts
      (SMEs) to assess the completeness, accuracy, validity, veriﬁability, producibility, and risk
      of a speciﬁcation.
    • Reuse-Based Approach An approach that exploits or plagiarizes an existing speciﬁcation
      that may or may to be applicable to a speciﬁc application and uses it as the basis for creat-
      ing a new speciﬁcation. This approach, which is typically prone to errors and omissions, is
      highly dependent on the speciﬁcation writer’s and reviewer’s knowledge and expertise to
      identify and correct errors and omissions.
    • Feature-Based Approach An ad hoc brainstormed approach to speciﬁcation requirements
      development. This approach, by virtue of its feature-based nature, is subject to omissions in
      the hierarchy of requirements and is highly dependent on reviewer assimilation and recog-
      nition of the omissions to correct them.


31.2 UNDERSTANDING WHAT A
SPECIFICATION COMMUNICATES

Speciﬁcations are not intended to be Pulitzer Prize winning novels on the bestseller list. However,
like novels, they do require some insightful forethought to bring a degree of continuity and
coherency to a set of mundane, disjointed outline topics.
     There are numerous ways of structuring a speciﬁcation outline. Rather than elaborate on com-
monly available speciﬁcation outlines, let’s take a different approach and THINK about WHAT we
need to communicate in the speciﬁcation. Then, based on that discussion, translate the information
into a meaningful outline structure that best ﬁts your organization or application.
342     Chapter 31   Speciﬁcation Development

Standard Outline Templates
As with any commonly used documentation, start with a standard outline, tailor, and apply it across
all speciﬁcations for a contract program. If you do not have one, consider establishing one in your
organizational command media.
     If you analyze and implement most speciﬁcation outlines, you will discover two things:
      1. People who are not practitioners with in-depth experience often create speciﬁcation out-
         lines used in many organizations. Outline topics are mismatched and disorganized. While
         the outline satisﬁes an organizational ego, it may be useless to stakeholders—namely the
         practitioners and readers.
      2. Speciﬁcation outline creators tend to structure outlines from an academic perspective that
         makes the outline unwieldy for practitioners. You can organize a speciﬁcation with many
         levels of hollow academic structure that addresses the ﬁrst requirement at the fourth,
         ﬁfth, or sixth level. Imagine having such as high-level statement as “The system shall
         perform the following capabilities;” appear in Section 3.X.X.X.X. Since speciﬁcations
         for large, complex systems often require four to eight or ten levels of detail, placing the
         ﬁrst requirements at the ﬁfth level makes the document IMPRACTICAL to read and
         reference.
The point is to organize the outline structure in a meaningful way that posts major requirements at
least by the third level.

Speciﬁcation Outline
To facilitate our understanding as to WHAT a speciﬁcation communicates, let’s use the following
structure to guide our discussion. You may decide to restructure these topics to better suit your
needs:
      1.0 INTRODUCTION
      2.0 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
      3.0 REQUIREMENTS
          3.1 Operational Performance Characteristics
              3.1.1 System (Level 1 System) Entity Deﬁnition
              3.1.2 System Mission(s)
              3.1.3 Phases of Operation
              3.1.4 Mission Reliability
              3.1.5 System Maintainability
              3.1.6 System Availability
              3.1.n (Other Mission Related Topics)
          3.2 SYSTEM/Entity Capabilities (Level 1)
              3.2.1 System Capability Architecture
              3.2.2 Phase-Based Capability Application Matrix
              3.2.3 through 3.2.n (Individual Capabilities)
          3.3 System Interfaces
              3.3.1 External Interfaces (Level 1)
              3.3.2 Internal Interfaces (Level 2)
                                                  31.3 Speciﬁcation Development Approaches   343

        3.4 Design and Construction Constraints
        3.5 Personnel and Training
        3.6 Operations and Support (O&S)
        3.7 Transportability
        3.8 Technical Documentation
        3.9 Precedence and Criticality of Requirements
    4.0 QUALIFICATION PROVISIONS
        4.1 Responsibility for Veriﬁcation
        4.2 Veriﬁcation Methods
        4.3 Quality Conformance Inspections
        4.4 Qualiﬁcation Tests
    5.0 PACKAGING
    6.0 REQUIREMENTS TRACEABILITY
    7.0 NOTES
        7.1 Acronyms and Abbreviations
        7.2 Deﬁnitions
        7.3 Assumptions

Guidepost 32.1 As a general rule, most organizations employ some form of the outline struc-
ture above. Beyond this point, speciﬁcation development depends on the organization or devel-
oper’s preferred approach.

We now shift our focus to understanding HOW many organizations and individuals develop
speciﬁcations.


31.3 SPECIFICATION DEVELOPMENT APPROACHES

Organizations and SEs employ a number of approaches to development of speciﬁcations. Typical
approaches include:
    1. Feature-based approach
    2. Reuse-based approach
    3. Performance-based approach
    4. Model-based approach
Let’s explore a brief description each type beginning with the most informal, the feature-based
approach.

The Feature-Based Approach
Feature-based speciﬁcations are essentially ad hoc brainstormed lists of requirements. People who
LACK formal training in speciﬁcation development commonly use a feature-based approach. Spec-
iﬁcations developed in this manner are often just formalized wish lists. Although feature-based
speciﬁcations may use standard speciﬁcation outlines, they are often poorly organized and prone
to missing, misplaced, conﬂicting or contradictory, and duplicated requirements.
344     Chapter 31   Speciﬁcation Development

Advantages of the Feature-Based Approach. The feature-based approach enables devel-
opers to quickly elicit and collect requirements inputs with a minimal effort. Speciﬁcation devel-
opers spend very little time analyzing and understanding potential implications and impacts of the
requirements. When time is limited or a new system is being developed from minor modiﬁcations
of an existing system, this method may be minimally acceptable. Every system is different and
should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Remember, it is easy to rationalize erroneous logic
that ignores common sense to meet schedule and budget constraints.

Disadvantages of the Feature-Based Approach. The disadvantages of the feature-based
approach are that the random method produces a smattering of hierarchical requirements with:
      1. Compound requirements written in paragrah style prose.
      2. Conﬂicts with other requirements.
      3. Multiple instances of duplication.
      4. Vague, ambiguous requirements statements open to interpretation.
Figure 29.2 illustrates how this approach might affect the quality of the speciﬁcation and result in
DEFICIENCIES such as missing, misplaced, conﬂicting, or duplicated requirements.

The Reuse-Based Approach
The reuse-based approach simply exploits or plagiarizes an existing speciﬁcation or integrates
“snippets” from several speciﬁcations. The underlying assumption is that existing speciﬁcations are
reference models. This can potentially be a big mistake! THINK about it! The source speciﬁcation
you plan to use as a starting point may be of poor quality!
     The reuse-based approach is often used under the guise of economy—meaning saving time
and money. The developers fail to recognize that corrections to the product design due to speciﬁ-
cation deﬁciencies, such as overlooked and incorrect requirements, often cost more than employ-
ing model-based structured analysis discussed later in this chatper.
     Speciﬁcation reuse often occurs within a product line, which is ﬁne. You are working from a
known entity accepted and reﬁned by the organization. However, speciﬁcation reuse occurs across
product domains and organizations that may be unrelated, which may cause signiﬁcant risk.

Author’s Note 31.1 The reuse-based approach is generally the standard repertoire for most
new engineers, especially if they have not been given formal training in the proper ways to develop
speciﬁcations. A manager tasks an engineer to develop a speciﬁcation. Confronted with meeting
schedule commitments, the engineer decides to contact someone who might have an existing spec-
iﬁcation and simply ADAPT it to meet the needs of the task. Constructively speaking, this approach
becomes the DEFAULT survival mechanism for the engineer without ever learning the proper way.
Some engineers spend their entire careers without ever learning methods that are more appropri-
ate. Unfortunately, most organizations and managers contribute to the problem. They lack knowl-
edge themselves and fail to recognize the need to provide the proper training.

The risk of using the reuse-based approach is the source or “model” speciﬁcation may be intended
for a totally different system, system application, or mission. The only commonalities between
applications may be the high-level topics of the outline. As a result, the speciﬁcation could poten-
tially contain two types of ﬂaws:
      1. References to inappropriate or obsolete external speciﬁcations and standards.
      2. Retention of requirements that are not relevant or applicable.
                                                       31.3 Speciﬁcation Development Approaches   345

Even if the requirements are topically relevant, they may miss or over-/underspecify the capabili-
ties and levels of performance required for the new system’s ﬁeld application.

Guidepost 31.2 Our discussion of the performance-based and model–based approaches
provide a better method of developing a speciﬁcation. As we will see, the model-based approach
presumes some knowledge of the SYSTEM/entity architecture and employs the model-based
approach to specify entities with the architecture.

The Performance-Based Approach
The performance-based approach speciﬁes SYSTEM/entity capability requirements in terms of
performance boundary conditions and transactions. The SYSTEM/entity is automatically treated
as a simple box with inputs and outputs, as illustrated in Figure 31.1.
     The speciﬁcation’s Section 3.0 Requirements identiﬁes the SYSTEM/entity:
    1. Relationship to User Level 0/Tier 0 systems—or external interfaces
    2. System missions, phases, modes/use cases
    3. ACCEPTABLE and UNACCEPTABLE inputs
    4. Capabilities required to transform the inputs into performance-based outcomes
    5. ACCEPTABLE and UNACCEPTABLE outputs—behavior, products, by-products, and
       services
    6. Design and construction constraints
Performance speciﬁcations represent the preferred approach to speciﬁcation development for many
applications, particularly unprecedented systems. By AVOIDING design speciﬁc requirements, the
Acquirer provides the System Developer with the ﬂexibility to innovate and create any number of
architectural solutions within contract cost, schedule, and risk constraints. Depending on the
Acquirer’s intent, performance-based speciﬁcations require extensive System Developer/
Subcontractor’s structured analysis and derivation of requirements to select a preferred system
architecture.
    Most Acquirers developing an unprecedented system—unproved—tend to favor the perform-
ance-based speciﬁcation approach as the initial step of a multi-phase acquisition strategy where


                                        Design & Construction
                                             Constraints



                                                                                  Products
                                                                                 • Acceptable
 ACCEPTABLE
                                           System/Entity
                                            System/Entity                       • Unacceptable
Range(s) of Inputs
                                            OperationalCapabilities
                                        • •Operational  Capabilities
                                              - -Use                            By-Products
                                                      Case#1
                                                  UseCase  #1                    • Acceptable
                                                  UseCase
                                              - -Use  Case#2
                                                           #2                   • Unacceptable
UNACCEPTABLE                                      - -……...
                                                     ……...
Range(s) of Inputs                                UseCase
                                              - -Use  Case#n
                                                           #n                     Services
                                                                                 • Acceptable
                                                                                • Unacceptable

Figure 31.1 Performance-Based Approach to Speciﬁcation Development
346     Chapter 31       Speciﬁcation Development

requirements may be unknown or immature. The strategy may employ a series of spiral develop-
ment contracts to evolve and mature the system requirements. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 31.1
An Acquirer plans to develop an unprecedented system. After due consideration, the Acquirer decides to estab-
lish a multi-phase acquisition strategy. Phase 1 of the acquisition strategy results in the award of a perform-
ance-based speciﬁcation contract to develop initial prototypes for testing, collecting, and analyzing
performance data; selecting a system architecture; and producing a set of requirements as the work product
for a Phase 2 follow-on prototype or system. There may even be several other spiral development phases, all
focused on derisking the ﬁnal system development.

   As the Phase 1 requirements and system architecture mature over one or more contracts, the
Acquirer may shift to our next topic, the model-based structured analysis approach.

The Model-Based Structured Analysis Approach
The model-based structured analysis approach focuses on specifying and bounding capabilities and
performance for elements within a deﬁned SYSTEM/entity model-based architectural framework,
as illustrated in Figure 31.2. This approach is often referred to as model-based structured analysis.
The SYSTEM level is still treated as a “box.” However, the SYSTEM is analytically decomposed
into an architecture of interrelated entities or capabilities. Each SYSTEM architectural entity—
SUBSYSTEM—or capability can be treated two ways:
      1. As a performance-based entity using the performance-based approach.
      2. Or, decomposed to lower level architectures of entities or capabilities.
To illustrate this approach, consider the following example:



                                                               Design&&
                                                              Design
                                MISSION
                                MISSION                     Construction
                              RESOURCES                      Construction
                               RESOURCES                    Constraints
                                                             Constraints


                                                 SYSTEM
                               Subsystem A                       Subsystem B
  External
   External   Input #1                            A2 - B1                           Out #1    External
 System                        A1           A2                  B1             B2              External
  System#1
         #1                                                                                   System#4
                                                                                             System  #4

  External    Input #2                                               B1 - D1
   External                    A3           A4                                      Out #2    External
                                                                                               External
  System#2
 System  #2                                                                                  System
                                                                     Subsystem D              System#5
                                                                                                     #5
                                    A4 - C2                                    D2
                                                                                    Out #3    External
                              Subsystem C                                                      External
                                                                               D3             System#6
                                                                                             System  #6
              Input #3                            C2 - D1
                               C1           C2                  D1                  Out #4
  External                                                                     D4
   External                                                                                   External
 System                                                                                        External
  System#3
         #3   Input #4                                                              Out #5
                                                                                             System
                               C3                                              D5             System#7
                                                                                                     #7



Figure 31.2 Architecture-Based Approach to Speciﬁcation Development
                                                       31.3 Speciﬁcation Development Approaches       347


 EXAMPLE 31.2
A System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) is to be developed for a vehicle. Section 3.1 addresses operational
performance and characteristics assembled in the same manner as the performance-based approach. Next,
speciﬁcation developers structure Section 3.2 Capabilities based on the architectural elements:

    3.2 Capabilities
        3.2.1 Vehicle Frame System
        3.2.2 Body System
        3.2.3 Propulsion System
        3.2.4 Fuel System
        3.2.5 Electrical System
        3.2.6 Cooling System
        3.2.7 Steering System
        3.2.8 Entertainment System
        3.2.9 Storage System, etc.


Implementing the Model–Based Analysis Approach. Suppose that a speciﬁcation devel-
opment team or developer creates an analytical architecture for a SYSTEM that includes SUB-
SYSTEM’s A through D, as illustrated in Figure 31.2. SUBSYSTEM A consists of capabilities A1
through A4, SUBSYSTEM B consists of capabilities B1 and B2, and so forth. The team constructs
an architectural model that expresses the relationships between:
    • The SYSTEM and External Systems 1 through 5.
    • SUBSYSTEMs A through D.
    • Capabilities A1–A4, B1–B2 and so forth within each SUBSYSTEM.


Author’s Note 31.2 Note the use of the term “architectural model.” The speciﬁcation devel-
opment team creates a model of the system that is informally or formally controlled by the team
for their exclusive use. Based on the analysis, the speciﬁcation developer(s) structure speciﬁcation
Section 3.2 Capabilities as follows:
    3.2 System Capabilities
        3.2.1 Capability A
              3.2.1.1 Capability A1
              3.2.1.2 Capability A2
              3.2.1.3 Capability A3
              3.2.1.4 Capability A4
        3.2.2 Capability B
              3.2.2.1 Capability B1
              3.2.2.2 Capability B2
        3.2.3 Capability C
              3.2.3.1 Capability C1
              3.2.3.2 Capability C2
              3.2.3.3 Capability C3
348   Chapter 31   Speciﬁcation Development

         3.2.4 Capability D
               3.2.4.1 Capability D1
               3.2.4.2 Capability D2
               3.2.4.3 Capability D3
               3.2.4.4 Capability D4
The model represents the conﬁguration of capabilities that accommodates all instances
of SYSTEM/entity use cases and scenarios. This means that for any use case or scenario, the ana-
lysts can trace the “thread” from input through each capability to produce a performance-based
outcome.
     Using this method, the speciﬁcation developer(s) translate WHAT capabilities the SYSTEM is
required to provide via text statements positioned in the speciﬁcation outline. For analysis purposes,
you may decide to insert speciﬁcation paragraph references in the appropriate graphical model
element without dictating a speciﬁc conﬁguration solution. Each capability is then decomposed into
multi-level subcapabilities that form the basis for outcome-based performance requirement
statements.
     For speciﬁcations developed for implementation within the System Developer’s organization
such as conﬁguration items (CIs), you may decide to include Figure 31.2 in the document. However,
if you intend to procure the SYSTEM or one or more SUBSYSTEMs from external vendors, you
may be dictating a speciﬁc solution.
     Later, if the you or the vendor determines that the graphic overlooked a key capability, you
may be confronted with modifying the contract and paying additional money to incorporate the
missed capability. The downside here is that it gives the vendor the opportunity to recover costs of
other capabilities they overlooked in their original estimate at your expense.
     Additionally, if the vendor develops the system you mandated graphically and it fails to satisfy
your needs, the vendor’s response will be “We built the system YOU contracted us to develop.” The
bottom line is: Exercise CAUTION when inserting architectural graphics into speciﬁcations, espe-
cially SYSTEM/entity architecture graphics.
     By creating an analytical architecture such as Figure 31.2 to support speciﬁcation develop-
ment, you improve your chances of expressing the capabilities you desire without mandating a
speciﬁc solution. IF you perform the analysis well and translate it into capability-based require-
ments, the reader with some insight should be able to “reverse engineer” the system graphic. The
difference is: You haven’t told the System Developer HOW TO design the system.

Applying the Model-Based Analysis Approach. Model-Based speciﬁcations are well-suited
for precedented system applications where there is an established architecture—such as airframe,
propulsion system, and cockpit. However, when the speciﬁcation developers specify the primary
architectural components, they may limit the potential for new and innovative architectures that
may be able to exploit new technologies and methods such as combining two traditional components
into one.
     Additionally, there is ALWAYS the risk that requirements speciﬁed for a SUBSYSTEM may
unintentionally constrain the design of an interfacing SUBSYSTEM. As a result, cost and sched-
ule impacts may be incurred. Simply state the architectural component capabilities as performance-
based entities. Consider the following example:
                                        31.4 Understanding the Speciﬁcation Development Paradigm           349


 EXAMPLE 31.3
Traditionally, a commercial aircraft crew consisted of a pilot, a copilot, and a navigator. As a paradigm, most
aircraft had three crewmembers. However, technology advances, in combination with the need to reduce oper-
ating costs, contributed to the elimination of the navigator position. Thus, the paradigm shifted to integrating
the NAVIGATOR function into the pilot and copilot roles and designing navigation systems to support those
two roles.

Using the example above, mentally contrast a model-based speciﬁcation approach that required three
crewmember positions versus a performance-based speciﬁcation approach that simply identiﬁes
three functional roles and thereby leaving the physical implementation to the System Developer.

Guidepost 32.3 At this point we have introduced some of the more common approaches to spec-
iﬁcation development. Our next discussion delves into HOW we create speciﬁcations.

31.4 UNDERSTANDING THE SPECIFICATION
DEVELOPMENT PARADIGM

Most people have the perception that speciﬁcation developers write a speciﬁcation as if they were
writing a novel as THE only work product of the exercise. They provide no supporting analyses or
rationale as to HOW they arrived at the capabilities and levels of performance speciﬁed in the doc-
ument. This is a paradigm that exempliﬁes WHY many contracts and system development efforts
“get off to the wrong start,” beginning at Contract Award.
     Speciﬁcation development is a multi-level, concurrent, system analysis, conceptual design
effort that requires documented rationale of decisions. Some organizations and SEs say, “We do
this. If Joe is writing a speciﬁcation and has a TBD that needs to be replaced with a numeric value,
we perform a ‘back of the envelope’ analysis or go into the lab and run a simulation, and give him
a number. So the problem is solved!” That’s NOT what we are referring to here.
     Our point is that when you develop a speciﬁcation, we want to know WHAT architectural and
behavioral analyses you performed and the source criteria that compelled you to make informed
decisions concerning the capability-based requirement. How did you:
     1. AVOID missing, misplaced, conﬂicting, or duplicated speciﬁcation requirements.
     2. Support requirement allocations to lower level speciﬁcations.
The answer resides in implementation of the SE Process Model, as illustrated in Figure 31.3. Let’s
brieﬂy describe the process.

SE Process Model Implementation
From an implementation perspective, the System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT):
     1. Implements the SYSTEM level SE Process Model and analyzes the SPS.
     2. Creates the SE Process Model’s Operational, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions.
During the creation of these domain solutions, the SEIT may request Decision Support assistance
to obtain data to support requirements allocations to PRODUCT level development speciﬁcations.
This cycle repeats at lower levels as the respective development or integrated product teams (IPTs)
implement the SE Process Model, as illustrated in Figure 31.3.
    Now, let’s investigate HOW the SE Process Model relates to speciﬁcation development at each
level.
350         Chapter 31       Speciﬁcation Development


                                                                3
 1          System                        2                            System Level SE Process
          Performance
                              Reqm                                      Understand Problem/Solution Spaces
          Specification              ts. A
             (SPS)                        naly
                                              si s                        Develop Requirements Solution
                                                                                                                               4
                                                                      Develop         Develop         Develop
Requirements                   Highly                                Operations      Behavioral       Physical
 Linking &             8      Iterative                               Solution        Solution        Solution
Traceability                                               wn                                                          Decision
                                                     w   Do          Evaluate & Optimize Entity Design Solution   5     DecisionSupport
                                                                                                                                     Support
                                                  Flo                                                                          Process
                                       n&                                                                                        Process
   7                                tio                  6                                                                  • •Analyses
                                 oca                                                                                             Analyses
                              All                                                                                       • •Trade
        PRODUCT                                                                                                              TradeStudies
                                                                                                                                     Studies
       Development                        9                                       Highly Iterative                         • •Prototypes
                                                                                                                                Prototypes
       Specifications                                                                                                         • •Models
                                                                                                                                  Models
                              Reqm
                                     ts. A                      10                                                        •Simulations
                                          naly
                                              si s                   PRODUCT Level SE Process                               •Simulations
                                                                                                                  12         •Mockups
                                                                                                                               •Mockups
                                                                        Understand Problem/Solution Spaces
Requirements                   Highly
 Linking &              15    Iterative
                                                         n                Develop Requirements Solution
Traceability                                           ow                                                                     11
                                                     wD
                                                  Flo                 Develop         Develop         Develop
                                        n     &
 14                                  tio                             Operations      Behavioral       Physical
                                  oca                                 Solution        Solution        Solution
                               All                 13
      HWCI/CSCI
                                                                     Evaluate & Optimize Entity Design Solution
      Requirements
      Specifications
       (HRS/SRS)


Figure 31.3 Multi-Level SE Process Model Requirements Analysis, Allocation, and Flow Down Process




Applying the SE Process Model to Speciﬁcation Development
We can apply the preceding strategy to our earlier discussion of the model-based approach. Figure
31.4 illustrates this application of the speciﬁcation development strategy for the system illustrated
in Figure 31.2.
     For any speciﬁcation, the SEIT, IPT, and other teams analyze multi-level User requirements
such as a Statement of Objectives (SOOs), System Requirements Document (SRD), SPS, and devel-
opment speciﬁcations. Based on the analysis, which includes understanding the problem and solu-
tion space, use cases, scenarios, and the like, the team identiﬁes the SYSTEM/entity I/O Model
capabilities (2). Given those capabilities, they formulate a set of viable candidate architectures and
select the most suitable one (4) based on pre-deﬁned selection criteria.
     At this point, the accountable team has to answer the question: HOW does the selected archi-
tecture relate to higher level source requirements or speciﬁcation capabilities? They answer the
question by creating a simple matrix (7) that allocates or links architectural elements to derived
capabilities. Based on those allocations, requirements are ﬂowed down to lower level speciﬁca-
tions. It is important to note here that the requirements allocated and ﬂowed down are high-level
translations of WHAT the User wants the entity to accomplish and HOW WELL.
     To illustrate HOW model-based speciﬁcation development occurs from a multi-level perspec-
tive, let’s return to the model-based approach. Let’s investigate HOW lower level speciﬁcations can
be developed using SUBSYSTEM A of Figure 31.2 as an example. Figure 31.5 provides a graph-
ical illustration.
        • The SEIT analyzes the SPS, employs the SE Process Model to create an I/O Model of multi-
          level capabilities, selects a SYSTEM architecture, allocates capabilities to architectural ele-
          ments, and ﬂows requirements allocations down to the PRODUCT A3 Development
          Speciﬁcation.
                                                          31.4 Understanding the Speciﬁcation Development Paradigm                                                     351

1    Requirements                 2     I/O Model                                     3                                            4   Architectural
     Representation                   Representation                                                                                   Representation
                                                                                                                                          SYSTEM
      System                                 SYSTEM                        Highly Iterative
                                              SYSTEM                                                                                     A1         A2
    Performance                               Capability#1#1
                                          • •Capability
    Specification                         • Capability #2                             7
                                            • Capability #2
       (SPS)                                   ……..
                                                ……..
                                          • •Capability                                                                                  A3         A4
                                              Capability#n#n                                 Elements




                                                                                       A1

                                                                                                 A2

                                                                                                           A3
                                                                                                                    A4
                                          6                       Capability #1
                                                                                                                                  Requirements
                                                                  ……….                                                        5 Allocations Matrix
                                                                                                                                 Representation
                                                                  Capability #n



                                                        S                        S                                        S                          S



                                                 Product                 Product                                      Product                    Product
                                                    A1                      A2                                           A3                         A4
                                      8
                                               Development             Development                                  Development                Development
                                               Specification           Specification                                Specification              Specification

                                                                                                                                                                   4
Figure 31.4 Basic Speciﬁcation Requirements Allocation and Flowdown Method

Specifications               I/O Model View                        Allocations View                                               Architectural View
                                                                                                                                          SYSTEM
                                                                                 A1

                                                                                            A2
                                                                                                    A3

                                                                                                               A4




   System                          SYSTEM                                                                                 Ext #1          A1        A2
                                    SYSTEM
 Performance                        Capability#1#1
                                • •Capability                   Capability #1
 Specification                  • Capability #2
                                  • Capability #2               ……….
    (SPS)                            ……..
                                      ……..
                                • Capability #n                                                                          Ext #2           A3        A4
                                  • Capability #n               Capability #n
             Requirements
             Flow Down &                  Highly Iterative                                             S
              Traceability
                                                                                                                                        PRODUCT A3
                                                                                       A31
                                                                                                 A32

                                                                                                           A33




                                PRODUCT A3                                                                                    A1          A31       A32
  PRODUCT                         PRODUCT A3
                                • Capability #11                 Capability #11
      A3                          • Capability #11
                                • Capability #12
 Development                      • Capability #12                ……….
                                      ……..                                                                                                          A33
 Specification                         ……..                                                                              Ext #2
                                • Capability #1n
                                  • Capability #1n               Capability #1n

             Requirements                                                                                  S
             Flow Down &                  Highly Iterative
              Traceability
                                                                                     A331
                                                                                             A332

                                                                                                       A333

                                                                                                                 A334




                                                                                                                                       SUBSYSTEM A33
                                 SUBSYSTEM
 SUBSYSTEM                         SUBSYSTEM                                                                               A31           A331       A332
                                      A33
                                       A33                     Capability #111
     A33                       • •Capability
  Development                      Capability#111
                                              #111             ……….
                                     ……..
                                      ……..
 Specification                 • •Capability #11n                                                                        Ext #2          A333       A334
                                   Capability #11n             Capability #11n
                                                                                                                                                               5
Figure 31.5 Applying the SE Process to the Architecture-Based Approach


      • The PRODUCT A3 IPT analyzes its requirements allocations, employs the SE Process Model
        to create an I/O Model of multi-level capabilities, selects the PRODUCT A3 architecture,
        allocates capabilities to architectural elements, and ﬂows requirements allocations down to
        the SUBSYSTEM A33 Development Speciﬁcation.
If we employed the traditional Waterfall Model discussed earlier in Chapter 27 System Develop-
ment Models, these steps would be performed sequentially—starting at a higher-level speciﬁcation.
352     Chapter 31   Speciﬁcation Development

Its design would be complete before progressing to the next level. As the highly iterative ovals
indicate, speciﬁcation development is a multi-level effort.

Realities
As the preceding discussion illustrates, speciﬁcation development is a highly iterative, multi-level
process. Obviously to more efﬁciently and effectively utilize personnel resources, requirements allo-
cations at higher levels have to reach a level of maturity before initiating lower level speciﬁcation
development efforts. So, there may be some offsets in the start of speciﬁcations at multiple levels.
     In any case, CONCURRENT speciﬁcation development drives the need to investigate lower
level critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs) to understand and reconcile WHAT
needs to be speciﬁed at higher levels. You may ask: WHY is this?
     At each level of SYSTEM decomposition and speciﬁcation development, each requirement
has:
      1. A priority to the User.
      2. A cost to implement.
      3. A level of risk.
      4. A schedule time element to implement.
So, you need to develop multi-level speciﬁcations for an internal-to-the-program “go investigate
and determine the feasibility of implementing these capabilities and provide us feedback” activity.
Whereas higher level speciﬁcations tend to be abstract, lower level speciﬁcations represent
WHERE items are physically developed or procured from external vendors. You need this feed-
back to mature higher level speciﬁcations over time. This illustrates WHY speciﬁcation develop-
ment is a multi-level TOP-DOWN, BOTTOM-UP, LEFT-RIGHT, RIGHT-LEFT process. When
you complete speciﬁcation development:
      1. Requirements at any level should be traceable to the next higher level and subsequently to
         the Acquirer’s source or originating procurement requirements—SOO or SRD.
      2. Speciﬁcation requirements should be realistically achievable within cost and schedule
         budgetary constraints with acceptable risk.


31.5 CREATING THE SPECIFICATION SECTIONS

When we develop a speciﬁcation, we employ an outline structure to communicate HOW the User
wants the SYSTEM/entity to operate. So, the speciﬁcation Section 3.0 consists of Section 3.1 which
addresses operational characteristics. For performance-based speciﬁcations, you may choose
to bypass Section 3.2 on System Capabilities, shift the outline, and have a Section 3.2 System
Interfaces.
     The process of developing speciﬁcation Section 3.1 Characteristics is illustrated in Figure 31.6.
The ﬁgure shows HOW the operational entity relationships identiﬁed in Figure 31.2 enable us to
structure and translate operational capabilities into multi-level capability-based requirements state-
ments. Since most speciﬁcations are developed for precedented systems, they employ Section 3.1,
as stated above, and elaborate speciﬁc architectural element requirements in Section 3.2 on System
Entity Capabilities. This allows the Acquirer to express requirements that relate to speciﬁc archi-
tectural capabilities. The speciﬁcation developer(s) create an analytical architecture such as Figure
31.2. Based on the architecture, they organize speciﬁcation Section 3.2 into a hierarchical structure
and translate architectural capabilities into requirements, as illustrated in Figure 31.7.
                                                                 31.5 Creating the Speciﬁcation Sections     353

Specification Developer
                                  1.0   INTRODUCTION
        Analysis
                                        1.1 Scope                                 Spe
       System
        System                          1.2 Purpose                                   cif
       Purpose
        Purpose                         1.3 System Overview                        Ou icatio
                                                                                       tln     n
                                  2.0   REFERENCED DOCUMENTS                               e
      Mission                     3.0   REQUIREMENTS
       Mission                          3.1 Operational Performance Characteristics
    Application(s)
     Application(s)                         3.1.1 System Entity Definition
                                            3.1.2 System Mission(s)
        Phaseofof
       Phase                                3.1.3 Phases of Operation
      Operation
       Operation                                  3.1.3.1 Pre-Mission Phase Operational Capabilities
                                                          3.1.3.1.1 Operational Capability Requirement
       Phase                                              3.1.3.1.2 …….
        Phase                                             3.1.3.1.3 Operational Capability Requirement
     Objective(s)
      Objective(s)                                3.1.3.2 Mission Phase Operational Capabilities
                                                          3.1.3.2.1 Operational Capability Requirement
     Use                                                  3.1.3.2.2 Operational Capability Requirement
      UseCase(s)
          Case(s)
                                                                      3.1.3.2.2.1 Op’l. Capability Reqmts.
                                                                      3.1.3.2.2.2 ………...
    Operational
     Operational                                                      3.1.3.2.2.3 Op’l. Capability Reqmts.
    Capability(s)
     Capability(s)                                3.1.3.3 Post-Mission Phase Operational Capabilities
                                            3.1.4 Mission Reliability
                                            3.1.5 System Maintainability
     Elaborated
      Elaborated                            3.1.6 System Availability
    Capability(s)
     Capability(s)                      ….

Figure 31.6 Deﬁning a Speciﬁcation’s Section 3.1 Operational Characteristics (Level 1 system)




                                        1.0   INTRODUCTION
                                              1.1 Scope
                                              1.2 Purpose                  Ou
                                                                              tlin
                                              1.3 System Overview                 e
                                        2.0   REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
                                        3.0   REQUIREMENTS
                                              3.1 Operational Performance Characteristics
                                                   3.1.1 System Definition
                                                   3.1.2 System Mission(s)
                                                   3.1.3 System Phases of Operation
Structural                                         …..
 Analysis                                     3.2 System Capabilities
                                                   3.2.1 System Capability Architecture
                                                   3.2.2 Phase-Based Capability Application Matrix
     SYSTEM/Entity                                 3.2.3 Capability #A1
        A1          A2                                   3.2.3.1 Capability #A11
                                                         ….
                                                         3.2.3._ Capability #A1_
        A3          A4                             3.2.4 Capability #A2
                                                   3.2.5 Capability #A3
                                                   3.2.6 Capability #A4
                                              3.3 System Interfaces
                                              3.4 Design & Construction Constraints
                                              …...

Figure 31.7 Specifying SYSTEM/Entity Capabilities using the Architecture-Based Approach (Level 2
System/Entity)
354     Chapter 31   Speciﬁcation Development

Final Thoughts
Speciﬁcation development approaches ARE NOT foolproof. Approaches are ONLY as GOOD as
the analysts who identify and specify the requirements. However, the model-based structured analy-
sis approach is superior to the feature-based method for ensuring more complete coverage of
SYSTEM capability requirements during all phases and modes of operation.


31.6 SPECIFICATION DEVELOPMENT CHECKLIST

SYSTEM/entity speciﬁcations offer a number of challenges to their developers. Based on lessons
learned from developing speciﬁcations, here are some suggestions:
       1. AVOID stating CSOW tasks as speciﬁcation requirements.
       2. Understand the User’s problem and solution spaces.
       3. Validate operational requirements with the User.
       4. State requirements using terminology familiar to the stakeholders; create lower level spec-
          iﬁcations using terminology familiar to the developers.
       5. Specify the RIGHT solution space and system.
       6. Adequately bound the solution space and OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
       7. Identify system threats and priorities.
       8. AVOID dictating a system design solution.
       9. Specify requirements that state WHAT rather than HOW.
      10. Delineate threshold requirements from goal-based objective requirements.
      11. Explicitly identify and bound external reference requirements.
      12. Select the minimum veriﬁcation method to prove compliance at the least cost.
      13. AVOID writing incomplete requirements.
      14. AVOID writing subjective requirements that are open to interpretation.
      15. AVOID duplicating, conﬂicting, and missing requirements.
      16. AVOID requiring unnecessary precision and accuracy.
      17. Ensure requirements consistency and completeness within and across speciﬁcations.
      18. Balance technical, technology, support, cost, and schedule risk.
      19. Assign speciﬁcation development and ownership accountability.
      20. Identify and scope veriﬁcation methods.
      21. Establish and maintain requirements traceability.
      22. Provide deﬁnitions of key terms, notes, and assumptions to clarify meanings.
      23. Prioritize requirements for implementation and cost purposes.
      24. Include system block diagrams (SBDs) if they CLARIFY and DO NOT conﬂict with text-
          based requirements.
      25. Elicit stakeholder requirements and review comments.
                                                                         31.8 Guiding Principles   355

31.7 SPECIFICATION REVIEWS

When a speciﬁcation reaches a level of maturity, conduct a speciﬁcation review with stakeholders.
There are several ways of conducting these reviews.

Line-by-Line Reviews
Some individuals and organizations conduct speciﬁcation reviews on a line-by-line basis that con-
sumes hours.

Reviewer Comments–Issues Approach
An alternative approach is to distribute the document electronically, request that comments be
inserted as changes in a different color font, and returned. Review the comments and incorporate
those that make sense; follow up with the stakeholder for comments that require clariﬁcation.
     Based on the collection of review comments, identify any major issues and conduct a review
with the stakeholders. The purpose of this review is to simply resolve major issues. Based on the
results of the review, update the document for the next review or approval for baselining and release.
This approach avoids consuming hours of stakeholder time changing “happy” to “glad” on a line-
by-line basis.

Review Records
Whichever approach is best for the review, document the list of stakeholder attendees, approved
changes, decisions, and action items in conference minutes.

Speciﬁcation Baselines
You may ask: When should certain types of speciﬁcations be baselined? First, ALWAYS consult
your contract for speciﬁc requirements. As a general rule, speciﬁcations are baselined and released,
as listed in Table 31.1. Figure 46.2 provides a graphical view of the sequences.


31.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, our discussions in this chapter provide the basis with which to establish the several
key principles that govern speciﬁcation development practices.


Table 31.1 Example speciﬁcation release time frames

Technical Review                                        Speciﬁcations Approved

System Requirements Review (SRR)        System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)

System Design Review (SDR)              PRODUCT/SUBSYSTEM development speciﬁcations

Hardware Speciﬁcation Review (HSR)      Hardware conﬁguration item (HWCI) requirements speciﬁcations

Software Speciﬁcation Review            Computer software conﬁguration item (CSCI) requirements
 (SSR)                                   speciﬁcations

Preliminary Design Review (PDR)         • Lower level development speciﬁcations, as applicable
                                        • Facility interface speciﬁcations (FIS)
356     Chapter 31   Speciﬁcation Development

Principle 31.1 Anyone can WRITE to a speciﬁcation outline; however, DEVELOPING a spec-
iﬁcation requires premeditated forethought supported by informed analysis.

Principle 31.2 Every speciﬁcation must have an assigned owner accountable for its develop-
ment, implementation, and maintenance.

Principle 31.3 Every speciﬁcation expresses two aspects of requirements:
      1. WHAT the SYSTEM/entity is to accomplish and HOW WELL.
      2. Qualiﬁcation provisions for verifying requirements compliance.

Principle 31.4 Use system speciﬁcation terminology that is familiar to the Acquirer and User.
Apply terminology familiar in developers in lower level speciﬁcations.

Principle 31.5 SHALL requirement statements express mandatory actions required to achieve
compliance; GOALS express nonmandatory or voluntary desires to strive for.


31.9 SUMMARY

Our discussion of speciﬁcation development practices identiﬁed the key challenges, issues, and methods
related to developing system speciﬁcations. As the ﬁnal part of the concept, we introduced a basic methodol-
ogy for preparing speciﬁcations. The methodology provides an operational approach to speciﬁcation devel-
opment based on HOW the User intends to use the system. We are now ready to focus on developing the
system solution as a response to the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements.



GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Annotate HOW you believe the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) Section 3.0 outline should be
       structured.
   (b) Pick a component of the system. Annotate the Section 3.0 outline for the components’s development
       speciﬁcation.



ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact several contract programs within your organization. Interview the Technical Director, Project/Chief
   Engineer, or lead SEs and answer the following questions:
   (a) What type of speciﬁcations are required by the contract?
   (b) How was each speciﬁcation developed—by feature-based, reuse, or structured analysis?
   (c) Based on the interviewee(s) opinion, if they were to redevelop the speciﬁcation, what would they do
       differently?
2. Research your organization’s command media. What guidance or direction is provided concerning devel-
   opment of speciﬁcations and approaches?
                                                                                        Additional Reading     357

ADDITIONAL READING

IEEE Std. 1220–1998. 1998. IEEE Standard for Application      MIL-STD-490A (canceled). 1985. Military Standard:
   and Management of the Systems Engineering Process.          Speciﬁcation Practices. Washington, DC: Department of
   Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).    Defense (DoD).
   New York, NY.                                              MIL-STD-961D. 1995. DoD Standard Practice for Defense
International Council on System Engineering (INCOSE).          Speciﬁcations. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
   2000. INCOSE System Engineering Handbook, Version           (DoD).
   2.0. Seattle, WA.
Chapter              32

      Requirements Derivation, Flow
      Down, Allocation, and Traceability

32.1 INTRODUCTION

Development of the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) typically represents only a small
portion of a large, complex system’s hierarchy of requirements. The challenge for SEs is: How do
we establish the lower level speciﬁcations that enable system developers to ultimately create PART
level designs?
     This chapter introduces the requirements derivation, allocation, ﬂow down, and traceability
practices that enable us to create the speciﬁcation-based hierarchy of system requirements. Our dis-
cussions delineate the terms requirements derivation, allocation, and ﬂow down. We explore how
requirements are derived, identify a methodology for deriving requirements, and how to apply the
methodology.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is requirements derivation?
      2. How do you derive requirements?
      3. What is requirements allocation?
      4. How do you allocate requirements?
      5. How do you ﬂow down requirements?
      6. How do you trace requirements? To where?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Leaf Requirement The lowest level derived requirement for a speciﬁed capability.
      • Requirements Allocation The act of assigning accountability for implementation of a
        requirement to at least one or more lower level contributing system elements—such as
        EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, and FACILITIES—or embedded items within those elements.
      • Requirements Derivation The act of decomposing an abstract parent requirement into
        lower level objective, performance-based sibling actions. Collective accomplishment of the
        set of derived “sibling” actions constitutes satisfactory accomplishment of the “parent”
        requirement.



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

358
                                            32.2 Understanding How Requirements Are Derived       359

    • Requirements Flow Down The act of transferring accountability for implementation of a
      requirement or portion thereof to a lower system level of abstraction—such as SYSTEM to
      PRODUCT or PRODUCT to SUBSYSTEM.
    • Requirements Testing The act of evaluating the lineage, content, and quality of a require-
      ment statement relative to a pre-deﬁned set of requirements development criteria. The
      purpose is to determine if a requirement is ambiguous, testable, measurable, veriﬁable, and
      traceable.
    • Requirements Traceability The establishment of bottom-up, multi-level linkages between
      lower level speciﬁcation requirements back to one or more source or originating
      requirements.
    • Requirements Veriﬁcation The act of proving by veriﬁcation methods such as inspection,
      analysis, demonstration, or test that a logical or physical item clearly complies with allocated
      capability and performance requirements documented in its performance or item develop-
      ment speciﬁcation, as applicable. Requirements veriﬁcation occurs throughout the System
      Procurement Phase and System Development Phase of the system/product life cycle.
    • Requirements Validation An activity performed by the User or Acquirer to ensure that the
      stated requirements completely, accurately, and precisely address the RIGHT problem space,
      specify and bound the User’s intended operational needs as delineated by the solution space.


32.2 UNDERSTANDING HOW REQUIREMENTS ARE DERIVED

The identiﬁcation and derivation of requirements for various multi-level system items requires more
than simply documenting text statements. The process is a highly iterative and immersive envi-
ronment that must consider, reconcile, and harmonize a large number of constraints. Perhaps the
best way to describe the process is by depicting the environment using the graphic shown in Figure
32.1. The following discussion serves as an overview for the Requirements Derivation Process, our
next topic, symbolized at the top center of the chart.

Requirements Derivation via the System Engineering Process
The focal point for requirements identiﬁcation and derivation is the SE Process Model as symbol-
ized at the center of the chart. As the SE Process Model is applied to each level of abstraction and
entity, requirements are allocated and ﬂowed down from higher level speciﬁcations to lower level
item development speciﬁcations (IDS). As the multi-level SYSTEM solution evolves, requirements
are allocated and ﬂowed down via lower level item development speciﬁcations.
     You should also recall that the Decision Support Process supports the SE Process Model, as
illustrated in Figure 26.1. Technical decisions related to requirements derivation may require in-
depth analyses and trade studies to be performed. In turn, completion of the decision support analy-
ses and trade studies may require development of prototypes, models, and simulations to provide
data to support informed decision making.

Relationships and Interfaces with Other Processes
The Requirements Derivation Process, symbolized at the top center of Figure 32.1, is actually
part of the Develop Requirements Domain Solution within the SE Process Model. The Require-
ments Derivation Process, which is more than simply a set of sequential decision steps, as
noted by the “clouds”, is characterized by highly iterative interfaces with the following SE Process
activities:
360      Chapter 32        Requirements Derivation, Flow Down, Allocation, and Traceability


                                                                          Requirements Derivation Process
                                                                                                                                   Requirement
                                                                                                                                 “Fitness for Use”




                                    Requirements Flow Down & Allocation
         Higher Level
        Specifications                                                                                                          Evaluation Criteria
        • Performance
        • Development




                       User
                      & SME                                                                                               CI Mission
                     Review &                                                                                              Analysis
                     Feedback
                                                                              System Engineering Process
                                                                               Understand Problem/Solution Spaces

  Prototypes,                                                                                                                   Item Physical Solution
              Models,&&
   Prototypes,Models,                                                             Develop Requirements Solution
       Simulations
        Simulations                                                                                                         Item Behavioral Solution
                                                                              Develop         Develop        Develop
                                                                             Operations      Behavioral      Physical      Item Modes & States
                                                                              Solution        Solution       Solution
                                                                                                                        Item Concept of Operations
   DecisionSupport
  Decision  SupportProcess
                    Process                                                    Evaluate & Optimize Selected Solution



      Where:
      SME = Subject Matter Expert                                               Flow Down & Allocation to
                                                                                Lower Level Specifications

Figure 32.1 Requirements Derivation Process Environment




      • Understand the Entity’s Problem and Solution Spaces.
      • Develop the Entity’s Operational Domain Solution.
      • Develop the Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution.
      • Develop the Entity’s Domain Solution.
The Understand Item Problem and Solution Spaces activity demands that requirements developers
thoroughly understand and appreciate:
      1. HOW the SYSTEM or item, for which requirements are being developed, is intended to ﬁll
         a given solution space.
      2. HOW that solution space relates to a higher level problem space.
This brings us to HOW the Requirements Derivation Process “ﬁts” within this environment. Thus,
SEs must employ mission analysis methods and techniques to understand the context, sequencing,
and dependencies of the solution space within the problem space.

Reconciling WHAT the Customer WANTS, NEEDS,
Can AFFORD, and WILLING to PAY
The ﬂow down of requirements from higher-level speciﬁcations expresses WHAT the Acquirer or
higher level System Developer teams WANT. The Requirements Derivation Process must also rec-
oncile WHAT the User (role) WANTs versus WHAT they NEED versus WHAT they can AFFORD
versus WHAT they are WILLING to PAY as illustrated in Figure 32.2.
    Finally, within this same context, understand the system entity’s solution space in terms of
WHAT is required.
                                              32.2 Understanding How Requirements Are Derived     361

   The User’s Dilemma …...
                                                          WHAT the              WHAT
                                                          User Can       the User is WILLING
                                                          AFFORD               TO PAY


            WHAT
             WHAT                       WHATthe
                                        WHAT   the
           the
            theUser
               User                       User
                                          User
           WANTS                         NEEDS               $$
                                                              $$                  $$
            WANTS                        NEEDS
             $$$$
              $$$$                        $$$
                                           $$$



                              …… the System Developer’s Challenge.
Figure 32.2 Qualifying Customer Needs

    • How does the User intend to use the system entity?
    • How do we bound the system entity’s operational effectiveness, utility, and suitability rela-
      tive to User’s WANTS, NEEDS, can AFFORD, and WILLINGNESS to PAY?
Let’s explore this further.

Understanding Each Requirement’s Intent and Meaning
As higher level speciﬁcation requirements are allocated and ﬂowed down to the system entities,
SEs must analyze each requirement to understand its relationship and contribution to bounding the
system entity’s solution space. Each requirement, by deﬁnition, identiﬁes, speciﬁes, and bounds a
system item capability and its level of performance. The analysis must answer questions such as:
    1. WHAT outcomes must be achieved to satisfy this requirement?
    2. WHEN is the capability to be provided to achieve the desired outcome?
    3. HOW WELL must each required capability be performed?
    4. Under WHAT scenarios and conditions should each capability be performed?
    5. WHAT is the relationship of this capability to others?
The answers to these thought provoking questions must evolve harmoniously through preliminary
graphical and text descriptions such as the item concept of operations (ConOps), item modes and
states, item behavioral/logical solution, and item physical solution. These descriptions enable SEs
deriving the requirements to gain multi-perspective views that scope of the domain and context of
the requirement.

Concluding Point
As we will see, deriving requirements statements is just one portion of the process. The other portion
is developing requirements statements for capabilities and levels of performance that can be:
    1. Easily communicated and understood by the implementers.
    2. Traced back to higher level source requirements.
    3. Physically veriﬁed.
362   Chapter 32   Requirements Derivation, Flow Down, Allocation, and Traceability

Thus, pre-deﬁned ﬁtness-for-use requirement evaluation criteria must be established to ensure a
level of quality as well as maintain integrity of the requirements traceability. Given that require-
ments derivation is a chain of decisions, each dependent on the integrity and quality of its parent
requirement’s derivation, requirements traceability is paramount for ensuring system integrity.
    Based on this fundamental understanding of the requirements derivation environment, let’s
begin our discussion of the requirements derivation methodology.


32.3 REQUIREMENTS DERIVATION METHODOLOGY

The derivation of requirements requires a methodology that can be easily communicated and pro-
duces repeatable, predictable results. To facilitate an understanding of the need for the methodol-
ogy, let’s ﬁrst understand the mindsets and environment surrounding the process.

Derivation Paradigms
Requirements derivation, as an abstract label, falls into the category of topics of every day vocab-
ularies. Yet, few engineers actually understand WHAT is required to derive the requirements.
Objective evidence of this point is illustrated in speciﬁcations based on multi-level Wiley & CW
feature-based speciﬁcations.
     The problem is that this label DOES NOT educate newcomers without some form of under-
standing its origin. Ironically, many people learn to ﬂaunt the buzzword to impress their peers with
their SE vocabulary without ever understanding WHAT the label means.
     In SE, requirements derivation refers to elaborating an abstract parent requirement statement
into a set of lower level, objective, performance-oriented sibling requirements in which collective
accomplishment constitutes satisfaction of the parent requirement.

The Requirements Derivation Methodology
One approach to requirement derivation focuses on a line of investigative questions tempered by
seasoned experience and observations. The purpose of these questions is to identify key elements
that will be used as a methodology for deriving requirements. Read, understand, tailor, and apply
this methodology accordingly to your speciﬁc business needs and applications. The steps of this
methodology include:
Step 1:   Analyze a requirement (1).
Step 2:   Identify outcomes (2)—behaviors, products, by-products, and services.
Step 3:   Derive capabilities, behavioral responses, and performance from outcomes (3).
Step 4:   Identify and bound capability operating scenarios and conditions (4).
Step 5:   Bound capability levels of performance (5).
Step 6:   State the requirement (6).
Step 7:   Identify the veriﬁcation method(s) for the requirement (7).
Step 8:   Validate the requirement (8).
Step 9:   Proceed to the next requirement (10).
Figure 32.3 provides a graphical illustration of these steps.
                                                         32.4 Applying the Requirements Derivation Methodology                 363

    1      R1
                                                Compliance
                                9                                                                HOW Should Each
                                         Compliance
                                          Compliance                   Verification             Capability Be Verified
   2
                                         Verification
                                          Verification                  Method(s)                 to Demonstrate Its
    WHAT Outcome(s)
                                                                                                 Contribution to This
     Must Be Achieved                                                                      7
                                                                  8                                  Requirement
      to Satisfy This
      Requirement?                                                       Valid
                                                                          Valid            No - Rewrite
                                                                      Requirement
                                                                       Requirement
                                                                           ??
                             WHAT Capability(s)
                       3                                                       Yes                   6
                              are Required to                                                             Write
                               Achieve Each                           10  Next                                   theDerived
                                                                                                          Writethe   Derived
         Outcomes                                                                                          Requirements
                                                                                                            Requirements
                                Outcome?                               Requirement                          Statements
                                                                                                              Statements

                                                              4         Under WHAT
                                                                         Scenarios &                        Performance
                                    Capabilities                      Conditions Should
                                                                      Each Capability Be
                                                                          Achieved?
   * Valid Requirement Criteria                                                            5      HOW WELL Must
   • Clear & Concise   • Implementable                                                            Each Capability be
   • Unambiguous       • Testable                                     Scenarios &                    Performed to
   • Realistic         • Measurable
                                                                      Conditions                     Accommodate
   • Achievable        • Verifiable                                                              Scenarios/Conditions?


Figure 32.3 Performance Requirements ID & Derivation

32.4 APPLYING THE REQUIREMENTS
DERIVATION METHODOLOGY

After reading through the methodology, you might ask: How can we apply the requirements deri-
vation methodology to develop a speciﬁcation that may contain hundreds of requirements? The
answer resides in seasoned SE experience.
     Most seasoned SEs imprint a methodology such as this in their minds. Then, when called upon
to develop a speciﬁcation, their subconscious thought processes automatically cycle through this
methodology. The more experience you have, the more proﬁcient you become in applying the
methodology.

User Interface Requirements Derivation
The requirements derivation methodology applies to most requirements situations. There are some
instances, however, that pose challenging questions when deriving User interface requirements.
When addressing the SYSTEM level mission requirements, we characteristically use requirements
phrases such as “. . . user friendly . . . intuitively obvious . . . effective training . . . realistically rep-
resentative of the real world . . . easy to maintain . . . aesthetically pleasing”.
     As humans, engineers have both a case of the smarts and the uncertainties regarding these
terms. We generally have a “gut instinct,” through our own personal experiences and frustrations,
as to WHAT the speciﬁcation writer is attempting to communicate. Conversely, we also have uncer-
tainty as to WHAT this term or phrases requires. HOW do we verify a SYSTEM’s user friendli-
ness, intuitively obvious interactions, effective training, and the like? There are ways of dealing
with these problems.
     Generally, engineers ask two questions regarding developing subjective requirements:
        1. Is it okay to include subjective requirements statements in the speciﬁcation?
        2. If we leave the statement in, how do we verify SYSTEM compliance?
364    Chapter 32    Requirements Derivation, Flow Down, Allocation, and Traceability

The answer to the ﬁrst question, depending on the situation, is generally a qualiﬁed yes. The answer
to the second question requires statement of subordinate requirements that explicitly state WHAT
user friendliness, intuitively obvious, and effective training, for example, mean to the User. Then,
structure the parent requirement statement to indicate compliance with all of the sibling require-
ments constitutes accomplishment of the parent requirement.
     This may seem a bit surprising but the world is far from perfect. Although we like to espouse
beliefs that we only write objective requirements, there are times when subjective requirements,
when properly stated and clariﬁed, are effective in communicating WHAT the User desires.
Remember, one of the key objectives of the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) is to com-
municate requirements in a language that is easily understood by all stakeholders—the User, the
Acquirer, and the System Developer. Lower level speciﬁcations written for an internal system devel-
opment team—the Integrated Product Team (IPT)—are a different matter and have a different set
of stakeholders.
     Ironically, explicit statements of objective requirements in language that is unfamiliar or mis-
understood by stakeholders may be worse that having subjective requirements. If the Acquirer and
Users have “warm, fuzzy feelings” about user friendly phrases in speciﬁcations, for example, this
may be acceptable as long as there is a consensus by ALL stakeholders that compliance with sup-
porting sibling requirements constitutes the basis for compliance with the subjective requirement.
There must be qualifying and clarifying requirements that explicitly state HOW the stakeholders
will know WHEN user friendliness has been achieved to the satisfaction of the Acquirer and User.

Visual Conﬁguration Requirements
When developing speciﬁcations, there may be some requirements that are best depicted graphically
rather than by using text. Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 32.1
Visual display layouts, panel layouts, safety icons, graphics, and graphical plots overcome the difﬁculty of
attempting to describe a graphic image in words that are open to creating false impressions and are open to
interpretation.
      The reality is that attempting to describe displays and panel layouts using text language is often imprac-
tical and produces ambiguous results. A solution may be to simply specify that the display, panel layouts, and
other layouts match or use Figure XX as a guide. Then, insert the graphic as Figure XX in the speciﬁcation.

The preferred approach to this type of problem is through a performance speciﬁcation that uniquely
bounds human engineering requirements for display, panel, safety, and other layouts. This approach
leaves many decisions “open” to collaborative interpretation by the System Developer. The fact is
that Users either have some idea concerning WHAT they WANT or expect the System Developer
to possess the expertise in ergonomic design to offer options from which the user can decide.
     The best way to bring a convergence and consensus of the minds is to simply develop “rapid
prototypes”—such as actual displays, viewgraphs and so forth—using conventional presentation
software tools for the User to evaluate, validate, and offer recommendations. This is a classic case
of spiral development whereby the requirements may be undeﬁned, and numerous iterations are
required to “get the requirements right.” The product of the exercise is a set of graphics that capture
the consensus of the User desires within the speciﬁcation.

Referral For more information about spiral development, refer to Chapter 27 on System Devel-
opment Models practices.
                                       32.5 Requirements Allocation, Flow Down, and Traceability   365

Performance Characteristics Requirements
The development of systems often requires extensive engineering analysis data and derived from
reference models, experimentation, and data collection.


 EXAMPLE 32.2
Examples include performance characteristics of propulsion systems and behavior of materials.

The problem is HOW do you communicate performance characteristics in a language-based spec-
iﬁcation? One solution resides in developing language-based speciﬁcation requirements that refer-
ence graphical plots and tables that characterize data or a performance envelope.

A Word of Caution! If you specify a capability that has a behavioral response represented by
a linear or nonlinear graphical plot over a range of values, you may be expected to verify the
system response at each point along the line for the respective inputs. Therefore, when you include
such as plot in a speciﬁcation, provide only the speciﬁc data points along the curve that are to be
formally veriﬁed, such as end and middle points.

Final Thoughts
Requirements derivation focuses on decomposing a higher level objective or capability into lower
level supporting capabilities that can be translated into design requirements. On the surface this
appears to be a mundane process in which each requirement leads to the next. As you derive lower
level requirements closer to the ASSEMBLY/CSC level, there is another method you can employ
to ensure that all aspects of a capability are derived.
     You should recall our discussion of Chapter 22 on the Anatomy of a System Capability. Figure
22.1 illustrated the basic construct for a generic capability. The point is that you should consider
using this ﬁgure to facilitate some of the deliberations of requirements derivation, especially at
lower levels such as development speciﬁcation levels for SUBSYSTEMS or lower, as appropriate.


32.5 REQUIREMENTS ALLOCATION, FLOW DOWN,
AND TRACEABILITY

The cornerstone for developing speciﬁcation requirements resides in the integrity of the require-
ments allocation, ﬂow down, and traceability.

Requirement Allocation and Flow Down
Requirements allocation, ﬂow down, and traceability can be illustrated by a simple construct such
as the one shown in Figure 32.4. For this illustration, let’s assume that the SUBSYSTEM A Devel-
opment Speciﬁcation includes use case based capability requirement A_11. The requirement spec-
iﬁes and bounds a capability to input, process, and display data. SEs perform a use case analysis
and construct a use case thread that characterizes HOW this capability can be accomplished. This
way they manage to obtain the required performance-based outcome. Based on the analysis, they
translate each of the use case steps into Capability Requirements, A_111, A_112, and A_113.
     This illustration provides insights for deriving capability requirements within a speciﬁcation.
Now, suppose that we have a SYSTEM level requirement that must be implemented ACROSS
several SUBSYSTEMs, each with its own development speciﬁcation.
366                        Chapter 32          Requirements Derivation, Flow Down, Allocation, and Traceability


                                UseCase-
                               Use  Case-




                                                                                                                             Vertical Requirements Traceability
                                                            Translation                             Where:
                                 Based
                                  Based                                                                   = Requirement
  Requirement Flow Down


                               Capability
                                Capability
                                                                                 A_11
                                                         Derived Capability
                                                           Requirements



                                    Use Case            A_111                   A_112            A_113
                                    Analysis




                                                                                                                     Performance-
                            Input                      Collect                  Process         Display
                                                                                                                        Based
                            Data                     Input Data               Input Data        Results
                                                                                                                       Outcome
                                                                     Use Case Thread

                                          Use Case Thread - Requirement Allocations & Horizontal I/O Traceability

Figure 32.4 Intra-speciﬁcation Requirements Traceability




Author’s Note 32.1 As you allocate and ﬂow down requirements observe a basic WHY–HOW
construct. From any requirement position within the hierarchy between the top and bottom, moving
upward within the hierarchy represents WHY the requirement exists. Moving downward elaborates
HOW the requirement is accomplished.

Requirements Derivation, Allocations, and Flow Down Across
Entity Boundaries
When you allocate and ﬂow down requirements across entity speciﬁcation boundaries. The process
becomes more challenging, as illustrated in Figure 32.5. SEs, as facilitators of the requirements
allocation and ﬂow down process, must ensure that the use case thread is traceable across ALL
applicable speciﬁcations via their respective requirements.
     Suppose that we have a SYSTEM level capability requirement, SYS_11. The SEIT analyzes
the requirement, performs a use case analysis, and derives sibling requirements A_11 and B_11.

Author’s Note 32.2 At this point, the SEIT has not allocated requirements A_11 and B_11 to
SUBSYSTEMs A and B. We designate each for now as A_11 and B_11 to delineate the uniqueness
of each requirement.

Use case analysis reveals that Requirements A_11 and B_11 require further decomposition. So,
without becoming immersed into whether requirement A_11 should be allocated to SUBSYSTEM
A or B, SEs construct a use case thread. Based on that analysis, SEs derive:
                          • Requirements A_111 and A_112 from A_11.
                          • Requirements B_111, B_112, and B_113 from B_11.
Subsequently these requirements are allocated to SUBSYSTEMs A and B and ﬂowed down to their
respective development speciﬁcations.
    So, in terms of what the SYSTEM is expected to accomplish, what does this mean? It means:
                                                                                                                           32.6 Requirements Traceability                                 367

                                                                                                                        Where:




                                                                                                                                                     Vertical Requirements Traceability
                                   SYSTEM Level                                                                                = Requirement
                                                                       SYS_11
  Requirements Flow Down


                                    Requirements


                                   SUBSYSTEM A                                                                      SUBSYSTEM B




                                                                       Physical Subsystem Interface
                                                      A_11                                                       B_11
                                   Derived Requirements                                                             Derived Requirements


                                       A_111               A_112                                       B_111       B_112           B_113




                                                                                                                                               Performance-
  Input                                Collect
                                        Collect           Transmit
                                                           Transmit                                   Receive
                                                                                                       Receive     Process
                                                                                                                    Process        Report
                                                                                                                                    Report        Based
  Data                                InputData
                                     Input  Data            Data
                                                             Data                                      Data
                                                                                                        Data        Data
                                                                                                                     Data           Data
                                                                                                                                     Data        Outcome

                                                                   Use Case Thread

                                     Use Case Thread - Requirement Allocations & Horizontal I/O Traceability

Figure 32.5 Inter-Speciﬁcation Requirements Traceability

                           • If you want to accomplish the performance-based outcome speciﬁed by SYSTEM Require-
                             ment SYS_11, SUBSYSTEM A must accomplish Requirement A_11 and provide the result
                             (outcome) to SUBSYSTEM B, which must accomplish requirement B_11 and produce the
                             ﬁnal result (outcome).
How do SUBSYSTEMs A and B accomplish requirements A_11 and B_11 respectively?
                           • SUBSYSTEM A accomplishes requirement A_11 by performing requirements A_111 and
                             A_112.
                           • SUBSYSTEM B accomplishes requirement B_11 by performing requirements B_111,
                             B_112, and B_113.
Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 32.3
Suppose that we have a simple system that has a remote sensor (SUBSYSTEM A). The sensor collects input
data and transmits it to a central site as illustrated in Figure 32.5.
                           • The central site (SUBSYSTEM B) receives and processes data to produce a report. So, the Remote
                             Sensor Development Speciﬁcation must state that it: 1) collects data (A_111) and 2) transmits data to
                             the central site (A_112).
                           • The Central Site Development Speciﬁcation includes the remainder of the requirements use case thread
                             to: 1) receive data (B_111), 2) process data (B_112), and 3) report data (B_113).


32.6 REQUIREMENTS TRACEABILITY

When requirements are derived, the allocation and ﬂow down process should be veriﬁed via bottom-
up requirements traceability linkages to higher level requirements and ultimately to the source or
originating requirements.
368     Chapter 32   Requirements Derivation, Flow Down, Allocation, and Traceability

Individual, Contract, and Organizational
Requirements Traceability
Anecdotal evidence suggests that engineers and organizations tend to learn and mature in require-
ments traceability via a three-stage process. The degree of evolution depends on the size, com-
plexity, and risk of SYSTEMs being developed and an organizational and individual desire and
willingness to improve performance.
Stage 1:    There is general recognition of the need to organize and structure requirements using a
            standard speciﬁcation outline. Over a period of time, the individual and organizational
            lessons learned, such as missing, misplaced, and conﬂicting requirements, indicate
            that a new level of requirements implementation capability is required. This leads to
            Stage 2.
Stage 2:    The individual or organization recognizes that multi-level system requirements involve
            vertical requirements traceability via lineage with high-level requirements. Again, over
            time and many painful experiences in implementing speciﬁcation requirements, there is
            a recognition and appreciation that vertical requirements traceability is one-dimensional.
            This leads to Stage 3.
Stage 3:    The individual and organization recognize the need for two-dimensional requirements
            traceability, VERTICALLY through the requirements hierarchy to the source or origi-
            nating requirements and HORIZONTALLY via the use case thread traceability.


What Happens If You Fail to Do This?
You may ask, “Why bother to do all of this consistency thread checking?” If we limit the require-
ments derivation, allocation, and ﬂow down to only vertical linkages from Capability Requirement
B_11 to Capability Requirement B_111, B_112, and B_113:
      1. What will the text of language of each of these requirements state?
      2. Will there be any objective evidence of WHAT outcome is expected when capability
         requirement B_111 is implemented, and WHAT is the relationship of this outcome to capa-
         bility requirements A_112 and B_112?
      3. Will capability requirement A_112 indicate WHAT it expects from capability requirement
         A_111, and WHAT transformational processing is required to produce an output acceptable
         for requirement B_111?
Generally, no. Limiting requirements allocation and ﬂow down to strictly VERTICAL entity rela-
tionships DOES NOT guarantee that teams implementing requirements B_111 through B_113 will:
      1. Communicate with each other.
      2. If they do communicate, incorporate the results into design documentation.
Unfortunately, many SEs do not discover these discontinuities in system use case threads until the
system is in integration and test when the cost to correct is prohibitively expensive.



32.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, our discussions in this chapter provide the basis to establish the several key princi-
ples that govern practices requirement derivation, ﬂow down, allocation, and traceability.
                                                                     Organizational Centric Exercises     369

Principle 32.1 When deriving SYSTEM/entity requirements, understand:
     1. What the User NEEDs.
     2. What the User WANTs.
     3. What the User can AFFORD.
     4. What the User is WILLING to pay.

Principle 32.2 Speciﬁcation requirements allocations ensure vertical requirements traceability;
use case threads integrate those allocations into horizontal workﬂows that produce SYSTEM level
performance-based outcomes.

32.8 SUMMARY

In our discussion of the requirements derivation, allocation, ﬂow down, and traceability practices, we
described a methodology for deriving multi-level speciﬁcation requirements. We considered the importance
of vertical requirements traceability based on requirements allocations and ﬂow down. We showed also the
importance of horizontal requirements traceability based on use case continuity thread checks.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter General
   Exercises or a new system, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical discussions.
   (a) Using the system architecture previously created, identify PRODUCTs or SUBYSTEMs that will
       require development speciﬁcations.
   (b) Create a SYSTEM level, use case based requirement concerning system operation.
   (c) Derive sibling requirements.
   (d) Allocate and ﬂow down the requirements to PRODUCTS or SUBSYSTEMs.
   (e) Perform a use case continuity I/O thread check between the respective PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM
       requirements.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media. What guidance and direction is provided for deriving, allo-
   cating, ﬂowing down, and tracing requirements?
2. Contact a contract program within your organization and interview the Technical Director, Project Engi-
   neer, and Lead SEs to answer the following questions:
   (a) How were requirements derived?
   (b) Did the contract mandate traceability of requirements?
   (c) Did the program use a requirements management tool to enable traceability between speciﬁcations? If
       not, how were requirements traced?
   (d) What analysis tools were used to reconcile and balance performance allocations?
   (e) What did personnel learn from the exercise?
Chapter              33

      Requirements Statement
      Development

33.1 INTRODUCTION

Once a solution space is identiﬁed, the challenge for SEs is being able to accurately and precisely
bound and specify it via the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or entity development spec-
iﬁcation. Our discussion on speciﬁcation development practices provided an approach for identi-
fying types of speciﬁcation requirements.
     This chapter focuses on the formulation and development of those requirements statements.
Our discussions introduce and explore various methods for preparing requirements statements. We
identify a syntactic structure to facilitate deﬁnition of a requirement. The discussions emphasize
the need to deﬁne the substantive content of a requirement before focusing on the grammar. To
facilitate preparation of requirements, we provide requirements development guidelines and discuss
how to “test” a requirement.
     We conclude the chapter with a discussion of one of the challenges of speciﬁcation
requirements development: knowing WHEN a set of requirements is necessary and sufﬁcient.
We explore the need to minimize the quantity of requirements and avoid overspeciﬁcation and
underspeciﬁcation.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What are the attributes of a “good” requirement?
       2. When is a “requirement” ofﬁcially recognized as a requirement?
       3. What are some suggestions for preparing “good” requirements?
       4. What is a common pitfall in preparing requirements statements?
       5. What methodology should one use to create a requirements statement?
       6. What criteria do you use to “test” a requirement?
       7. How do you identify a requirement’s veriﬁcation method(s)?
       8. What is a Requirements Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM)?
       9. How do you develop an RVM?
      10. What is requirements minimization?
      11. How do you minimize requirements?



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

370
                                         33.2 Understanding the Structure of Good Requirements    371

Deﬁnition of Key Term
    • Speciﬁcation Language “A language, often a machine-processible combination of natural
      and formal language, used to express the requirements, design, behavior, or other charac-
      teristics of a system or component. For example, a design language or requirements speci-
      ﬁcation language.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)

33.2 UNDERSTANDING THE STRUCTURE
OF GOOD REQUIREMENTS

People often say that a speciﬁcation has a good set of requirements. The subjective usage of the
term “good” makes SEs cringe. “Good” for WHOM relative to WHAT “ﬁtness-for-use” stan-
dard(s)? The User? The System Developer? If good requirements are relative to the User, WHAT
makes a “bad requirement bad?” Does “bad” mean poorly stated, open to interpretation, unachiev-
able, immeasurable, unveriﬁable, and untestable?
    What these people are attempting to convey is: GOOD requirement statements are well deﬁned,
explicit, and can be implemented with low risk of misinterpretation. They are well deﬁned and
explicitly stated in a clear and concise manner that results in the same interpretation by two or more
independent readers with comparable disciplinary skills.

Understanding the Contents of a Capability Requirement
A well-deﬁned requirement should consist of several key characteristics, depending on application.
It must explicitly express the following, as applicable:
    1. The use case based operational capability to the performed.
    2. The source of the action.
    3. WHAT scenario or conditions for performing the action.
    4. WHAT is expected as a performance-based outcome (i.e., WHAT products or services are
       to be produced).
    5. WHAT by-products are to be AVOIDED.
    6. WHEN the capability or action is to be initiated.
    7. WHO is the expected recipient(s) of the action.
    8. WHAT are the expected result(s) and outcome(s).
    9. HOW is the outcome to be measured and veriﬁed.
Let’s examine each of these characteristics further.

Use Case Based Operational Capability. Requirements statements should originate with use
case based operational capabilities. Lower level requirements should elaborate speciﬁc action-
based outcomes that contribute to achievement of the use case as well as any probable scenarios
anticipated.

Source of the Action. The source of the action for a capability requirement is the noun-based
object—person, place, or thing—that triggered or initiated the capability.

Operating Environment Conditions and Scenarios. Each capability requirement must be
bounded by prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT scenarios that represent the threshold or
triggering events or cues that initiate or stimulate a capability’s behavioral response.
372    Chapter 33   Requirements Statement Development

Outcome Produced by the Capability Action. When a capability is initiated, an action must
be performed. The outcome attribute of the requirement identiﬁes the behavioral actions—meaning
the products or services that result from the capability.

Product and/or Service Outcome. The subject of a requirement is a capability that represents
an expected response action to transform and/or process information, energy, or data, into (produce)
an outcome, product/service, or behavioral response.

Action Response Time. Time constraints between the triggering stimulus—cue or event—and
the required capability response from the system. The question is: WHAT period of performance is
permissible between the triggering event and the output response?

Recipient(s) of the Action. The intended recipient(s) of the capability’s outcome(s) must be
identiﬁed, recommended and bounded including their capability to receive the action.

Format the Action Response. The format of the action response to cooperative, benign, or
hostile interactions must be compatible, interoperable, or commensurate with the rules of engage-
ment. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 33.1
When two computers communicate with another, both must implement an interface protocol that includes
messages formatted in accordance with an interface control document (ICD), interface requirements speciﬁ-
cation, or industry standard.


 EXAMPLE 33.2
If an adversary commits a hostile action, the defender may respond with an action-based response commen-
surate with rules of engagement (i.e., allowable actions and measured responses).

Expected Outcome and Results of the Action. Producing a capability response is merely
a means to an end. Therefore, the requirement must also deﬁne WHAT the expected outcome or
action is to be commensurate with the behavioral response—a measured level of performance such
as magnitude or priority.

Requirement Veriﬁcation. Every speciﬁed requirement must be linked to one or more Section
4.0 veriﬁcation requirements—inspection, analysis, demonstration, and test.

33.3 WHEN DOES A REQUIREMENT BECOME OFFICIAL?

Our previous discussions focused on the content of well-deﬁned requirements. A key question com-
monly asked is: WHEN is a requirement recognized as a requirement? There are two stages of
answers to the question: 1) unofﬁcial and 2) ofﬁcial.
    Simply identifying this information in a statement is only a prerequisite to ofﬁcial stakeholder
recognition and acceptance. This ﬁrst stage merely establishes the statement as RELEVANT and
WORTHY of consideration as a requirement. That takes us to the next stage, ofﬁcial approval and
subsequent release.
    Many SEs erroneously believe that simply preparing a requirement statement makes the
requirement complete. Preparing a requirement statement DOES NOT mean that the statement will
                                                       33.4 Preparing the Requirement Statement    373

pass the requirement completeness criteria discussed later in this chapter. WHY is it necessary to
test completeness? There are two key factors to consider.
     First, identifying the veriﬁcation method(s) forces the requirement developer to THINK about
HOW the requirement can be veriﬁed. If you can write a one- or two-sentence veriﬁcation test
plan—for example, compare A to B—you MAY have a legitimate basis for the requirement. Con-
versely, if you have difﬁculty identifying a test plan, maybe you should consider rewriting and
rescoping the requirement statement.

Author’s Note 33.1 Engineers tend to defer identiﬁcation of the veriﬁcation method(s) up to
the start of the system integration, test, and evaluation (SITE) phase. This is not adequate! You
must identify the veriﬁcation methods early as part of the requirements preparation process, not
only for cost estimates but also to validate the reasonableness of the requirement.

     Second, identifying the veriﬁcation method prematurely may force an early revision to the
baselined speciﬁcation. WHY? Since most systems have multiple levels of speciﬁcations, analysis
must be performed one or more levels below the current level to better understand HOW the higher
level requirement can be veriﬁed.
     Regarding the second point, an approach may be to identify a preliminary set of veriﬁcation
methods when the requirements are derived. This will provide an initial completeness check on the
requirement. Then, continue the analysis to lower levels. Prior to the need to baseline the higher
level requirements, review and reconcile the preliminary veriﬁcation methods at the higher level.
     While the potential ramiﬁcations for premature baselining are known—such as increased costs
due to stability of decisions—human procrastination can pose an even greater risk. Whether inten-
tional or not, program schedules often become a convenient excuse for SEs to shift identiﬁcation of
veriﬁcation methods to the back of the priority list.
     People, in general, tend to AVOID spending time on an effort unless they recognize its impor-
tance to technical management or are directed to do so. Then, the veriﬁcation methods are hap-
hazardly thrown together just prior to the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) phase.
The bottom line is: If System Developers do not identify speciﬁcation veriﬁcation methods up front,
you will suffer the consequences during SITE.

33.4 PREPARING THE REQUIREMENT STATEMENT

Speciﬁcation developers often become consumed with attempting to state too many requirements
at once. When you develop requirements, there is actually a three-step process that you should
follow:
Step 1: Focus on the capability that is to be communicated in the requirement and its supporting
        attributes.
Step 2: Focus on the syntax of the primary contents of the requirement.
Step 3: Focus on the grammar.
Let’s elaborate on each of these points.

Step 1: Identify the Key Elements of the Requirement
Earlier in this chapter we identiﬁed key attributes that describe the content of most requirements
(source of the action, etc.). For each of these attributes, identify in short notation (verb–noun form)
WHAT the requirement attributes are to communicate. Consider the example shown in Table 33.1.
Here we describe the fundamentals of a SYSTEM level requirement related to a car design.
     Notice that Table 33.1 focuses on WHAT must be accomplished; grammar comes later as illus-
trated in the example that follows.
374    Chapter 33      Requirements Statement Development


 EXAMPLE 33.3
The vehicle shall have the capability to safely and comfortably transport a driver and four passengers on-
demand to a destination 200 miles away during all weather conditions.

Step 2: Develop the Draft Requirements Statement
Humans unintentionally overcomplicate the performance and development speciﬁcation require-
ments process. The formulation and development of a requirements statements involves three
aspects: 1) content, 2) syntax, and 3) grammar. One of the most common problems in requirements
statement development is that people attempt to perform all three of these aspects simultaneously.
As a result, when you focus on syntax and grammar, you may lose focus on the content. One solu-
tion to this problem is to develop primitive requirements statements.

Create Primitive Requirements Statements. Primitive requirements statements focus on
the content of the requirement. The best way to develop primitives is to use a tabular approach
such as the one illustrated in Table 33.2. Here, we assign a unique requirement ID—SPS-136—to


Table 33.1 Example requirements attributes deﬁnition approach for a car-driver system

Requirement Statement Attribute                                     Requirement Contents

Required use case capability                      Transportation

Source of the action                              Vehicle

Expected outcome/results of the action            Safe and comfortable travel to/from a planned destination

Operating environment constraints                 All weather conditions, -30°F to +130°F

Action response time                              On-demand; immediately available

Recipient(s) of the action                        Driver and four passengers

Format of the action                              Seated



Table 33.2 Table for identifying primitive requirements

Requirement         Capability           Relational Operators          Boundary Constraints,         Notes
ID                    to Be                                               Tolerances, or
                    Provided                                               Conditions

SPS-136           Capability 24     • Not to exceed                 • 50 pounds
                                    • Less than or equal to         • 68° Fahrenheit
                                    • Greater than or equal to      • 25° Celsius
                                    • In accordance with (IAW)      • 6 g’s
                                    • Not exceed                    • 6 nautical miles (NM)
                                    • And so forth                  • 25 Hertz (Hz)
                                                                    • 10.000 volts dc +/- 0.010
                                                                      volts dc
                                                                    • Sea state 3
                                                                    • 12 megabytes (Mb)
                                            33.5 Identifying the Requirement Veriﬁcation Method   375

Table 33.3 Examples of primitive requirements using the tabular approach

Requirement       Capability to be          Relational          Boundary Constraints,          Notes
ID                   Provided               Operators           Thresholds, Tolerances,
                                                                    or Conditions

SYS_1         The SYSTEM shall          Rated at             • 110 vac +/- 10%                Assuming
               operate from an                                                                 a TBD
               external power                                                                  load
               source
SYS_123       The gross weight of the   Not exceed           • 50 pounds
               SYSTEM shall . . .
SYS_341       The SYSTEM shall          Throughout a         • -10°F to +90°F
               operate . . .             range of            • +20% to +100% humidity
SYS_426       On receipt of a           In accordance with   • Regulation 126 Section 3.2.1
               command from the
               operator, the SYSTEM
               shall produce reports
               formatted
SYS_525       The SYSTEM shall          Exceed               • +10 amps dc
               sense overload
               conditions that . . .



Capability 24, which represents a speciﬁc use case. The remainder of the columns focus attention
on substantive content such as types of relational operators; boundary constraints, tolerances, or
conditions; and notes.
     Notice how Table 33.2 focuses on the primary content of the requirement and AVOIDS becom-
ing mired in grammar. Once the elements of the requirements are established, the next step is to
translate the contents into a syntax statement.

Develop the Syntactical Statement Structure. Step 2 translates the primitive requirement
into a text phrase as illustrated in Table 33.3.

Step 3: Reﬁne the Requirements Statement Grammar
The third step requires the syntactical statements in Table 33.3 to be transformed into a clear and
concise grammatical statements that are easily read and understood.


33.5 IDENTIFYING THE REQUIREMENT
VERIFICATION METHOD

One of the key elements of speciﬁcation development is establishing agreement between the
Acquirer and the System Developer as to HOW to prove that the speciﬁcation Section 3.X Require-
ments have been satisﬁed. One of the greatest potential risks in system development is for the System
Developer to prepare or conduct acceptance tests for the Acquirer and both parties DISAGREE on
the method of veriﬁcation. Disagreements at acceptance testing result in signiﬁcant impacts on
System Developer contract costs, schedules, and Acquirer ﬁelding and support costs schedules.
     To preclude this scenario, speciﬁcations include a Section 4.0 Qualiﬁcation Provisions section
that explicitly captures the Acquirer and System Developer agreement on veriﬁcation methods. The
agreement is documented as a Requirements Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM).
376          Chapter 33            Requirements Statement Development

Author’s Note 33.2 Remember, the terms Acquirer and System Developer are used in a “role-
based” context. These terms, as used above, identify the contract level roles and relationships. They
also apply in a similar context between SYSTEM and PRODUCT, PRODUCT and SUBSYSTEM
development teams; System Developer and Subcontractors, and so on. Why? As each team ﬂows
down requirements to lower level item development speciﬁcations, the implementer of those require-
ments must demonstrate to their Acquirer (role)—the higher level team—that the requirements have
been satisﬁed.

Before we address the Requirements Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM), let’s address HOW veriﬁcation
methods are selected.

Referral For more information about veriﬁcation methods, refer to Chapter 53 System Veriﬁca-
tion and Validation practices.

Veriﬁcation Method Selection Process
In general, SEs have four basic veriﬁcation methods available to demonstrate that a system, product,
or service meets a speciﬁc requirement. These methods include INSPECTION or EXAMINATION,
ANALYSIS, DEMONSTRATION, and TEST. A ﬁfth method, SIMILARITY, is permitted by some
organizations.
     Veriﬁcation method selection requires insightful forethought. Why? First, veriﬁcation decisions
range from simple visual inspections to highly complex tests that include analysis. This can be very
costly and consumes valuable schedule time. Second, common sense asks WHY you would want
to go to the trouble and expense of performing a TEST when a simple visual INSPECTION is
sufﬁcient.
     So, how do SEs select a method? A time-cost driven methodology provides a basis for the ver-
iﬁcation method of decision making as illustrated in Figure 33.1.


                   Initial
                    State
   1
                                                                      Increasing Verification Expense
            Verify by          No
           Similarity?
                                          3                                                                     Iterate Decision Cycle for Each
                                                Verify                                                               Requirement Until All
                   Yes                           Verifyby
                                                        by              No
                                                                                                               Requirements Have at Least One or
                                               Inspection?
                                                Inspection?                                                        More Verification Methods
       2
           Similarity         No                                                    7
                                                        Yes
           Sufficient?                4                                                                    No
                                                Select                                        Verifyby
                                                                                             Verify  by
                                                 Select                                      Analysis?
                                          INSPECTION Method                                   Analysis?
                 Yes                       INSPECTION Method
                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                  Yes                     Verify         No
                                                                               8                                           Verifyby
                                                                                                                                  by
                                               Inspection            No                                                    Demo?
                                                                                                                            Demo?
                                                Inspection                              Select
                                               Sufficient?                               Select
                                                Sufficient?                         ANALYSISMethod
                                                                                   ANALYSIS    Method
                                          5                                                                                    Yes
                                                                                                                    11     Select
                                                        Yes                                                                 Select
                                                                                9                                       DEMO Method
                                                                                                          No             DEMO Method
                                                                                          Analysis
                                                                                           Analysis
                                                                                         Sufficient?
                                                                                          Sufficient?              12                        13
                                                                                                                            Demo
                                                                                                                             Demo       No        Select
                                                                                                                                                   Select
                                                                                                  Yes                     Sufficient               Test
                                                                                                                           Sufficient               Test
                                                                                                                              ??                  Method
                                                                                                                                                   Method
                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                 Yes

 Notes
 1. Similarity may or may not be allowable as a verification method.
                                                                                       Final State
 2. “Sufficient” is defined as adequately verifying full compliance with a specification requirement.

Figure 33.1 Veriﬁcation Method Selection Process
                                          33.5 Identifying the Requirement Veriﬁcation Method   377

Veriﬁcation by SIMILARITY. Some contracts or organizations permit veriﬁcation by SIMI-
LARITY. In this case a previously veriﬁed design is permitted to be reused to develop a new system
or product, provided that the design’s performance data and quality records (CM, QA, etc.) remain
valid. This means:
    1. No changes have been made to the design since its ofﬁcial veriﬁcation.
    2. No safety critical problems have been encountered in ﬁelded units.
    3. Design requirements of the new system or product do not exceed the reusable component’s
       “As Veriﬁed” requirements.
One of the reasons many organizations discourage veriﬁcation by SIMILARITY is that it requires
INSPECTION or EXAMINATION of records, which may no longer be available. The best
approach may be to verify the requirement by INSPECTION/EXAMINATION and show that the
reused design has not changed.

Veriﬁcation by INSPECTION or EXAMINATION Decision. Veriﬁcation by INSPECTION
requires a questioning exercise that has two potential outcomes:
    • Is INSPECTION/EXAMINATION necessary to prove that a physical entity complies with
      a stated speciﬁcation requirement? If the answer is YES, select INSPECTION/EXAMINA-
      TION as a veriﬁcation method.
    • Is the INSPECTION/EXAMINATION sufﬁcient to prove that the requirement and its asso-
      ciate level of performance have been successfully accomplished? If the answer is YES,
      proceed to identiﬁcation of veriﬁcation methods for the next requirement. If not, proceed to
      the veriﬁcation by ANALYSIS decision.

Veriﬁcation by ANALYSIS Decision. Veriﬁcation by ANALYSIS requires a questioning exer-
cise that has two potential outcomes:
    • Is ANALYSIS necessary to prove that a physical entity or data collected from its formal
      testing prove that it complies with a stated speciﬁcation requirement? If the answer is YES,
      select ANALYSIS as a veriﬁcation method.
    • Is ANALYSIS sufﬁcient to prove that the requirement and its associate level of performance
      have been successfully accomplished? If the answer is YES, proceed to identiﬁcation of ver-
      iﬁcation methods for the next requirement. If not, proceed to the veriﬁcation by DEMON-
      STRATION decision.

Veriﬁcation by DEMONSTRATION Decision. Veriﬁcation by DEMONSTRATION requires
a questioning exercise that has two potential outcomes:
    • Is DEMONSTRATION necessary to prove by formal observation that a physical entity pro-
      duces repeatable and predictable outcome(s) without having to record formal measurements
      to prove that it complies with a stated speciﬁcation requirement? If the answer is YES, select
      DEMONSTRATION as a veriﬁcation method.
    • Is DEMONSTRATION sufﬁcient to prove that the requirement and its associate level of per-
      formance have been successfully accomplished? If the answer is YES, proceed to identiﬁ-
      cation of veriﬁcation methods for the next requirement. If not, proceed to the veriﬁcation by
      TEST decision.

Veriﬁcation by TEST Decision. If any of the preceding questions indicate that a formal test is
required to collect data to verify that the physical entity produces repeatable and predictable
378     Chapter 33    Requirements Statement Development

outcome(s) to prove that it complies with a stated speciﬁcation requirement, then TEST must be
selected as a veriﬁcation method for a speciﬁc requirement.
     Given this understanding of HOW veriﬁcation methods are selected, let’s proceed with HOW
the methods are documented via the RVM.

33.6 WILEY WHAT IS A REQUIREMENTS VERIFICATION
MATRIX (RVM)?

A Requirements Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM) is a tabular listing that maps each Section 3.X require-
ment to speciﬁc Section 4.X Veriﬁcation Methods—namely inspection, analysis, demonstration, and
test.
RVM Example. To illustrate the structure of a RVM, let’s use a hypothetical example. Assume
that requirement 3.1.1 for Capability A states: The system shall perform Capability A, which consists
of the capabilities speciﬁed in the subparagraphs below:
      • 3.1.1.1 Capability A1 . . .
      • 3.1.1.2 Capability A2 . . .
      • 3.1.1.3 Capability A3 . . .
      • 3.1.1.4 Capability A4 . . .
Table 33.4 gives an example of an RTM entry for this requirement.
     As illustrated in the table, Capability A is veriﬁed by INSPECTION that three sibling capa-
bility requirements—3.1.1.1, 3.1.1.2, 3.1.1.3, and 3.1.1.4 have been veriﬁed. Each of these sibling
capability requirements is veriﬁed as follows:
      • 3.1.1.1 Capability A1 is veriﬁed using the INSPECTION method.
      • 3.1.1.2 Capability A2 is veriﬁed using the INSPECTION and ANALYSIS methods.
      • 3.1.1.3 Capability A3 is veriﬁed using the DEMONSTRATION method.
      • 3.1.1.4 Capability A4 is veriﬁed using the INSPECTION and TEST methods.
Since Capability A’s requirement is satisﬁed by veriﬁcation of its sibling requirements, Capability
A’s veriﬁcation methods are INSPECTION that the sibling requirements have been veriﬁed.
     Most SEs develop the RVM structure and progress down the list one item at a time by check-
ing the veriﬁcation methods boxes. You simply cannot do this for every system application. The
identiﬁcation of requirements veriﬁcation methods is highly iterative and must be reconciled
between multiple levels or chains of requirements.

Table 33.4 Speciﬁcation Section 4.0 Requirements Traceability Matrix (RTM) example

 Speciﬁcation Requirement                                  Veriﬁcation Methods
 Paragraph
                                      Inspection     Analysis          Demonstration       Test

 3.1.1 Capability A                       X

 3.1.1.1 Capability A1                    X

 3.1.1.2 Capability A2                    X                X

 3.1.1.3 Capability A3                                                       X

 3.1.1.4 Capability A4                    X                                                 X
                                  33.6 Wiley What is a Requirements Veriﬁcation Matirx (RVM)?    379

Requirements Management Tools. Traditional speciﬁcations include a separate table for
Section 4.0 Qualiﬁcation Provisions. The difﬁculty with this approach is that the speciﬁcation
developer and readers must ﬂip back and forth between Section 3.0 requirements and Section 4.0
veriﬁcation methods. From an SE perspective, this method is very inefﬁcient.
    The best approach is to use a requirements management tool, preferably one that is based on
an object-oriented, relational database. The tool enables the veriﬁcation methods to be stated in a
spreadsheet display as additional columns of the requirement. Table 33.5 illustrates this approach.
Some tools simplify this approach and use “pick lists” for each cell in one column instead of ﬁve
columns.
    In the example above, note the following:
    • Each requirement has its own unique identiﬁer such as SYS_136 or 4692xxx.
    • The full text of each requirement is stated.
    • Each requirement can be easily related to its veriﬁcation method(s).
Table 33.5 represents a view that can be obtained from an object-oriented, relational database tool.
If you have a small technical program and do not have a tool of this type, you could use a spread-
sheet to accomplish similar results.

A Word about Requirements Management Tools. Traditionally, Acquirers prefer word
processor-based documents. Why? They are easier to control as part of the contract and require skills
and software applications most stakeholders possess. The SE problem is, however, HOW do you link
requirements in a word processor document to another speciﬁcation, engineering drawing, graphic,
and so on?
     With today’s Web-based technologies, you will say this can be done easily with document
links. However, conventional document links do not allow you to display or printout the “thread”
of text statements that are traceable across documents. Requirements management tools provide
this unique capability. You can live without a requirements management tool. However, the tool
saves hours when verifying requirements traceability. This is why RT tools provide an advantage


Table 33.5 Requirements management tool RVM report

 Requirements          Requirements Statement                         Method of Veriﬁcation
 ID
                                                         N/A    Inspect    Analysis    Demo     Test

 SYS_136        3.1.1 Capability A                                X
                The system shall perform (Capability
                A), which consists of the capabilities
                speciﬁed in the subparagraphs below:

 SYS_137        3.1.1.1 Capability A1                             X            X
                The system shall (Capability A1) . . .

 SYS_138        3.1.1.2 Capability A2                                          X
                The system shall (Capability A2) . . .

 SYS_139        3.1.1.3 Capability A3                                                    X
                The system shall (Capability A3) . . .

 SYS_140        3.1.1.4 Capability A4                                                            X
                The system shall (Capability A4) . . .
380    Chapter 33     Requirements Statement Development

and leverage your own ability and time. You can convince yourself to believe you cannot afford
the tool. However, the capabilities and productivity of your personnel and organization will pay
dividends, especially for large, complex system development efforts.

Veriﬁcation Level. We like to think that simply identifying veriﬁcation methods for a
requirement is sufﬁcient. However, some requirements may not be veriﬁable at every entity or CI
level. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 33.4
You are assigned a task to create SUBSYSTEM A Development Speciﬁcation. Ideally, you would like to verify
SUBSYSTEM A as a work product. There may be cases whereby it is impractical to complete veriﬁcation of
SUBSYSTEM A as a work product until it is integrated into the higher level SYSTEM. For example, it may
be impractical to stimulate one of SUBSYSTEM A’s interfaces during veriﬁcation tests at the SUBSYSTEM
level. As a result, you may want to indicate in the RVM, for internal record keeping, the level of abstrac-
tion at which veriﬁcation of a speciﬁc requirement will be accomplished. Table 33.6 provides a tabular
illustration.

As illustrated in Table 33.6, requirement 3.1.1.1 will be veriﬁed at the SUBSYSTEM level. Require-
ment 3.1.1.4, which requires SUBSYSTEM A to be integrated with SUBSYSTEM B, will be ver-
iﬁed at the SYSTEM level. Thus, the veriﬁcation of requirement 3.1.1 cannot be completed until
the 3.1.1.4 TEST method is performed at SYSTEM level integration.




Table 33.6 RVM Example illustrating Veriﬁcation Level for Each Requirement

 Requirements          Requirement            Veriﬁcation                   Veriﬁcation Methods
 ID                     Statement               Level
                                                               N/A    Inspect   Analysis   Demo     Test

 SYS_136          3.1.1 Capability A      See subparagraphs
                  The system shall        below
                  perform (Capability
                  A) Capability A,
                  which consists of the
                  capabilities speciﬁed
                  in the subparagraphs
                  below:

 SYS_137          3.1.1.1 Capability      SUBSYSTEM                     X          X
                  A1 The system shall
                  provide (Capability
                  A1) . . .

 ⯗                ⯗                       ⯗

 SYS_140          3.1.1.4 Capability A4 SYSTEM                                                       X
                  The system shall
                  provide (Capability
                  A4) . . .
                                                      33.7 Requirements Development Guidelines      381

33.7 REQUIREMENTS DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES

Requirements can be characterized a range of attributes. These attributes include legal, technical,
cost, priority, and schedule considerations. Let’s examine each of these brieﬂy.

Suggestion 1: Title Each Requirement Statement
Requirements tend to lose their identities as statements within a larger document. This is particu-
larly troublesome when the need arises to rapidly search for an instance of a requirement. Make it
easy for reviewers and users of speciﬁcations to easily locate requirements. Give each requirement
a “bumper sticker” title. This provides a mechanism for capture in the speciﬁcation’s table of con-
tents and makes identiﬁcation easier.

Suggestion 2: Use the Word “Shall”
Requirements, when issued as part of a contract, are considered legally binding and sufﬁcient for
procurement action when expressly stated with the word “shall.” Engineers have a REPUTATION
for expressing requirements with the words “will,” “should,” and “must.” Those terms are expres-
sions of intent, not a mandatory or required action. To facilitate speciﬁcation readability, consider
boldfacing each instance of the word “shall” (e.g., shall).

Author’s Note 33.3 There is increasing evidence of less discipline in speciﬁcation wording by
using words such as “will.” The general viewpoint is that the “context” of the statement of the
statement is what is important. For example, “. . . the system will perform the tasks speciﬁed below.
. . .” If you subscribe to this notion, it is critically important that you establish “up front” in the
speciﬁcation HOW the term “will” is to be interpreted relative to being “mandatory.” Whatever
convention you and your organization adopt, you must be consistent throughout the speciﬁcation.
The best practice is to use the word SHALL. In any case, ALWAYS seek the advice of your organi-
zation’s legal counselors before committing to a speciﬁcation that contains ambiguous wording that
may be subject to legal interpretation.

Suggestion 3: References to Other Sections,
Speciﬁcations, and Standards
Speciﬁcation sections often reference other sections within the document. Typically, the speciﬁca-
tion will state, “Refer to Section 3.4.2.6.” If you do this, consider including the title of the section
with the sectional reference. Why? The structures of speciﬁcations often change as topics are added
or deleted. When this occurs, the sections are renumbered. Thus, the original “Refer to Section
3.4.2.6.” may now reference an unrelated requirement topic. By noting the sectional title to the ref-
erence, the reviewer can easily recognize a conﬂict between the referencing and target sections.
The same applies to references to external standards and speciﬁcations.

Suggestion 4: References to External
Speciﬁcations and Standards
When you reference external speciﬁcations and standards, include the title and document number.
Normally the title and document identiﬁcation should be stated in Section 2.0 Referenced Docu-
ments. However, there may be instances of documents with similar titles that may be confusing.
If this occurs, references as follows: “XYZ System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) (Document
No. 123456).”
382     Chapter 33   Requirements Statement Development

Suggestion 6: Operational and Technical Capabilities and
Performance Characteristics
Operational and technical capabilities and characteristics requirements should explicitly describe
the required system capabilities and levels of performance. The DSMC Test and Evaluation Man-
agement Guide deﬁnes these terms as follows:
      • Required Operational Characteristics “System parameters that are primary indicators of
        the system’s capability to be employed to perform the required mission functions, and to be
        supported.” (Source: DSMC T&E Mgt. Guide, Appendix B, DoD Glossary of Test Termi-
        nology, p. B-17)
      • Required Technical Characteristics “System parameters selected as primary indicators of
        achievement of engineering goals. These need not be direct measures of, but should always
        relate to the system’s capability to perform the required mission functions, and to be sup-
        ported.” (Source: DSMC T&E Mgt. Guide, Appendix B, DoD Glossary of Test Terminol-
        ogy, p. B-17)
Remember, OPERATIONAL and TECHNICAL characteristics should be measurable, achievable,
realistic, testable, and veriﬁable.


Suggestion 7: Avoid Paragraph-Based Text Requirements
Engineers default to traditional writing methods when preparing requirements statements. They
write requirements statements in paragraphs with theme sentences, compound statements, and lists.
When specifying systems, isolate requirements as singular testable requirements.
     Paragraph-based declarative statements in speciﬁcations are acceptable for Section 1.0 Intro-
duction. The problem is System Developers must spend valuable time separating or parsing com-
pound requirements into SINGULAR requirements in Section 3.x. Do yourself and the System
Developer (contractor, subcontractor, etc.) a favor and generate system speciﬁcations with singu-
lar requirements statements. This saves valuable time that can be better spent on higher priority
tasks and creates a consistent format that promotes readability, understandability and veriﬁability.


Suggestion 8: Eliminate Compound Requirements Statements
When requirements statements specify compound requirements, allocation of the requirement
becomes confusing and veriﬁcation becomes difﬁcult. Why? If multiple requirements are speciﬁed
in a single requirements statement and they are allocated to different system entities, the challenge
is: HOW do you link which portion of a requirement statement to a speciﬁc target entity?
     When the system must be veriﬁed, HOW can you check off a requirement as complete (i.e., ver-
iﬁed) when portions remain to be veriﬁed due to missing equipment, and the like? The only alter-
native is to uniquely number each requirement within the statement. When it comes time to verify
the requirement statement, complete veriﬁcation of all requirements embedded within the statement
is required to satisfy veriﬁcation of the whole statement.


Suggestion 9: Eliminate the Word “ALL”
Speciﬁcation writers are often consumed with the word “all.” Eliminate uses of the word “all” in
a speciﬁcation! Appreciate the legal signiﬁcance of stating that “. . . ALL instances of an XYZ will
be veriﬁed. . . .” Contemplate HOW large in scope the ALL universe is? Remember, ALL is one of
those limitless words, at least for practical purposes. As a speciﬁcation writer, your mission is to
specify and bound the solution space as simply and as practical, not open it up for verifying every
                                                     33.8 “Testing” Derived Requirements Statements   383

conceivable scenario or instance of an entity. ALL, in a limitless context, is boundless and is subject
to interpretation. Do yourself a favor and AVOID usage of ALL.

Suggestion 10: Eliminate the Term and Abbreviation “Etc.”
Et cetera is another word that we use constantly. Most engineers discover early in their careers
there will always be someone who “nit picks” about miniscule instances of science or a natural
occurrence and chastise the engineer for missing it. Thus, engineers learn to “cover all cases” by
using the term “etc.” Again, when you develop speciﬁcations, your mission is to specify and bound
the solution space. When you state, “As a minimum, the system shall consist of a, b, c, etc.,” the
Acquirer could say later, “Well, we also want a “d, e, and f.” You may reply we did not bid the
cost of including a “d, e, and f,” which may then bring a response “You agreed to the requirements
and “etc.” means we can request anything we want to.” Do yourself a favor and eliminate all
instances of etc. in speciﬁcations.

Suggestion 11: Avoid the Term “And/Or”
Speciﬁcation writers often specify requirements via enumerated lists that include the term “and/or.”


 EXAMPLE 33.5
For example, “. . . the system shall consist of capabilities: A, B, C, and/or D.”

      Be explicit. Either the system consists of A, B, C, or D or it does not. If not, so state and bound
exactly WHAT the system is to contain. Remember, speciﬁcations must state exactly WHAT capa-
bilities are required at SYSTEM delivery and acceptance.


33.8 “TESTING” DERIVED REQUIREMENTS STATEMENTS

Many people are surprised to ﬁnd that you can “test” requirements. Requirement testing takes the
form of technical compliance audits with organizational standards and conventions, such as coding
standards and graphical conventions. Modeling and simulation provides another method for testing
requirements. Execution of those models and simulations provides insights into the reasonableness
of a requirement, performance allocation, potential conﬂicts, and difﬁculty in veriﬁcation.
     Requirement testing also includes inspection and evaluation of each requirements statement in
accordance with pre-deﬁned criteria.

Requirement Validation Criteria
When testing the validity of a requirement by inspection or evaluation, there are a number of cri-
teria that can be applied to determine the adequacy and sufﬁciency of the requirement. Table 33.7
provides an example listing of key criteria.
     The criteria stated in Table 33.7, though examples, are reasonably comprehensive. You are
probably thinking how can you evaluate a speciﬁcation with potentially hundreds of requirements
using these criteria.
     First, seasoned SEs imprint these criteria subconsciously in their minds. With experience you
will learn to test speciﬁcation requirements rapidly. Second, for large speciﬁcations, obviously
groups of SEs must be participants in the testing and analysis exercise. This further demonstrates the
criticality of training all SEs in the proper methods of requirements writing and review to ensure a
level of conﬁdence and continuity in the results.
384   Chapter 33      Requirements Statement Development

Table 33.7 Requirement validation criteria

ID           Criteria                                           Criteria Question

 1.     Unique identity         Does the requirement have its own unique identity such as a title that
                                reﬂects the subject capability and unique tracking identiﬁer number?
 2.     Singleness of           Does the requirement specify and bound one and only one capability or
        purpose                 are there compound requirements that should be broken out separately?
 3.     Legitimacy and          Is this a legitimate requirement that reﬂects a capability traceable to the
        traceability            User’s intended operational needs or simply a random thought that may or
                                may not be applicable?
 4.     SOW language            Does this requirement include language that logically belongs within the
        avoidance               Contract Statement of Work (CSOW)?
 5.     Appropriateness         Does this requirement fall within the scope of this speciﬁcation or does it
                                belong in another speciﬁcation?
 6.     Hierarchical level      If this requirement is within the scope of this speciﬁcation, is the
                                requirement positioned at the right level within the requirements hierarchy?
 7.     User priority           What is the User’s priority level for this requirement—can live without,
                                nice to have, desirable, or mandatory?
 8.     Realism                 Is the requirement realistic?
 9.     Achievability           If the requirement is realistic, can it be achieved economically and at
                                acceptable risk with available technology?
10.     Feasibility             Can the requirement be implemented within reasonable need priorities
                                and budgetary cost without limiting the minimum required set of
                                requirements?
11.     Explicitness            Is the requirement stated in unambiguous language—in text and graphics?
12.     Readability and         Is the requirement simply stated in language that is easily understood
        understandability       by the document’s stakeholders and ensures that any combination of
                                stakeholders emerge with the same interpretation and understanding of
                                WHAT is required after reading the requirement?
13.     Completeness            Does the requirement adequately satisfy the structural syntax criteria
                                identiﬁed in an earlier section?
14.     Consistency             Is the requirement consistent with system terminology used:
                                1. Throughout the speciﬁcation?
                                2. Among speciﬁcations within the speciﬁcation tree?
                                3. By the Acquirer and User?
15.     Terminology             Does the requirement contain any terms that require scoping deﬁnitions?
16.     Assumptions             Does the requirement make assumptions that should be documented in
                                the Notes and Assumptions section of the speciﬁcation?
17.     Conﬂicts                Does this requirement conﬂict with another requirement?
18.     Objectivity             Is the requirement stated objectively and avoids subjective compliance
                                assessments?
19.     Accuracy                Is the requirement stated in language that accurately bounds the subject
                                capability and level of required performance?

                                                                                                 (continued)
                                                                  33.9 Requirements Minimization         385

Table 33.7 continued

ID           Criteria                                        Criteria Question

20.     Precision             Is the precision of the required level of performance adequate?
21.     Testabability         If required, can a test or series of tests be devised and instrumented
                              economically with available resources— knowledge, skills, and equipment?
22.     Measurability         If testable, can the results be measured directly or indirectly derived by
                              analysis of test results?
23.     Veriﬁability          If the results of the test can be analyzed either directly or indirectly, can
                              the results be veriﬁed by inspection, analysis, demonstration, or test to
                              prove full compliance with the requirement?
24.     Level of risk         Does this requirement pose any signiﬁcant technical, technology, cost,
                              schedule, or support risks?




33.9 REQUIREMENTS MINIMIZATION

SEs often struggle with the rhetorical question how many requirements do you need to specify a
system. There are no speciﬁc guidelines or rules; only disciplined and seasoned experience. Con-
trary to many things in life, speciﬁcation quality is not measured by the QUANTITY of reﬁnements
and features.
      Frightening? Yes! But think about it! Every layer of requirements adds restrictions, complex-
ity, cost, and schedule that limit the System Developer’s ﬂexibility and options to innovate and
achieve lower costs, schedule implementation, and risk.
      How many requirements should an ideal speciﬁcation have? Hypothetically, the answer could
be ONE requirement; however, a one-requirement speciﬁcation has limited utility. We can never-
theless state that a properly prepared speciﬁcation is one that has the minimal number of require-
ments but yet enables the User/Acquirer to procure a system that can be veriﬁed and validated to
meet their operational capability and performance needs.
      How do we emerge with this idyllic speciﬁcation? The answer may be found in performance
speciﬁcations. Performance speciﬁcations enable SEs to treat a SYSTEM like a box with inputs
and outputs (Figure 31.1). The intent is to scope and bound the behavior of a SYSTEM relative to
scenarios and conditions in its prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. This is accomplished
via measures of effectiveness (MOEs) and measures of suitability (MOSs) with supporting meas-
ures of performance (MOPs). By treating the system characteristics as a “performance envelope,”
we have avoided specifying how the system is to be designed.

Referral For more information regarding measures of effectiveness (MOEs), measures of suit-
ability (MOSs), and measures of performance (MOPs), refer to Chapter 34 Operational Utility, Suit-
ability, and Effectiveness practices.

There is one problem, however, with bounding the SYSTEM at the “performance envelope” level.
If you cast the performance speciﬁcation in a manner that allows too much ﬂexibility, the results may
unacceptable, especially to the Acquirer. This leaves the System Developer with the challenge or
interpretation of determining WHAT speciﬁc capabilities the SYSTEM is to provide and HOW
WELL each capability is to be provided. This can be good or bad, depending on your role as an
Acquirer or System Developer/Subcontractor.
386     Chapter 33     Requirements Statement Development

     Since all capabilities may not be considered to be of equal importance by the User, especially
in terms of constrained budgets, the User’s priority list may be different from the System Devel-
oper’s PRIORITY list.

Author’s Note 33.4 Remember, the User is interested in optimizing capabilities and perform-
ance while minimizing technical, cost, and schedule risk. The System Developer, depending on type
of contract, is also interested in minimizing technical, cost, and schedule risk while optimizing prof-
itability. Thus, unless both parties are willing to work toward an optimal solution that represents
a win-win for both parties, conﬂicts can arise regarding these priority viewpoints and organiza-
tional objectives can clash.

How do we solve this dilemma? The Acquirer may be confronted with having to specify additional
requirements that more explicitly identify the key capabilities, levels of performance, as well as
priorities. The challenge then becomes: At what level does the Acquirer stop specifying require-
ments? Ultimately, the Acquirer could potentially OVERSPECIFY or UNDERSPECIFY the
system, depending on budget factors. Additionally, there may be other options for the Acquirer to
work around the problem via “decision control or approval” tasks incorporated into the Contract
Statement of Work (SOW).
     So, what is the optimal number of requirements? There are no easy answers. Philosophically,
however, we may be able to describe the answer in our next topic, the optimal system requirements
concept.

Optimal System Requirements Concept
Anecdotal data suggest that a notional proﬁle can be constructed to express the ideal quantity
of speciﬁcation requirements. To illustrate this notional concept, consider the graphic shown in
Figure 33.2.


                                        Optimal
                UNDER Specification                               OVER Specification

                       Point of Inflection
Specification
Adequacy &                                    Theoretical Threshold of Minimum Requirements
   Utility                                             for Optimal System Definition

                                                                                    Breakpoint Threshold
                                                                        (Organization and Business Posture Dependent)


                          Zone 1                    Zone 2
                          Zone of                   Zone of                  Zone Where Requirements
                        Increasing                 Increasing               Restrictions Unduly Constrain
                     System Definition            Requirements               Design Options & Diminish
                         Adequacy                                                     Feasibility
                                                   Restrictions

                                                                      Zone 3
                                                                                                             Quantity of
                Diminishing                                                                                 Requirements
                             SEValue
                 DiminishingSE         DiminishingSE
                                Value Diminishing     DesignOptions
                                                   SEDesign  Options&&Feasibility
                                                                       Feasibility

                            Point of Inflection Varies
                            by System & System Entity
Figure 33.2 Speciﬁcation Requirements Coverage Concept
                                                                        33.10 Guiding Principles    387

     The ﬁgure consists of a graphical proﬁle with three curved line segments. For discussion pur-
poses, we will identify the area under each segment as a zone. Beginning at the intersection of the
X- and Y-axes, every legitimate requirement that is identiﬁed at the top hierarchical levels increases
the adequacy of system deﬁnition toward a theoretical optimal level. We characterize this theoret-
ical point as the point of inﬂection in the curve’s slope.
     At the point of inﬂection, we should have an optimal number of requirements. Hypothetically,
the quantity of requirements should be technically necessary and sufﬁcient to specify a SYSTEM
with the desired capabilities and levels of performance. At this level the requirements are minimally
sufﬁcient to specify and bound the User’s intended operational needs.
     Beyond the point of inﬂection lies the Zone of Increasing Requirements Restrictions. As the
slope of the curve indicates, requirements can be added but at the expense of speciﬁcation ade-
quacy and utility—over speciﬁcation. Each additional requirement restricts the SE design options
and may increase technical, cost, schedule, technology, and support risk.
     As the quantity of requirements continues to increase to the right, you ﬁnally reach a break-
point for Zone 3. Zone 3 represents the region where the requirements become too restrictive. Thus,
the requirements unduly restrict SE design options and severely limit feasibility of the system. Gen-
erally, when this occurs, the Acquirer discovers this problem during the draft proposal stage. To
alleviate the risk, the Acquirer may remove some requirements due to prohibitive technical, cost,
schedule, technology, and support costs and risks.
     The problem described here is not unique to the Acquirer. The same problem challenges the
System Developer program organization, not just at the SYSTEM level but at multiple levels of
speciﬁcations at lower levels. Every requirement at every level has a cost to implement and a cost
to verify besides their schedule and risk implications. This impacts SE Design Process, the Com-
ponent Procurement and Development Process and the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation
(SITE) Process of the System Development Phase of the system/product life cycle.
     Does this concept answer the question: What is the optimal number of speciﬁcation require-
ments? No. However, it illustrates some hypothetical conditions—the points of inﬂection and break-
points—that should be within your mindset. The bottom line is: writing speciﬁcations requires more
thought than simply writing “random thoughts” within schedule constraints. You need to THINK
about WHAT you require and the potential ramiﬁcations on the System Developer.

Author’s Note 33.5 As a discipline, industry is consumed with metrics and comparing them with
everyone else. While there may be some rough order of magnitude (ROM) relevance, do not lose sight
that the “end game” is for the Acquirer, System Developer, and Subcontractors to respectively come
to a mutual understanding and agreement on WHAT is to be delivered and emerge with a POSITIVE
experience. Every system is different and should be evaluated on its own merits. If you make system-
to-system comparison, make sure the two systems are comparable in form, ﬁt, and function.

Final Thoughts
The intent of the preceding discussion has been to heighten your awareness of a key theme: when
specifying requirements, strive for the optimal number of requirements that is sufﬁcient in quan-
tity to adequately to cover the subject but few in quantity to avoid increasing costs, risks, and devel-
opment time and reducing the ﬂexibility of equally qualiﬁed design options.


33.10 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis to establish guiding principles that govern
requirements statement development practices.
388     Chapter 33   Requirements Statement Development

Principle 33.1 Every system requirement must be unique within the system, singular in purpose,
consistent with other requirements, and nonconﬂicting.

Principle 33.2 Every requirement must be explicitly understandable, realistic, achievable, con-
sistent, testable, measurable, and veriﬁable.

Principle 33.3 Every requirement must have an assigned owner who is accountable for its imple-
mentation and maintenance.

Principle 33.4 A requirement is NOT a requirement until it:
      1. Is traceable to source or originating requirements via an RVM.
      2. Satisﬁes requirements validation criteria (Table 33.7).
      3. Is assigned one or more veriﬁcation methods.
      4. Is accepted by a consensus of its stakeholders.
      5. Is approved and released for implementation.

Principle 33.5 Every requirement:
      1. Has a value and priority to the User.
      2. Constrains design solution options.
      3. Increases risk.
      4. Has a cost to implement and maintain.


33.11 SUMMARY

Our discussion of the requirements statement development practices:
• Described the key attributes that characterize a good requirement.
• Introduced a basic methodology for preparing requirements statements via a three-step approach that avoids
  common problems of developing requirement content and grammar simultaneously.
• Provided a list of suggestions for developing good requirements.
• Highlighted the need to focus on singular requirements statements that meet speciﬁc criteria.
• Described how to develop a Requirements Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM).
• Discussed when a requirement should be ofﬁcially recognized as a requirement.
• Described the process for selecting requirement veriﬁcation methods.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Based on four to six use case based capabilities identiﬁed for the SYSTEM, write requirements state-
       ments for each capability.
   (b) For each capability requirement, derive the next level of sibling requirements that constitute what must
       be completed to achieve the higher level capability.
                                                                                    Additional Reading       389

   (c) Create a Requirements Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM), and identify the veriﬁcation methods required to
       prove compliance with each requirement.
   (d) Pick two requirements. Using Table 33.1 as a reference, create your own table for each requirement
       and append a separate column that rationalizes how the respective requirement satisﬁes the criteria.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Select a contract speciﬁcation or one developed by your organization and test it using the criteria described
   in this section.
2. Research your organization’s command media for guidance or direction in preparing requirements state-
   ments. Document your ﬁndings.
3. Contact a contract program within your organization.
   (a) What types of speciﬁcation review methods were used to review speciﬁcation requirements?
   (b) What guidance did the program provide to speciﬁcation developers regarding requirements develop-
       ment guidelines or criteria?


REFERENCES

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998. Test    IEEE Std 610.12-1990, 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of
  and Evaluation Management Guide, 3rd ed. Defense         Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-
  Acquisition Press, Ft. Belvoir, VA.                      trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY


ADDITIONAL READING

Kar, Phillip, and Bailey, Michelle. 1996. Characteristics of Good Requirements. International Council on Systems
  Engineering (INCOSE) Requirements Working Group. 1996 INCOSE Symposium.
Chapter              34

      Operational Utility, Suitability,
      and Effectiveness

34.1 INTRODUCTION

When you develop systems, there are four basic questions the User, Acquirer, and System Devel-
oper need to answer:
      1. If we invest in the development of this system, product or service, will it have UTILITY to
         the User in accomplishing their organizational missions?
      2. If the system has UTILITY, will it be SUITABLE for the User’s mission application(s) and
         integrate easily into their business model?
      3. If the system has UTILITY and is SUITABLE for the application, will it be operationally
         AVAILABLE to perform the mission when tasked?
      4. If the system has UTILITY to the organization, is SUITABLE for the application, and is
         AVAILABLE to perform its mission when tasked, will it be EFFECTIVE in performing
         mission and accomplishing mission objectives with a required level of success?
The ultimate test of any system, product, or service is its mission and system effectiveness in per-
forming User missions and accomplishing mission objectives. Failure to perform within prescribed
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions and constraints places operational, ﬁnancial, and sur-
vival risks on the Users, their organizations, and the public. One of System Engineering’s greatest
challenges for SEs is being able to translate operational and system effectiveness objectives into
meaningful capability and performance requirements that developers understand and can imple-
ment. The challenge is exacerbated by a lack of formal training on this topic to help SEs under-
stand HOW to perform the practice.
     This section introduces one of the most challenging areas to SE. In fact, it serves as the core
of requirements identiﬁcation, analysis, allocation and ﬂow down. As a general practice, this area
is ﬁlled with buzzwords that verbose SEs pontiﬁcate with limited knowledge, Why? Typically, the
recipients of the verbose pontiﬁcation know less about the topic and do not bother to seek clariﬁ-
cation and understanding.

Author’s Note 34.1 Operational AVAILABILITY is part of this discussion thread. However,
since AVAILABILITY is a mathematical function of reliability and maintainability, we will defer the
AVAILABILITY discussion. The topic is a key element of the Reliability, Availability, and Main-
tainability (RAM) Practices discussion in Chapter 50 of the Decision Support Series.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

390
                                                                            34.1 Introduction   391

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
  1. What is a measure of effectiveness (MOE)?
  2. What is a measure of suitability (MOS)?
  3. What is a technical performance measure (TPM)?
  4. What is a technical performance parameter (TPP)?
  5. What is the relationship between MOEs, MOSs, MOPs, and TPMs?
  6. Who is responsible for MOEs, MOSs, MOPs, and TPMs?
  7. How do you track and control MOEs, MOSs, MOPs, and TPMs?
  8. What is the relationship between TPMs and risk items?
  9. When do TPMs trigger risk items?



Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Critical Issues “Those aspects of a system’s capability, either operational, technical, or
    other, that must be questioned before a system’s overall suitability can be known. Critical
    issues are of primary importance to the decision authority in reaching a decision to allow
    the system to advance into the next phase of development.” (Source: DSMC, Glossary:
    Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
  • Critical Operational Issue (COI) “Operational effectiveness and operational suitability
    issues (not parameters, objectives, or thresholds) that must be examined in operational test
    and evaluation (OT&E) to determine the system’s capability to perform its mission. A COI
    is normally phrased as a question that must be answered in order to properly evaluate oper-
    ational effectiveness (e.g., ‘Will the system detect the threat in a combat environment at ade-
    quate range to allow successful engagement?’) or operational suitability (e.g., ‘Will the
    system be safe to operate in a combat environment?’).” (Source: DSMC, Glossary: Defense
    Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
  • Figure of Merit (FOM) “The numerical value assigned to a measure of effectiveness,
    parameter, or other ﬁgure, as a result of an analysis, synthesis, or estimating technique.”
    (Source: DSMC, Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
  • Key Performance Parameters (KPPs) “Those capabilities or characteristics so signiﬁcant
    that failure to meet the threshold can be cause for the concept or system selected to be reeval-
    uated or the program to be reassessed or terminated.” (Source: DSMC, Test and Evaluation
    Management Guide, Appendix B, Glossary of Test Terminology, p. B-10)
  • Technical (Performance) Parameters (TPPs) “A selected subset of the system’s technical
    metrics tracked in Technical Performance Measurement (TPM). Critical technical parame-
    ters relate to critical system characteristics and are identiﬁed from risk analyses and contract
    speciﬁcations. Technical parameters examples (include):
    1. Speciﬁcation requirements.
    2. Metrics associated with technical objectives and other key decision metrics used to guide
        and control progressive development.
    3. Design-to-cost targets.
    4. Parameters identiﬁed in the acquisition program baseline or user requirements
        documentation.”
    (Source: Former MIL-STD-499B DRAFT, Appendix A, Glossary, p. 41)
392     Chapter 34   Operational Utility, Suitability, and Effectiveness

      • Technical Performance Measurement (TPM) “The continuing veriﬁcation of the degree
        of anticipated and actual achievement of technical parameters. TPM is used to identify and
        ﬂag the importance of a design deﬁciency that might jeopardize meeting a system level
        requirement that has been determined to be critical. Measured values that fall outside an
        established tolerance band require proper corrective actions to be taken by management.
        a. Achievement to Date Measured progress or estimate of progress plotted and compared
           with the planned progress at designated milestone dates.
        b. Current Estimate The value of a technical parameter that is predicted to be achieved
           with existing resources by the end of contract (EOC).
        c. Technical Milestone Time period when a TPM evaluation is accomplished. Evaluations
           are made to support technical reviews, signiﬁcant test events and cost reporting intervals.
        d. Planned Value Predicted value of the technical parameter for the time of measurement
           based on e planned proﬁle.
        e. Planned Value Proﬁle Proﬁle representing the projected time-phased demonstration of
           a technical parameter requirement.
        f. Tolerance Band Management alert limits placed each side of the planned proﬁle to
           indicate the envelope or degree of variation allowed. The tolerance band represents the
           projected level of estimating error.
        g. Threshold The limiting acceptable value of a technical parameter; usually a contractual
           performance requirement.
        h. Variation Difference between the planned value of the technical parameter and the
           achievement-to-date value derived from analysis, test, or demonstration.”
        (Source: INCOSE Handbook, Section 12, Appendix, Glossary, p. 46–47)

Scope of Discussion
Our discussion in this chapter employs hierarchical entity relationships to address the objective
aspects—operational and system effectiveness—of system development. Though somewhat sub-
jective, similar approaches and methods can be applied to operational utility and suitability.
     Based on this introduction, let’s begin our discussion with an overview of MOEs, MOSs, MOPs,
and TPM relationships.


34.2 OVERVIEW OF MOE, MOS, MOP,
AND TPM RELATIONSHIPS

In most engineering environments, SEs are tasked to identify Technical Performance Measures
(TPMs) for their SYSTEM, PRODUCT, and SUBSYSTEM. As the SEs struggle, program man-
agement laments as to WHY such as simple task can be so difﬁcult. There are two reasons.
     First, most engineers are not trained to understand WHAT a TPM is, HOW it originates, and
WHY TPMs are important—an organizational management and training system failure. Second,
the Lead Systems Engineer (LSE) and the System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT) that
oversee the technical program have not performed their job of linking lower level TPMs to criti-
cal MOEs and MOSs.
     So, to most engineers, TPMs are bureaucratic exercises of randomly selecting requirements
that may or may not have relevance to overall system performance from their assigned develop-
ment speciﬁcations.
     The terms measures of effectiveness (MOEs), measures of suitability (MOSs), measures of
performance (MOPs), and technical performance measures (TPMs) should be integrally linked.
Unfortunately, they typically exist as unrelated information fragments in separate documents and
                                                           34.2 Overview of MOE, MOS, MOP, and TPM Relationships                                    393

may only be linked mentally by a few reviewers. Given this situation, the potential for risk abounds
in the form of overlooked or missing requirements dropped along the path of getting to the System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). Let’s explore this point further.
     The relationships between MOEs, MOSs, MOPs, and TPMs can be very confusing. Part of the
difﬁculty arises from a lack of CLEAR understanding of how MOEs, MOSs, MOPs, and TPMs
originate. MOEs, MOSs, MOPS, and TPMs serve as critical benchmark metrics for deriving oper-
ational capabilities and requirements. The parameters provide traceability links with the intent of
delivering a physical system that fully complies with the Acquirer’s SPS requirements and satis-
ﬁes the User’s validated operational needs.

Linking MOEs, MOSs, MOPs, and TPMs
Figure 34.1 depicts the entity relationships between MOEs, MOPs, MOSs, and TPMs. Observe the
partitioning of the ﬁgure into two basic parts as denoted by the vertical dashed line: the
User/Acquirer domain on the LEFT side and the System Developer domain shown on the RIGHT
side.

Author’s Note 34.2 Some Acquirers may derive the SOO from the ORD in lieu of the SRD. In
this context the SOO serves as the source or originating requirements for the SPS.

When a new system is conceived, the User formulates a high-level Statement of Objectives (SOO)
(1). Users that lack in-depth knowledge of SE and acquisition expertise may employ an Acquirer
to represent their system development technical and contract interests. The Acquirer collaborates
with the Users to understand their problem space and bound a solution space. As part of this process,
the User requirements are elaborated in an Operational Requirements Document (ORD) (2). The
ORD, which typically focuses on application of the proposed system, describes HOW the User
envisions employing the system to perform their organizational mission(s) and achieve the mission
objectives.


                                    User/Acquirer                                                      System Developer
 1                        2                            3                                 4                       Implemented       5
     Statement                Operational                   System                             System                 By
         of                    Reqmts.                      Reqmts.                          Performance                               CWBS
                                                                                                                                        CWBS
     Objectives               Document                     Document                          Specification
      (SOOs)                    (ORD)                        (SRD)                              (SPS)

                                                     Traceable
            Characterized By                                                                                     Implemented
                                                        to              Characterized
                                                                                                                      By
                                                                             By                       Consists                         Structured
                          7                                 Traceable                                   of                                 on
              Described             Operational                to                       11                                 14
                                    Effectiveness                                            Capability
 6
                 by
                                8                             10                              Capability&&       Specify        Multi-Level
                                                                                                                                 Multi-Level
                                    Measures                                                 Performance
                                                                                              Performance                         System
                                                                                                                                   System
     Operational                     Measuresofof                      SRD
                                                                        SRD                  Requirements                       Architecture
      Operational                   Effectiveness                  Measures                   Requirements                       Architecture
      Outcomes                       Effectiveness                  Measuresofof
       Outcomes                       (MOEs)                       Performance
                                       (MOEs)                       Performance                                       Complies
                                                                     (MOPs)
                                                                      (MOPs)                         Quantified By      with
                                9                                                       12
                                    Measuresofof
                                    Measures                                                     SPSMeasures
                                                                                                SPS  Measuresofof
                                    Suitability
                                     Suitability                           Traceable           Performance(MOPs)
                                                                                              Performance  (MOPs)
           Described by               (MOS)
                                       (MOS)               Traceable          To
                                                              to                                                                Evaluated
                                                                                        13                                         By
                                                                                              TechnicalPerformance
                                                                                             Technical  Performance
                                                                                              Measurements(TPMs)
                                                                                             Measurements    (TPMs)

Figure 34.1 MOE, MOS, MOP, & TPM Relationships
394   Chapter 34   Operational Utility, Suitability, and Effectiveness

     The ORD (2) is oriented around a set of Operational Outcomes (6) required to achieve the
organizational mission success. Each operational outcome may consist of least one more measures
of effectiveness (MOEs) and/or at least one or more measures of suitability (MOSs). Collectively,
the MOEs and MOSs constitute what is referred to as Operational Effectiveness (7). Remember,
the focus up to this point has been on HOW the User intends to employ the system, product, or
service with MOE and MOSs as indicators of operational effectiveness and success. The challenge
for the Acquirer SEs is to translate the MOEs and MOSs into speciﬁcation requirements legally
sufﬁcient for procurement and development.
     The translation of ORD MOEs (8) and MOSs (9) into performance requirements is documented
in a System Requirements Document (SRD) (3). More speciﬁcally, each ORD MOE (8) and MOS
(9) is translated into a set of requirements, each of which is bounded by SRD measures of per-
formance (MOPs) (10).
     During the System Procurement Phase of the system/product life cycle, System Developer
Offerors analyze the SRD requirements. Typically, the Offerors are required to propose a System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) (4) that will serve as the technical basis for the system develop-
ment contract. Each Offeror reviews the SRD and its MOPs and formulates a proposed solution
consisting of the Contract Work Breakdown Structure (CWBS) (5), SPS Capability and Performance
Requirements (11), and a Multi-level System Architecture (14). SPS MOPs (12) bound each SPS
capability and are traceable to the SRD MOPs (10). The Offeror may be asked to select a list of
critical technical performance measures (TPMs) (13) to track from the list of SPS MOPs (12).
     When the contract begins, the SPS requirements are analyzed, allocated, and ﬂowed down to
multi-level development speciﬁcations that specify at least one or more the system architectural
elements (14) and their associated items or conﬁguration items (CIs). Each development speciﬁca-
tion consists of at least one more MOPs that are traceable back to the SPS MOPs.
     During the System Development Phase of the system/project life cycle, developers plot
analytically-based TPM predictions. The TPMs provide a basis for determine HOW WELL the
system architecture element designs will be able to achieve the development speciﬁcation and SPS
requirements. TPM status is typically reviewed at each of the major technical reviews—such as
SRR and SDR. When actual TPM performance data become available, either via prototypes or
demonstrations during integration and testing, that data will be plotted.

MOE and MOP Relationships
Figure 34.2 provides an example of MOE to MOP relationships. Here an airline’s Mission Phase
is partitioned into subphases of ﬂight. Each subphase has primary and supporting objectives to be
accomplished based on use cases. Each use case is translated into an operational capability require-
ment and referred to as a MOE. Each MOE is documented in the SPS and decomposed into MOPs
that are allocated to PRODUCTs, SUBSYSTEMs, and so forth, and then allocated and ﬂowed down
their respective item development speciﬁcations (IDSs).

Specifying MOEs in the System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
Given the example in Figure 34.2, how do we translate the MOPs into SPS requirements? Each
phase and subphase of operation has a speciﬁc measure of effectiveness (MOE) that must be
achieved. Thus we specify a summary requirement for each MOE in the SPS paragraph 3.1, System
Phases of Operation, as illustrated in Figure 34.3.
                                                  34.2 Overview of MOE, MOS, MOP, and TPM Relationships                               395

                                            Mission Subphases of Operation
  Loading          Taxi          Take-Off         Climbing          Cruise          Landing           Taxi          Unloading
   Phase           Phase          Phase            Phase            Phase            Phase            Phase          Phase




                                      Measures of Effectiveness (MOEs) (Note 1)



 MOE_1
 MOE_1           MOE_2
                 MOE_2            MOE_3
                                  MOE_3           MOE_4
                                                  MOE_4            MOE_5
                                                                   MOE_5            MOE_6
                                                                                    MOE_6           MOE_7
                                                                                                    MOE_7            MOE_8
                                                                                                                     MOE_8

    MOP_11
    MOP_11          MOP_21
                    MOP_21           MOP_31
                                     MOP_31          MOP_41
                                                     MOP_41           MOP_51
                                                                      MOP_51           MOP_61
                                                                                       MOP_61          MOP_71
                                                                                                       MOP_71           MOP_81
                                                                                                                        MOP_81

    MOP_12
    MOP_12          MOP_22
                    MOP_22           MOP_32
                                     MOP_32          MOP_42
                                                     MOP_42           MOP_52
                                                                      MOP_52           MOP_62
                                                                                       MOP_62           MOP_72
                                                                                                        MOP_72          MOP_82
                                                                                                                        MOP_82



    MOP_1_          MOP_2_           MOP_3_          MOP_4_           MOP_5_           MOP_6_           MOP_7_          MOP_8_


    Note 1: To keep the graphic simple, only one MOE is illustrated for each subphase.
            Subphases may have several objectives and supporting use cases, each of which is assessed by an MOE.
                                                                                                                                  2
Figure 34.2 Aircraft Example




 Phase of Operation                                                   System Performance Specification (SPS)
                                                                      3.0 Requirements
                                                                             Summary Objective Requirements (MOP-1 TO MOP-9)
                         Loading Phase
                                                                      3.1    Phases of Operation
                                                                             3.1.1 Loading Phase of Operations
                         Taxiing Phase                                             Capability Requirements (MOP 10 to MOP 19)

                                                                             3.1.2 Taxiing Phase of Operation
                       Taking-Off Phase                                            Capability Requirements (MOP-20 to MOP 29)

                                                                             3.1.3 Taking-Off Phase of Operation
                        Climbing Phase                                             Capability Requirements (MOP-30 to MOP 39)

                                                                             3.1.4 Climbing Phase of Operation
                         Cruising Phase                                            Capability Requirements (MOP-40 to MOP 49)

                                                                             3.1.5 Cruising Phase of Operation
                       Descending Phase                                            Capability Requirements (MOP-50 to MOP 59)

                                                                             3.1.6 Descending Phase of Operation
                         Landing Phase                                               Capability Requirements (MOP-60 to MOP 69)

                                                                             3.1.7 Landing Phase of Operation
                         Taxiing Phase*                                            Capability Requirements (MOP-60 to MOP 69)

                       Unloading Phase                                       3.1.8 Unloading Phase of Operation
                                                                                   Capability Requirements (MOP-70 to MOP 79)

                           Maintenance                                       3.1.9 Maintenance Phase of Operation
                             Phase                                                 Capability Requirements (MOP-80 to MOP 89)

                                                            Note: If capabilities are identical to the Taxi Phase that precedes
                                                            Take-Off, combine into one paragraph.
Figure 34.3 Contrasting Views of TPMs Mapping System Effectiveness to Operational Phase MOEs
396                               Chapter 34      Operational Utility, Suitability, and Effectiveness

34.3 PLOTTING TECHNICAL PERFORMANCE
MEASUREMENTS (TPMS)

Once the measures of performance (MOPs) for each item and conﬁguration item (CI) are estab-
lished, the next step is to track MOP values. This is accomplished a number of ways such as num-
erical value reporting. The best practice is to plot the values over time graphically as shown in
Figure 34.4.
     TPMs should be:
                                1. Tracked on a weekly basis by those accountable for implementation—such as by develop-
                                   ment teams or Integrated Product Teams (IPTs).
                                2. Reported at least monthly.
                                3. Reviewed at each major technical review.
    Regarding the last point, note how the development team or IPT at each major technical review
reported:
                                1. Here’s the level of performance we projected by analysis for TPM XYZ.
                                2. Here’s the level of performance we have achieved to date.
                                3. Here’s the level of performance we expect to achieve by the next review.
                                4. Here’s the corrective action plan for how we expect to align today’s level of performance
                                   with projected performance and acceptable control limits.
Note also how the TPM values consist of analytical projections through CDR with a level of risk
associated with achievement. Between CDR and TRR the physical components become available
for system integration and test. As such, actual values are measured and become the basis for ﬁnal
TPM tracking.




                                              = Analytical Prediction             = Actual, Unverified Measurement
                               MOP
                                              = Current Analysis                  = Actual, Verified Measurement
                               110.0
                                                                             Risk Area (Unacceptable)
Required Weight TPM (pounds)




                               108.0                                    5
                                                                                  107.5
                                                                                                                                                        +3s
                                                      105.5                                        Upper (+3s) Requirement Limit
                               106.0             3
                                 1                                                                                                    9            10
                                                                              4                                        8                  104.5
                                                                                                                              104.0
                                         105.0           2                                                103.0
                               104.0
                                                      Mean Budgeted Requirement Value
                                                                                                              7
                               102.0                                                               6
                                                                                                          102.0

                                                                              Lower (–3s) Requirement Limit
                               100.0
                                                                            Risk Area (Design Margin)                                                   –3s

                                98.0
                                                                            Risk Area (Unacceptable)

                                96.0
                                     CA SRR          SDR                    PDR                        CDR              TRR           SVT         SVR
Figure 34.4 Plotting Technical Performance Measurements (TPMs)
                                                                        34.4 TPM Challenges     397

     Recognize that system component performance varies due to mass properties, manufacturing
tolerances, and so forth. This is why the nominal TPM value represents the mean of a Normal Dis-
tribution. The challenge for SEs is, for a given TPM value: What are the allowable upper and lower
control limits for a given entity—PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM—that do not diminish overall system
performance? Based on the results of this decision, +3s and -3s or other applicable thresholds are
established for triggering multi-level risk items and mitigation plans. Within each +3s and -3s
threshold, design safety margins may be established. To facilitate viewing, the design margins zones
should be YELLOW; anything outside the +3s and -3s thresholds should be RED.

Author’s Note 34.3 Some requirements may only have single “. . . shall not exceed . . .” or
“. . . shall not be less than . . .” thresholds. As such, the TPM plot should so reﬂect these UPPER
or LOWER control limits.

TPMs along the development path pose potential risks, especially if the development team or IPT
is unable to achieve the analytical projections. When this occurs, each TPM should be required to
have risk thresholds that trigger risk items for tracking. If the risk becomes signiﬁcant, risk item
mitigation plans may be required to provide a risk proﬁle for reducing the risk over time and bring
it in line with speciﬁcation requirements. The Program’s risk management plan should deﬁnitize
this process and threshold criteria for triggering risk item for tracking and mitigation plans.

Selecting TPMs
TPMs can easily become a very time-consuming activity, especially for reporting purposes. Obvi-
ously, every MOP in a speciﬁcation CANNOT be tracked. So you need to select those of critical
importance. How is this accomplished?
     The Lead SE and SEIT should determine those critical SYSTEM level MOEs and MOPs that
have a major impact on achieving mission and system objectives. Then, collaborate with the respec-
tive teams to select four to six TPMs from each development speciﬁcation that have traceability to
SPS level MOEs.


34.4 TPM CHALLENGES

TPM tracking involves several challenges. Let’s explore a few.

Challenge 1: Bureaucratic Metrics Tracking
TPMs have two levels of criticality. First, TPMs serve as visual indicators to alert Integrated
Products Teams (IPTs) or developers to potential technical trouble. IPT Leads need to clearly
understand this. Otherwise, the effort is perceived as nothing but bureaucratic metrics tracking
performed to impress the Acquirer. Second, as a Lead SE, Project Engineer, or Technical Director,
you need early indicators that to provide a level of conﬁdence that the system is going to per-
form as speciﬁed and designed. If not, you need to know sufﬁciently in advance to take corrective
action.

Challenge 2: Select TPMs Wisely
IPTs often randomly select a few TPMs to satisfy the metrics-tracking task. Selecting the “easiest
to achieve” TPMs causes you to believe your own success rhetoric. Select the most difﬁcult, poten-
tial SHOWSTOPPER TPMs to make sure the most critical risk areas stay fully addressed through
proactive tracking.
398    Chapter 34   Operational Utility, Suitability, and Effectiveness

Challenge 3: Withholding Actual TPM Data
If a TPM becomes a risk item, IPT Leads often continue to plot analytical predictions to avoid the
realities of actual data that pose political and technical risks. Don’t play games! Your obligation
as an SE is to report factual, existing data. If you have political problems, deal with the matter in
other ways. Remember, if you are not meeting performance levels now and you choose to ignore
potentially major problems, wait until you attempt to explain those problems to technical, program,
and executive management when the cost to correct is very expensive.
     Conversely, program management should recognize objective reporting as constructive behav-
ior. Avoid “punishing the messenger.” Focus on constructive techical solutions that lead to success.
Remember-designer/developer success leads to program management success.

Challenge 4: TPM “Shelf Life”
TPMs, especially lower level ones, have a shelf life. During design and early in the system inte-
gration, test, and evaluation phase (SITE), low-level TPMs are critical indicators of performance
that may affect overall system performance and effectiveness. Once a TPM requirement has been
veriﬁed, the necessity to TRACK the TPM may be pointless, unless something fails within the
system. Remember, lower level MOPs were derived from higher level MOPs. Once a lower level
MOP has been veriﬁed and its conﬁguration item (CI) or items have been integrated into the next
higher level, which has its own TPM, you should not continue to track the MOP. There may be
exceptions; use informed judgment.

Challenge 5: TPM Reporting
Your contract should specify WHAT TPMs the Acquirer requires you to report. There may be other
TPMs that you need to track internally. Depending on the relationship and maturity of the Acquirer
organization, some System Developers open all TPMs for review. Exercise caution when doing
this. Some Acquirer organizations are more mature than others in treating the OPENNESS with
admiration.

A Word of Caution Make sure your openness about TPMs doesn’t become a basis for those
with political agendas to make major issues out of minor TPM excursions. Recognize political
potholes!

34.5 Guiding Principles

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern operational utility, suitability, and effectiveness practices.

Principle 34.1 Quantify each measure of effectiveness or suitability (MOE/MOS) with at least
one or more measures of performance (MOPs).

Pricipal 34.2 Select TPMs for a speciﬁc item that are key contributors and performance affecters
for the next higher level system—SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, and so forth.

34.6 SUMMARY

As an SE you need to understand how system effectiveness is determined and decomposed into measures of
effectiveness (MOEs) and measures of suitability (MOSs), each with measures of performance (MOPs) that
are documented in various requirements documents. We addressed how TPMs are used to track planned versus
                                                                                      Additional Reading       399

actual MOP TPM values and the importance of thresholds for triggering risk items and associated risk miti-
gation plan (RMP).
     In closing, people will often state that TPMs are too laborious to perform and track. If this is the case,
then how can you and your organization deliver a system, product, or service that meets the User’s opera-
tional needs without performing the practice?

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Based on the system’s use cases, identify the system’s MOEs.
   (b) Based on the system’s use cases, identify the system’s MOSs.
   (c) For each MOE and MOS, identify derived requirements.
   (d) For each requirement, identify MOPs.
   (e) For TPM tracking purposes, which MOPs would you track and provide supporting rationale?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media.
   (a) What minimum requirements does the organization impose for TPM tracking?
   (b) What tools and methods are recommended for tracking TPMs?
   (c) What TPM training does the organization provide and who is accountable?
2. Identify a small, a medium, and a large contract program within your organization. Interview program per-
   sonnel concerning TPMs.
   (a) Does the Contract Statement of Work (CSOW) require TPM tracking?
   (b) What requirements does the CSOW impose on TPM reporting?
   (c) How did the program select TPMs?
   (d) How were TPMs linked to risk tracking?
   (e) What lessons did the program learn from TPMs?

REFERENCES

DoD 5000.59-M. 1998. DoD Modeling and Simulation             Defense Acquisition University Press. Ft. Belvoir,
  (M&S) Glossary. Washington, DC: Department of              VA.
  Defense (DoD).                                          International Council on System Engineering (INCOSE).
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998.             2000. INCOSE System Engineering Handbook, Version
  DSMC Test and Evaluation. Management Guide, 3rd ed.        2.0. Seattle, WA.
  Defense Acquisition Press. Fr. Belvoir, VA.             MIL-STD-499B (canceled DRAFT). Systems Engineering.
Defense Systems Management College. 2001. Glossary:          Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
  Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th ed.


ADDITIONAL READING
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.          IEEE Std. 1220-1998. 1998. IEEE Standard for Application
  Systems Engineering Fundamentals. Defense Acquisition     and Management of the Systems Engineering Process.
  University Press Fr. Belvoir, VA.                         Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).
                                                            New York, NY.
Chapter              35

      System Design Objectives

35.1 INTRODUCTION

When SEs engineer systems, the general mindset is to propose and develop solutions that solve
User solution spaces within problem spaces. The problem with this mindset is that it lacks a central
focal point that captures WHAT the User needs or seeks. For example: Is the User concerned about
Growth? Reliability? Manueverability? And so forth? If you do not understand: 1) WHAT the User
needs and 2) WHAT priorities they place on those needs, you are just going through a “check-the-
box” exercise. So, how do SEs AVOID this mindset?
    This section introduces design objectives that are often key drivers in system development.
These objectives form the basis for proposal and system development activities responding to
Acquirer formal solicitations and contracts. The broad, far-reaching ramiﬁcations of technical
decisions made in support of these objectives clearly focuses on the need to integrate subject
matter experts (SMEs), as key members of Integrated Product Teams (IPTs), to support system
development.
    Our discussions in this section identify and summarize each of these objectives. From a User’s
perspective, the system design solution exempliﬁes one or more of these objectives. As such, these
objectives should be highlighted as key themes in a formal request for proposal solicitations. In
response, Offerors should highlight their key features and capabilities of their proposed system
solution coupled with their experience in developing comparable solutions for other Users.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
What are the design ramiﬁcations of the following objectives?
       1. Design to value (DTV)
       2. Design to cost (DTC)
       3. Design for usability
       4. Design for single-use/multi-use applications
       5. Design for comfort
       6. Design for interoperability
       7. Design for transportability
       8. Design for mobility
       9. Design for maneuverability
      10. Design for portability


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

400
                                                                          35.1 Introduction   401

  11. Design for growth and expansion
  12. Design for reliability
  13. Design for availability
  14. Design for producibility
  15. Design for mission support
  16. Design for deployment
  17. Design for training
  18. Design for vulnerability
  19. Design for lethality
  20. Design for survivability
  21. Design for efﬁciency
  22. Design for effectiveness
  23. Design for reconﬁgurability
  24. Design for integration, test, and evaluation
  25. Design for veriﬁcation
  26. Design for maintainability
  27. Design for disposal
  28. Design for security and protection
  29. Design for safety

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Availability A measure of the degree to which an item is in an operable and committable
    state at the start of a mission when the mission is called for at an unknown (random) time.
    (The item’s state at start of a mission includes the combined effects of the readiness-related
    system R&M (Reliability & Maintainability) parameters, but excludes mission time.)
    (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G, Glossary, p. G-2)
  • Efﬁciency “The degree to which a system or component performs its designated functions
    with minimum consumption of resources.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
  • Maintainability “The ability of an item to be retained in, or restored to, a speciﬁed condi-
    tion when maintenance is performed by personnel having speciﬁed skill levels, using pre-
    scribed procedures and resources, at each prescribed level of maintenance and repair.”
    (Source: DoD Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
  • Portability (1) Hardware: The relative ease of moving a piece of EQUIPMENT under
    speciﬁc conditions from one location to another. (2) Software: The relative ease of moving
402     Chapter 35   System Design Objectives

        a computer software conﬁguration item (CSCI) from one type of computer platform to
        another.
      • Producibility “The relative ease of manufacturing an item or system. This relative ease is
        governed by the characteristics and features of a design that enables economical fabrication,
        assembly, inspection, and testing using available manufacturing techniques.” (Source: DoD
        Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
      • Reconﬁgurability The ability of a system, product, or service conﬁguration to be modiﬁed
        manually or automatically to support mission objectives.
      • Reliability “The ability of a system and its parts to perform its mission of a speciﬁed
        duration under speciﬁc operating conditions without failure, degradation, or demand on the
        support system.” (Source: Adapted from DoD Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and
        Terms)
      • Serviceability “A measure of the degree to which servicing of an item will be accomplished
        within a given time under speciﬁed conditions.” (Source: DoD Glossary: Defense Acquisi-
        tion Acronyms and Terms)
      • Simplicity “The degree to which a system or component has a design and implementation
        that is straightforward and easy to understand.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Supportability “The degree of ease to which system design characteristics and planned
        logistic resources, including the logistic support (LS) elements, allow for the meeting of
        system availability and wartime utilization requirements.” (Source: DoD Glossary: Defense
        Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
      • Survivability “The capability of a system and its crew, if applicable, to avoid or withstand
        a hostile Man-Made, Natural, and Induced OPERATING ENVIRONMENT without suffer-
        ing an abortive impairment of its ability to accomplish its designated mission.” (Adapted
        from DoD Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
      • Susceptibility “The degree to which a device, equipment, or weapon system is open to
        effective attack due to one or more inherent weaknesses. Susceptibility is a function of oper-
        ational tactics, countermeasures, probability of enemy ﬁelding a threat, etc. Susceptibility is
        considered a subset of survivability.” (Source: DoD Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms
        and Terms)
      • Sustainability “Sustainment includes, but is not limited to, plans and activities related to
        supply, maintenance, transportation, sustaining engineering, data management, conﬁguration
        management, manpower, training, safety, and health. This work effort overlaps the Full Rate
        Production and Deployment work effort of the Production and Deployment phase. See also
        Logistics Support and Logistics Support Elements.” (Source: DoD Glossary: Defense Acqui-
        sition Acronyms and Terms)
      • System Safety “The application of engineering and management principles, criteria, and
        techniques to optimize safety within the constraints of operational effectiveness, time, and
        cost throughout all phases of the system life cycle.” (Source: MIL-STD-882D System Safety,
        para. 3.13, p. 2)
      • System Security The level of protection that characterizes a system, product, or service’s
        ability to reject intrusion and access by external threats or unauthorized systems.
      • Testability “The degree to which a requirement is stated in terms that permits establishment
        of test criteria and performance of tests to determine whether those criteria have been met.”
        (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
                                             35.2 Commonly Applied System Design Objectives      403

    • Transportability “The capability of materiel to be moved by towing, self-propulsion, or
      carrier through any means, such as railways, highways, waterways, pipelines, oceans, and
      airways. (Full consideration of available and projected transportation assets, mobility plans
      and schedules, and the impact of system equipment and support items on the strategic
      mobility of operating military forces is required to achieve this capability.)” (Source: DSMC
      Deﬁnition of Terms)
    • Usability “The ease with which a user can learn to operate, prepare inputs for, and inter-
      pret outputs of a system or component.” (Source: IEEE Std. 610.12-1990)
    • Vulnerability “The characteristics of a system that cause it to suffer a deﬁnite degradation
      (loss or reduction of capability to perform the designated mission) as a result of having been
      subjected to a certain (deﬁned) level of effects in an unnatural [human-made] hostile envi-
      ronment. Vulnerability is considered a subset of survivability.” (Source: DoD Glossary:
      Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)


35.2 COMMONLY APPLIED SYSTEM DESIGN OBJECTIVES

The Introduction identiﬁed a list of objectives that inﬂuence system design decisions. The discus-
sions that follow scope the context of each objective.

Author’s Note 35.1 Two key points: First, speciﬁcations presumably document all of the
Acquirer’s key detail requirements. You can reach a point where you “can’t see the forest for the
trees,” as such immersion in the details tend to obscure WHAT is important to the User. So, once
you read a speciﬁcation, talk with the User via Acquirer contracting protocol to determine the key
objectives that matter most and affect System Developer decision making. System design objectives
provide those proverbial “forest” level insights. Second, COLLABORATE with the User to prior-
itize the objectives.


Design-for-Value (DTV) Objective
Users and Acquirers with limited budgets are often challenged to obtain the most system capabil-
ities and performance for their budget. The Design-for-Value (DTV) objective is a critical issue for
these customers. How do you deﬁne DTV?
    1. Determine WHAT the User needs.
    2. Prioritize those needs in terms of relative importance.
    3. Map those needs to the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements.
You can identify a single solution or a variety of solutions and offer them as the basis of Cost as
an Independent Variable (CAIV). Methods such as Quality Function Deployment (QFD) can be
also used to support value-oriented decisions.


Design-to-Cost (DTC) Objective
Users expect some systems to have budgetary “per unit cost” limit especially mass-produced
systems and products. Where this is the case, the Design-to-Cost (DTC) objective becomes a crit-
ical driver in the engineering of systems. Once the DTC is established at the SYSTEM Level, design
cost constraints are allocated and ﬂowed down through all system levels of abstraction to the PART
level. This is a highly iterative top-down/bottom-up/left-right/right-left process with reﬁnements of
404     Chapter 35   System Design Objectives

solutions and cost allocations until all entity technical design requirements, cost constraints, and
risks are “in balance.”

Design-for-Usability Objective
Durable systems and products require a high usability. Usability, as viewed by the User, is often
vague and ambiguous. Classic descriptions include user friendly interfaces . . . , easy to use . . . ,
easy to understand . . . , easy to control . . . , easy to drive over rough terrain . . . , easy to lift . . . ,
easy to carry . . . , and so forth. From an SE perspective, it is critical that the Design-for-Usability
objective be accurately and precisely bounded in speciﬁcation requirements.
    Rapid prototypes may need to be developed to present to Users for usability evaluation and
constructive feedback. User decisions must then be captured as graphical displays or text require-
ments. Application examples include:
      1. Special considerations for the physically challenged.
      2. Special equipment for ingress and egress from a vehicle.

Design-for-Single-use/Multi-use Applications Objective
Users acquire most systems and products for multi-use applications.
     Multi-use systems and products must be designed for durability and maintenance over a spec-
iﬁed number of usage cycles. The Design-for-Multi-use Applications objective requires particular
attention in areas such as modularity and interchangeability. In contrast, single-use applications
may require a focus on design and construction.

Design-for-Comfort Objective
Vehicular systems developed for Users such as operators and passengers for travel purposes over
long periods of time require a level of comfort to minimize fatigue, boredom, and so on. As in the
Design-for-Usability objective, requirements must be explicitly identiﬁed, scoped, and bounded.
The Design-for-Comfort objective is a key driver in the development of systems such as homes,
vehicles, spacecraft, and ofﬁces.

Design-for-Interoperability Objective
Systems and products that must be interoperable with other systems and products must have a
Design-for-Interoperability objective. If the Design-for-Interoperability objective is selected, strict
interface design standards and protocols must be established and controlled.

Design-for-Transportability Objective
Vehicle systems, military troops, et al require design considerations based on a Design-for-
Transportability objective. This requires understanding WHO/WHAT is to be transported, WHAT
space and carrying capacity is required, HOW the cargo is to be secured, WHO requires WHAT
access to the cargo and WHEN, WHAT protection mechanisms are required from environmental
and human-made system threats.

Design-for-Mobility Objective
Vehicle systems and military troops are Users that require design considerations based on a Design-
for-Mobility objective. The design considerations must include HOW the system will be secured
for mobility, physically moved, HOW often, and HOW the system is to be secured when it reaches
its destination.
                                             35.2 Commonly Applied System Design Objectives     405

Design-for-Maneuverability Objective
Systems often require the capability to navigate through their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. This
requires steering mechanisms that enable the operators to physically or remotely move the vehicle
from one location, change orientation relative to a frame of reference, or make directional vector
headed changes.

Design-for-Portability Objective
Some systems and products must be developed with a Design-for-Portability objective. Portabil-
ity concerns two key contexts: 1) physical properties and 2) software. Portability in one context
refers to physical properties of a system or product—such as the acceptable size and weight that a
human can lift, move, or transport. Portability in a software context refers to the ability to inte-
grate and execute computer software conﬁguration items (CSCIs) on various types of computer
systems with minimal adaption.

Design-for-Growth and Expansion Objective
Systems, products, and services often require the capability to be expanded to accommodate future
upgrades. This may require additional processing or propulsion power, ﬂexibility to increase storage
capacity of expendables or consumables, increased data communications ports or bandwidth, or
organizational or geographical expansion.

Design-for-Reliability Objective
Every system, product, and service has an intrinsic value to Users and stakeholders in being able
to support organizational missions and objectives. Depending on the stakes and OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT, mission and system reliability relative to achieving mission success may be a
critical issue.

Design-for-Availability Objective
The ﬁrst criterion for systems, products, and services success is system readiness to perform the
mission when called upon. Some systems are required to be available on demand.
     Establish a Design-for-Availability objective commensurate with the available budget and
mission. This includes implementation of daily operational readiness tests (DORTs), built-in tests
(BITs), built-in test equipment (BITE), indicators, and display meters. These activities and design
considerations can provide early indications of potential problem areas and thus enable corrective
action to be taken in advance of mission needs.

Design-for-Producibility Objective
Systems and products planned for production must be producible in manner that:
    1. Has acceptable risk.
    2. Repeatable and predictable processes and methods.
    3. Can be produced within budgets and schedules at a reasonable proﬁt.
Engineering development ﬁrst articles are often functional demonstrators that may include lesser
quality materials, improvised components, and “add-on” instrumentation to support performance
veriﬁcation. Production items may not require these additional items or weight that limit perform-
ance and increase cost. A Design-for-Producibility objective often drives a search for alternative
materials and processes to reduce cost and risk and improve or maintain system performance.
406    Chapter 35   System Design Objectives

Design-for-Mission Support Objective
Multi-use applications require continuing support throughout their planned lifecycle. A Design-
for-Mission Support objective ensures that appropriate design considerations are given to replen-
ishment of expendables and consumables and to corrective and preventive maintenance.
    Thus, system support concepts are critical for establishing Design-for-Mission Support
requirements.

Design-for-Deployment Objective
Many systems, products, and services require a Design-for-Deployment objective to support deploy-
ment or shipment to duty station mission areas. Design considerations include: tie-down chains,
anchors, accelerometer sensor instrumentation packages, controlled environmental atmospheres,
and shock and vibration prooﬁng. Additionally, enroute deployment constraints such as bridge
heights and maximum weights, road grades, and hazardous waste routes constraints must be fac-
tored into the decisions.

Design-for-Training Objective
Most systems and products require some form of Design-for-Training objective. Where this is
the case, TRAINING is a critical operational issue (COI), not only for the students but also for
the instructors, general public, and environment. Additionally, scoring and debriefs of training
sessions are important. Therefore, the Training Concept becomes a key input into system and
product requirements. In some cases systems and products are modiﬁed to include instructor
controls.

Design-for-Vulnerability Objective
Systems that operate in hostile threat environments or can be misused or abused by the operator(s)
should have a Design-for-Vulnerability objective. This applies to buildings, safes, vehicles, com-
puters, and electrical circuits.
    When a system, product, or service is anticipated to be vulnerable to OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT threats, mission analysis and use case analysis should identify the threats, threat sce-
narios, and prioritize design capabilities to resist or minimize the effects of those threats. This area
exempliﬁes our discussion of generalized and specialized solutions covered in Part I, System Inter-
faces. The generalized solution acknowledges the interaction; the specialized solution incorporates
key capabilities or features to protect the system and its operators from external threats.

Design-for-Lethality Objective
Some systems such as munitions and missiles are intended to penetrate vulnerable areas and
DESTROY mechanisms that enable the targeted system to survive. The Design-for-Lethality objec-
tive focuses on the system design and material characteristics that enable a system to achieve this
objective.

Design-for-Survivability Objective
Some systems and products are required to operate in harsh, hostile environments. They must be
capable of surviving to complete the mission and as applicable, return safely. Examples include:
thermal insulation, layers of armor, elimination of single points of fallure (SPF), and so forth.
Systems such as these require a Design-for-Survivability objective.
                                              35.2 Commonly Applied System Design Objectives       407

Design-for-Efﬁciency
Some systems and products require focused consideration on efﬁcient utilization of resources. In
these cases a Design-for-Efﬁciency objective must be established.

Design-for-Effectiveness
One of the key contributors to User satisfaction is a system, product, or service’s degree of
effectiveness. Did the missile hit and destroy the target? Does the ﬂight simulator improve pilot
effectiveness? Establish Design-for-Effectiveness objectives where the effectiveness is the key
determinate for mission success.

Design-for-Reconﬁgurability
Some systems and products are designed to accommodate a variety of missions as well as a quick
turnaround between missions. Therefore, some may have to be reconﬁgurable within a speciﬁed
time frame.

Design-for-Integration, Test, and Evaluation Objective
Modular system and products that undergo multiple levels of integration and test require a Design-
for-Integration, Test, and Evaluation objective. Ideally, you would isolate each conﬁguration item
(CI) and test it with actual, simulated, stimulated, or emulated interfaces. If the system or product
is to be integrated at various facilities, special interface considerations should be given to physical
constraints and equipment, and the tools available should be investigated.
     Finally, EQUIPMENT-based systems and products must be designed to facilitate multi-level
system veriﬁcation and validation. This requires the incorporation of temporary or permanent test
points and access ports for calibration and alignments among other things.

Design-for-Veriﬁcation Objective
Once the system or product is integrated, tested, and ready to be veriﬁed, designers must consider
HOW the item will be veriﬁed. Some requirements can be physically veriﬁed; other requirements
may not. Establish a Design-for-Veriﬁcation objective to ensure all data required for veriﬁcation
are accessible and can be easily measured.

Design-for-Maintainability Objective
Single-use, multi-use, and multi-purpose systems require some form of Design-for-Maintainability
objective. This may include preventive maintenance, corrective maintenance, calibration, upgrades,
and refurbishment. Key design considerations include maintenance operator access and clearances
for hands, arms, tools, and equipment. Additional considerations include the availability of elec-
trical power, need for batteries, or electrical generators, external air sources for aircraft while on
the ground, and so on. These considerations emphasize the need for a Maintenance Concept to
provide a framework for deriving Design-for-Maintainability requirements.

Design-for-Disposal Objective
Systems and products that employ nuclear, biological, or chemical (NBC) materials and ultimately
wear out, become exhausted, damaged, or destroyed intentionally or by accident. In any case, the
system or product requires a Design-for-Disposal objective. This includes mechanisms for moni-
toring and removal of hazardous materials such as NBC substances or traces. For items that can
408    Chapter 35    System Design Objectives

be reclaimed and recycled, special tools and equipment—categorized as peculiar support equip-
ment (PSE)—may be required.

Design-for-Security-and-Protection Objective
Various systems and products require a Design-for-Security-and-Protection objective that limits
SYSTEM or product access to only authorized individuals or organizations. Design considerations
include layers of armor, Internet ﬁrewalls, and authorized accounts and passwords.

Design-for-Safety Objective
The application of SE requires strict adherence to laws, regulations, and engineering principles and
practices that promote the safety of system and product stakeholders—the operators, maintainers,
general public, personal property, and environment. The Design-for-Safety objective focuses on
ensuring that systems, products, and services are safe to deploy, operate, maintain, and dispose of.
This includes not only the physical product but also establishing training and instructional proce-
dures, cautionary warnings and notices, and potential consequences for violation.

Quality Function Deployment (QFD)
One method for sorting out customer needs and priority values is Quality Function Deploy-
ment (QFD). Where time permits, you are encouraged to consider and investigate QFD as part of
your analysis.


35.3 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system design objectives practices.

Principle 35.1 Every User has key Operations and Support (O&S) Phase objectives that a
SYSTEM/entity design must satisfy; collaborate with Users to understand their needs and priori-
tize them.


35.4 SUMMARY

Our discussions in this chapter highlighted the need to establish system design objectives practices to ensure
that User operational needs are met. These objectives form the basis for developing Mission Needs Statements
(MNSs), Statements of Objectives (SOOs), Operational Requirements Document (ORD), System Requirements
Documents (SRDs), and System Performance Speciﬁcations (SPS).


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. A User has employed your services to recommend the driving design “to/for” objectives for
   the selected system or product.
   (a) What are the top three or ﬁve objectives you would recommend?
   (b) How would you prioritize each objective?
                                                                                                  References     409

   (c) Prepare a statement for a formal Request for Proposal (RFP) that expresses each objective and its
       relative priority.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a contract program in your organization.
   (a) What are the User’s objectives for the system, product, or service?
   (b) How were the objectives expressed? RFP? Contract?
   (c) What are the objectives?
   (d) How is the program implementing the objectives?
   (e) What lessons has the program learned from this exercise?


REFERENCES
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of          and Terms, 10th ed. Defense Acquisition University
  Software Engineering Terminology. Institute of Electrical    Press.
  and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY.              MIL-STD-882D. 2000. Standard Practice for System Safety.
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) Ft. Belvoir.         Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
  VA. 2001. Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms
Chapter              36

      System Architecture Development

36.1 INTRODUCTION

All human-made and living systems, by deﬁnition, are composed of interacting elements. Each
element has its own unique identity, capabilities, and characteristics, integrated into a purposeful
framework speciﬁcally arranged to accomplish a function or mission. The integrated, multi-level
framework of elements and combinations of elements represent the SYSTEM’s architectural con-
ﬁguration or simply architecture.
     This chapter explores the development of system architectures. As discussed in Part I on
System Analysis Concepts, the system architecture is an aggregate abstraction consisting of four
classes of architectures: 1) a requirements architecture, 2) an operations architecture, 3) a behav-
ioral architecture, and 4) a physical architecture.
     Our discussions in this chapter establish the foundation for developing a system architecture.
Since the fundamental concepts of the architectural frameworks were covered in Part I on System
Architecture Concepts, this chapter focuses attention on physical conﬁguration unique topics.
Topics include centralized, decentralized, and distributed processing; fault tolerant architectural
design; environmental, safety, and health (ES&H) considerations, ﬁre detection and suppression;
and security and protection.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What is a system architecture?
       2. What are the key attributes of an architecture?
       3. What are the primary architectural views of a system?
       4. Deﬁne the semantics of architectures.
       5. What is centralized control processing architecture?
       6. What is decentralized control processing architecture?
       7. What is distributed processing architecture?
       8. What is a fault tolerant architectural design?
       9. What are some architectural power system considerations?
      10. What are some architectural environmental, safety, and health (ES&H) considerations?
      11. What are some ﬁre detection and suppression architectural conﬁguration considerations?
      12. What are some security and protection architectural considerations?



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

410
                                                                36.2 What Is an Architecture?   411

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Architect (System) The person, team, or organization responsible for innovating and cre-
      ating a system conﬁguration that provides the best solution to User expectations and a set
      of requirements within technical, cost, schedule, technology, and support constraints.
    • Architecting “The activities of deﬁning, documenting, maintaining, improving, and
      certifying proper implementation of an architecture.” (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-2000, para.
      3.3, p. 3)
    • Architectural Description (AD) “A collection of products to document an architecture.”
      (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-2000, para. 3.4, p. 3)
    • Architecture A graphical model or representation, such as an interpretative artistic render-
      ing, a technical drawing, or a sketch, of a speciﬁc view of a system that communicates the
      form, ﬁt, or function of a SYSTEM, its operational elements, and interfaces as envisioned
      by its developer.
    • Centralized Architecture An architecture that “uses a central location for the execution of
      the transformation and control functions of a system.” (Source: Buede 2000, p. 231)
    • Concerns “Those interests which pertain to the system’s development, its operation or any
      other aspects that are critical or otherwise important to one or more stakeholders. Concerns
      include system considerations such as performance, reliability, security, distribution, and
      evolvability.” (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-2000, para. 4.1, p. 4)
    • Decentralized Architecture An architecture characterized by “multiple, speciﬁc locations
      at which the same or similar transformational or control functions are performed.” (Source:
      Buede, 2000, p. 231)
    • Open System Architecture “A logical, physical structure implemented via well deﬁned,
      widely used, publicly-maintained, non-proprietary speciﬁcations for interfaces, services, and
      supporting formats to accomplish system functionality, thereby enabling the use of properly
      engineered components across a wide range of systems with minimal changes.” (Source:
      Former MIL-STD-499, Appendix A, Glossary, p. 37)
    • Open Systems Environment (OSE) “A comprehensive set of interfaces, services and sup-
      porting formats, plus aspects of interoperability of application, as speciﬁed by information
      technology standards and proﬁles. An OSE enables information systems to be developed,
      operated and maintained independent of application speciﬁc technical solutions or vendor
      products.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC, Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and
      Terms)
    • View “A representation of a whole system from the perspective of a related set of concerns.”
      (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-2000, para. 3.9, p. 3)
    • Viewpoint “A speciﬁcation of the conventions for constructing and using a view. A pattern
      or template from which to develop individual views by establishing the purposes and audi-
      ence for a view and the techniques for its creation and analysis.” (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-
      2000, para. 3.10, p. 3)


36.2 WHAT IS AN ARCHITECTURE?

IEEE Std. 1471-2000 (para. 3.5, p. 3) deﬁnes an architecture as “The fundamental organization of
a system embodied in its components, their relationships to each other, and to the environment, and
the principles guiding its design and evolution.”
412   Chapter 36   System Architecture Development

      Through our educational systems, most people associate architecture with beautiful classical
buildings with ornamented façades that are tracable back to the Greek and Roman antiquity. What is
missing from the educational paradigm is a universal deﬁnition that encompasses building architec-
tures, systems, products, and services. Using the IEEE deﬁnition as a backdrop, if you analyze the
educational paradigm of architecture, you soon discover that architecture represents the totality of
three elements common to systems, products, and services. These elements are form, ﬁt, and function.
      An architecture exposes key features of a system, product, or service and expressively com-
municates via interpretative artistic renderings or graphics HOW those features interrelate within
the overall framework and its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Note the term “exposes.” However,
just because an architectural element or object is visually exposed DOES NOT infer frequency of
usage.
      System, product, or service architectures depict the summation of a system’s entities and capa-
bilities levels of abstration that support all phases of deployment, operations, and support. Some
entities may be an integral part of a system’s phases of operation 100% of the time; other entities
may be only used 1% of the time. Depending on the mission or system application, the system,
product, or service architecture can be abstracted to expose only those capabilities unique to the
mission.

System Architects
In most professional domains, the system architect is expected to possess licensed credentials,
preferably by some form of certiﬁcation accorded by a state of residency. Part of this process is to
demonstrate to decision authorities that the system architect has the experience, knowledge, and
understanding of artistic, mathematical, and scientiﬁc principles to translate a User’s vision into a
system, product, or service within the constraints of performance standards, laws, and regulations
established by society.
     As in the case of the educational architecture paradigm above, there is a paradigm for system
architects. Whereas most people think of architects as being individuals, teams and organizations
may be referred to as architects.


Formulating the System Architecture
System architecting requires years of experience in application-dependent knowledge and technol-
ogy. Due to the diversity of systems, product, and services, there are no speciﬁc ways to formulate
an architecture. There are guidelines that, in combination with experience, enable us to formulate
system, product, or service architectures.
     In recent years the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) issued IEEE
Standard-1471-2000, IEEE Recommended Practice for Architectural Description of Software-
Intensive Systems. IEEE-Std-1471-2000 established as a conceptual framework for developing
architectural descriptions of software intensive systems.
     IEEE 1471-2000 (para. 1.1, p. 1) deﬁnes software intensive systems as those “. . . where software
contributes essential inﬂuences to the design, construction, deployment, and evolution of the system
as a whole.” Although IEEE 1471 is a software standard, the conceptual framework presented is
equally applicable to all types of systems—electrical, electronic, mechanical, optical, and so forth.
Figure 36.1 illustrates the standard’s framework.
     IEEE 1471 provides a key construct that exposes several key terms that serve as the frame-
work for formulating a system, product, or service architecture. Speciﬁcally the terms are: archi-
tectural description, viewpoints, views, and concerns.
                                                                                                                36.2 What Is an Architecture?        413


                                            Mission

                                 fulfills 1..*



                         influences                                          has an
     Environment                            System                                             Architecture
                     inhibits


                                                                                      described by
                                                                                                 1
                    is important to                has 1..*
                                                               identifies
                               1..*                            1..*                            Architecture       provides
                                         Stakeholder                                                                                     Rationale
                                                                                               Description            participates
                                                                                                                           in
                                 is addressed to
                                            1..*
     has           identifies                                                                    organized by
                                                                   selects
     1..*          1..*                                                                          1..*
                                                                   1..*
                                                              conforms to
  Concern                                 Viewpoint                                     View
                used to
                cover 1..*
                                                                             participates in
                                                                                        1..*
                                  has source                                                                                     aggregates
                                  0..1                                                                                                 1..*
                                           Library                               establishes methods for              Model
                                          Viewpoint                                                 1..*

Figure 36.1 IEEE-Std-1471-2000 Architectural Description
Source: IEEE-Std-1471-2000 Figure 1: “Conceptual Model of Architectural Description,” p. 5. Reprinted with permission
of IEEE.



     • Architectural Description “An architectural description selects one or more viewpoints
       for use. The selection of viewpoints typically will be based on consideration of the stake-
       holders to whom the AD is addressed and their concerns.” (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-2000,
       para. 4.1, p. 4)
     • Viewpoint “A viewpoint establishes the conventions by which a view is created, depicted
       and analyzed. In this way, a view conforms to a viewpoint. The viewpoint determines the
       languages (including notations, model, or product types) to be used to describe the view, and
       any associated modeling methods or analysis techniques to be applied to these representa-
       tions of the view. These languages and techniques are used to yield results relevant to the
       concerns addressed by the viewpoint.” (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-2000, para. 4.1, p. 4)
     • View “A view may consist of one or more architectural models. Each such architectural
       model is developed using the methods established by its associated architectural viewpoint.
       An architectural model may participate in more than one view.” (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-
       2000, para. 4.1, p. 4)
     • Concerns “Those interests which pertain to the system’s development, its operation or any
       other aspects that are critical or otherwise important to one or more stakeholders. Concerns
       include system considerations such as performance, reliability, security, distribution, and
       evolvability.” (Source: IEEE Std. 1471-2000, para. 4.1, p. 4)

Attributes of an Architectural Description
An Architectural Description exposes and expresses the architecture of a system, product, or service
via standard attributes and conventions. These include:
414     Chapter 36   System Architecture Development

      • Architectural Entities An architecture exposes the operational elements such as objects or
        actors—which can be persons, places, things, roles, or capabilities—that comprise a
        SYSTEM or entity, regardless of the level of abstraction, and interacts synergistically to
        perform the entity’s mission.
      • Hierarchical Level of Abstraction An architecture expresses an entity’s operational,
        behavioral, and physical context within the User’s system of systems (SoS) for a given level
        of abstraction (Level 0, Level 1, Level 2, etc.).
      • Unique Identity Architecture expresses HOW a SYSTEM’s object or actor capabilities are
        uniquely identiﬁed via reference designators.
      • Interactions with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT An architecture expresses how the
        SYSTEM entity interacts and interoperates with external systems in its OPERATING ENVI-
        RONMENT based on external inputs, stimuli, or cues—for example, inputs such as event-
        based interrupts, raw materials, and information—as well as its SYSTEM RESPONSES—its
        behavioral patterns, products, by-products, or services.
      • Completeness An architecture expresses the integrated set of entities, capabilities, and inter-
        actions for a speciﬁc entity required to satisfy a prescribed set of User mission use cases and
        operational scenarios. This is accomplished in terms of incremental or phased capabilities
        evolving from: 1) an initial operational capability (IOC) through a series of “builds” to a full
        operational capability (FOC) or 2) a single grand design.
      • Architectural Views An entity’s architecture is characterized by four types of views: 1) a
        requirements view, 2) an operations view, 3) a behavioral view, and 4) a physical view.
Now that we have established WHAT a system architecture is and its attributes, let’s explore the
HOW the architectural description is represented.

Architectural Description Representation Methods
For most applications, system architectures are communicated via three mechanisms: 1) three-
dimensional and two-dimensional artistic renderings of buildings, 2) block diagrams, and 3)
hierarchy trees. Most SE applications employ block diagrams such as system block diagrams
(SBDs), architecture block diagrams (ABDs), and functional block diagrams (FBDs) as the primary
mechanism for communicating a SYSTEM or entity’s architecture.
     Block diagrams depict horizontal peer level and external relationships within a given system
level of abstraction. Vertical linkages to higher level parent or lower level siblings are referenced
by symbology but not shown. For example, a system entity, as a level of abstraction, may include
a symbol on or next to its box to denote lower levels exist.
     In contrast, hierarchy trees enable us to depict vertical relationships that infer levels of abstrac-
tion; they do not communicate, however, direct relationships and interactions among peers. Figure
36.2 contrats the two approaches.

Architectural Description Views and Concerns
When tasked to develop the architectural description, engineers naturally gravitate to debates over
WHAT tools and methods to use. Traditionally, SEs prefer to use functional methods; software engi-
neers focus on object-oriented methods, and so forth. Instead, the focus should be on WHAT is to
be described in terms of views. Once these views are identiﬁed, then you can decide whether a
viewpoint is best described using functional, object-oriented, or some other methods. The selection
depends on WHAT architectural view best communicates the System Architect’s solution to the
User’s vision in a manner that is accepted by the User.
                                                                  36.3 Architectural Views of a System   415

         Hierarchy Tree Approach                             Block Diagram Approach
    (Vertical Architecture Relationships)              (Horizontal Architecture Relationships)
                                                               System Architecture
                                                             SUBSYSTEM              SUBSYSTEM
                                                                                     SUBSYSTEM
                                                              SUBSYSTEM
                                                                 A                      BB
                 SYSTEM                                           A
                  SYSTEM

                                                                          SUBSYSTEM
                                                                           SUBSYSTEM
                                                                              C
                                                                               C


 SUBSYSTEM      SUBSYSTEM        SUBSYSTEM
  SUBSYSTEM      SUBSYSTEM        SUBSYSTEM
     A              B                C                               Decomposition
      A              B                C



                                                          SUBSYSTEM A               SUBSYSTEM B
 A1
  A1    A2
         A2     B1
                 B1     B2
                         B2      C1
                                  C1    C2
                                         C2                 A1        A2             B1      B2
                                                             A1        A2             B1      B2


                                                                   SUBSYSTEM C
                                                                    C1
                                                                     C1       C2
                                                                               C2          System
                                                                                                    2
Figure 36.2 System Architecture Presentation Methods




36.3 ARCHITECTURAL VIEWS OF A SYSTEM

There are numerous engineering perspectives of a system’s architecture. In general, the perspec-
tives are reﬂective of the views and concerns of key stakeholders of the system, product, or service
as illustrated in Figure 36.3. Your job as a system analyst or SE is to integrate these views.
     Earlier we introduced the concept of the four solution domains: Requirements, Operations,
Behavioral, and Physical. Each solution domain represents a unique view of a system representing
a consensus of its stakeholders. Let’s deﬁne each view:
    • Requirements Architecture View A representation of the hierarchy and traceability of an
      entity’s speciﬁcation requirements that bound its phases and modes of operation, capabili-
      ties, characteristics, design and construction constraints, and veriﬁcation methods.
    • Operations Architecture View A representation of HOW the MISSION SYSTEM and
      SUPPORT SYSTEM operational assets are employed—meaning deployed, operated, and
      supported—by the User in their Level 0 HIGHER ORDER SYSTEM. The operational archi-
      tecture may include lower level training, maintenance, and support architectures that graph-
      ically represent their respective concepts.
    • Logical/Functional Architecture View A representation of the logical/behavioral entity
      relationships and interactions—meaning behavior, products, by-products, and services—
      that express HOW the MISSION SYSTEM capabilities are envisioned to respond to
      external stimuli and cues for hypothesized scenarios within its prescribed OPERATING
      ENVIRONMENT.
    • Physical Architecture View A representation of HOW an entity is physically composed,
      constructed, conﬁgured, and interfaced to respond to external stimuli and cues to achieve the
      desired outcome-based responses.
416     Chapter 36        System Architecture Development

              User Community                                                     System Developer
                                    User’s Representative


                                         Acquirer                                        System
                                          Acquirer                                        System
              System                                                                   Engineering
                                                                                        Engineering
               System                                                                                            Hardware
           Administrators
            Administrators                                                                                        Hardware
                                                                                                                Engineering
                                                                                                                 Engineering

   Operator(s)
    Operator(s)
                                                      SystemViews
                                                     System    Views                                                Software
                                                                                                                     Software
                                                     • •Requirements
                                                         Requirements               System                         Engineering
                              User(s)                                                System                         Engineering
                               User(s)                 • Operations
                                                         • Operations             Developer(s)
                                                                                   Developer(s)
                                                       • Behavioral
   Maintainer(s)                                         • Behavioral
    Maintainer(s)                                        • Physical
                                                           • Physical
                                                                                                                      Test
                                                                                                                       Test
                                                                                                                   Engineering
                                                                                                                    Engineering

             Instructor(s)                                                Product                    Specialty
              Instructor(s)                                                Product                    Specialty
                                                                        Engineering                 Engineering
                                                                         Engineering                 Engineering


                                                                                          Where:
                                                                                                   = Inputs & Reviews
                                                                                                   = Collaboration & Consensus
Figure 36.3 Stakeholder Views of a System


                                                      SYSTEMor
                                                     SYSTEM    orEntity
                                                                  Entity
                                                       Architectural
                                                        Architectural
                                                        Description
                                                         Description

                                                     Consists of



                                                                          Logical/
                                                                           Logical/
   Requirements
    Requirements                         Operations
                                          Operations                                                          Physical
                                                                                                               Physical
                                                                         Behavioral
                                                                          Behavioral
   Architecture
    Architecture                         Architecture
                                          Architecture                                                      Architecture
                                                                                                             Architecture
                                                                        Architecture
                                                                         Architecture
       View
        View                                View
                                             View                                                              View
                                                                                                                View
      (Multi-Level)                      (Multi-Level)
                                                                           View
                                                                            View                              (Multi-Level)
       (Multi-Level)                      (Multi-Level)                  (Multi-Level)                         (Multi-Level)
                                                                          (Multi-Level)
    Requirements                       Operations                         Behavioral                        Physical Domain
   Domain Solution                   Domain Solution                    Domain Solution                        Solution

Figure 36.4 System Architectural Description (AD) Elements


Figure 36.4 illustrates these relationships as elements of an overall system architecture description.
The SYSTEM architecture description (AD) consists of a multi-level requirements architecture, a
multi-level operations architecture, a multi-level logical/functional architecture, and a multi-level
physical architecture.

Architectural Responses to the Solution Space
If we translate the IEEE construct shown in Figures 36.1 with the views of a system illustrated in
Figure 36.4, Figure 36.5 results. Here, we see the architectural views as satisfying the solution
space(s) based on stakeholders, views, and concerns.

Guidepost 36.1 At this point we have established the general relationships between the four
solution domain architectures with the solution space. Now let’s explore the interdependencies of
these views further.
                                                                                                      36.3 Architectural Views of a System                    417

impacted
by           Problem
              Space
                                           Architectural                                  SYSTEMor
                                                                                         SYSTEM    or
                                          Description (AD)                               SystemEntity
                                                                                        System  Entity
                 resolve
                                                                                   consists of
                     partitioned
                        into

             Solution                     Requirements
                                           Requirements                      Operations
                                                                              Operations                    Behavioral
                                                                                                             Behavioral                     Physical
                                                                                                                                             Physical
             Space(s)                     Architecture
                                           Architecture                     Architecture
                                                                             Architecture                  Architecture
                                                                                                            Architecture                  Architecture
                                                                                                                                           Architecture
                                          (Multi-Level)
                                           (Multi-Level)                    (Multi-Level)
                                                                             (Multi-Level)                 (Multi-Level)
                                                                                                            (Multi-Level)                 (Multi-Level)
                                                                                                                                           (Multi-Level)

           own
                       describes
                                                           captured by
                                         captures
                              described by                            documented in
                                                   View(s)
                                                    View(s)
 impacts     owned by                                                                                 documents

      Stakeholder(s)                                        own                             Concern(s)
       Stakeholder(s)              owned by                                                  Concern(s)

                    expressed by                                                        express

Figure 36.5 System Solution Viewpoints and Views


      SPS or                                                   System or Entity Architecture
     Entity Item
                                                                              Requirements Allocation Flow Down
    Development                Requirements
                                Requirements                 (Capabilities, Characteristics, Design & Construction Constraints, etc.)
    Specification              Architecture
                                Architecture
                                   (Multi-Level)
                                    (Multi-Level)
                                                                                    • Phases & Modes
      Contract                                                                      • Mission Operations
    Statement of                                                                    • Scenarios
                                                                                    • Event Timelines
       Work                                                  Operations             • Budgets & Margins
      (CSOW)                                                  Operations
                                                             Architecture
                                                              Architecture
                                           Requirements
                                                              (Multi-Level)
                                            Traceability       (Multi-Level)
                                                                                                                        • Logical Entities
                                                                                                                        • Entity Capabilities
      Contract                                                                                                          • Behavioral Models
        Work                                                                                                            • Algorithmic Models
                                                                                                Logical/
                                                                                                 Logical/
     Breakdown                                                                                                          • Budgets & Margins
      Structure                                                          Requirements
                                                                                               Behavioral
                                                                                                Behavioral
      (CWBS)                                                             Traceability         Architecture
                                                                                               Architecture
                                                                                                 (Multi-Level)
                                                                                                  (Multi-Level)

    Integrated                                                                                                                            Physical
    Master Plan                                                                                                                            Physical
      (IMP)/
                                                                                                                                        Architecture*
                                                                                                                                         Architecture*
                                                                     Requirements Traceability
                                                                                                                                         (Multi-Level)
     Schedule                                                                                                                             (Multi-Level)
      (IMS)
                                              * Assembly Drawings, Schematics, Product Structure, Bill of Materials (BOM), Code Listings, etc.
                                                                                                                                                          6
Figure 36.6 System Architecture Element Relationships


Architectural View Interdependencies
The requirements, operations, behavioral, and physical architectures are highly integrated and inter-
dependent shown in Figure 36.6. Notice that the highly iterative interdependencies are depicted via
an N2 (N ¥ N matrix) diagram. When you develop the architectures, it is very important for you to
maintain traceability with the Contract Statement of Work (CSOW), Contract Work Breakdown
Structure (CWBS), Integrated Master Plan (IMP), and Integrated Master Schedule (IMS) or their
contract documents.
418    Chapter 36   System Architecture Development

Author’s Note 36.1 The point here is that architecture development encompasses more than
simply creating graphical views of the system. The architectural description serves as the corner-
stone for the CWBS, IMP, and IMS. It must also be consistent with the CSOW.

     As system development progresses through lower levels of design over time, architectural
attributes such as capabilities or operations, requirements, performance budgets and safety margins,
and design and construction constraints are allocated to lower level architecture entities and ﬂowed
down via entity item development speciﬁcations.

Referral For more information about developing speciﬁcations, refer to Chapter 31 Speciﬁca-
tion Development Practices.

Closing Points
One of the ambiguities of SE and deﬁciencies of organizational training or the lack thereof occurs
when system architectures are developed. You may hear a development team member boldly pro-
claim they are going to “develop a system architecture.” The problem is listeners are thinking one
type of architecture and the doer has a “pet” architecture. As a result, the architectural work product
may or may not suit the development team’s needs.
     One way to avoid this situation is to express the four domain solutions in terms of views. As
each solution is formulated as illustrated in Figure 36.6, the team has a good idea of WHAT the
deliverable architecture will depict. So, when someone boldly PROCLAIMs to be developing a
system architecture, ASK: WHICH architectural views and viewpoints do you intend to EXPRESS.

Guidepost 36.2 Given a fundamental understanding in WHAT an architecture and architec-
tural description are, we now shift our focus to key considerations that drive selection of the type
of architecture suitable for a system, product, or service application.


36.4 CENTRALIZED VERSUS DECENTRALIZED
CONTROL ARCHITECTURES

Once a system’s interfaces are identiﬁed, most system architecture development activities begin
with HOW the system is structured for communications and decision-making. Figure 36.7 serves
as a reference for our discussion.
     Chapters 8 through 12 System Architecture Concepts discussed system interactions with its
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. The discussion highlighted various types of command and control
(C2) interactions that included open loop and closed loop systems. For the C2 mechanism, a key
question is: HOW do we efﬁciently and effectively implement C2? This requires a determination of
the need for a centralized versus decentralized or distributed control architectures. So, what are
these?

Centralized Control Architectures
Centralized control architectures, as illustrated on the LEFT side of Figure 36.7, consist of a single
processing mechanism. For most applications the mechanism interfaces to remote access ports or
sensors via mechanical, electronic, or optical types of devices. Consider the following examples:
                                                   36.4 Centralized Versus Decentralized Control Architectures     419

     Centralized Architecture                                        Decentralized Architecture
          Command and Control and                                           Command and Control and
         Transformational Processing                                       Transformational Processing

                                                               RFS_A #1
                                                                               Control
                                                                                Control
                                                               RFS_A #x       Capability
                                                                               Capability
    RFS_A #1
                                                                                 AA
    RFS_A #2
                                                               Service A Responses
    RFS_B #1               Centralized
                            Centralized
                         ControlCapability
                        Control  Capability
    RFS_B #2
                                                               RFS_B #1
                        • Control Capability A                                 Control              Supervisory
                                                                                                     Supervisory
                          • Control Capability A                                Control
                        • Control Capability B
                          • Control Capability B               RFS_B # y      Capability              Control
                                                                                                       Control
                        • Control Capability C                                 Capability
                          • Control Capability C                                 BB                  Capability
                                                                                                      Capability
    RFS_C #n
                                                               Service B Responses


     System Service Responses                                 RFS_C #1
                                                                               Control
                                                                                Control
                                                               RFS_C #z       Capability
                                                                               Capability
                                                                                 CC
Where:                                                         Service C Responses
     RFS_X = Request for Service A,B, C, etc.


Figure 36.7 Centralized and Decentralized Architectures




 EXAMPLE 36.1
Video surveillance systems route multi-channel, real-time camera video back to a multi-screen command
center staffed with security personnel.



 EXAMPLE 36.2
A power control circuit breaker panel distributes and controls power from an external service line to various
circuits throughout an ofﬁce building or home.

Limitations of Centralized Control. Centralized control architectures are ﬁne for many appli-
cations such as the examples cited above. However, they do have limitations. They are a potential
single point of failure (SPF).
     As a SPF, some applications may require vast lengths of wiring to remote sensors that increase
weight. For applications such as aircraft where an SPF may be a critical risk, additional weight,
assuming it can be accommodated, translates into increased fuel consumption, increased fuel tank
capacity, and reduces payload weight.
     There are several approaches to solving this problem space. Example solutions include:
     1. AVOID performance degradation and provide for expansion and growth by decentraliza-
        tion of processing functions.
     2. REDUCE weight by deploying decision-making mechanisms at key locations and inter-
        connecting the mechanisms via network-based conﬁguration nodes.
     3. AVOID risk due to potential SPFs by implementing control mechanism redundancies.
420     Chapter 36   System Architecture Development

Author’s Note 36.2 Based on the SPF discussion, we should note that the processing mecha-
nism, as illustrated at the right side of Figure 36.7, might consist of redundant processors as a
means of improving the mechanism’s reliability.

Decentralized Control Architectures
Decentralized control architectures partition key control functions and deploy them via remote pro-
cessing mechanisms that service input/output (I/O) requests as illustrated at the right side of Figure
36.7. The deployment may require:
      1. Remote, dedicated processing to support a speciﬁc sensor or suite.
      2. Retaining a central supervisory function to oversee each of the decentralized computing
         functions.
Depending on the mission and system application, decentralized functions might reside in the same
rack at a site, be physically stationed throughout a building, or geographically separated across a
country or around the world.
     The decentralized functions may be allocated to hardware or software entities or dynamically
assigned based on processing loads. As a result, overall system performance is improved but at the
expense and risk of adding more processors. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 36.3
An organization operates technical support centers to assist customers in implementing the organization’s prod-
ucts. In one approach, geographic sites are dedicated to addressing speciﬁc product questions. Since calls for
a speciﬁc product: 1) may not occur in a uniform distribution and 2) may have surge periods, it may be inef-
ﬁcient and unproﬁtable to employ large staffs at a single site. So, a central phone system places customer calls
in a ﬁrst-come–ﬁrst-served queue and assigns each call to “the next available representative or technician”
that may be available in any one of several different product support sites.

For some applications, I/O processors may be identiﬁed in an architecture to off-load mundane I/O
processing tasks such as data communications, printing, or interrupts from the main processor. This
allows the supervisory processor to concentrate on higher level performance intensive tasks.

Client-Server Architectures
For system applications that require desktop or Web-based access to a central repository of infor-
mation, client-server architectures are employed. In this case a processor is dedicated to process-
ing client requests for data, retrieving the data from a central repository, and disseminating the data
to the client. Applications such as this, which include internal organizational intranets and Web-
based sites, are helpful for contract programs that need to provide access to program and contrac-
tor data to authorized Acquirer/Users, System Developers, subcontractors, and vendors.

Network Architectures
Organizations and systems often have need for personnel/entities to share and access common
repositories of information as well as e-mail. Because of the cost and risk of having to connect ded-
icated wires from a central C2 system throughout the facility, high-speed serial data communica-
tions networks are employed. Local Area Networks (LANs) are used to service clients within a
facility, LANs for geographically separated facilities may be connected into wide area networks
(WANs). Consider the following examples:
                                                               36.5 Fault Tolerant Architectures   421


 EXAMPLE 36.4
Commercial network systems employ Broadband, DSL, Ethernet, among other data communications. Mili-
tary aircraft on-board networks employ MIL-STD-1553/1773 data communications networks; 1553 for wire-
based applications, 1773 for ﬁber-optic applications.


36.5 FAULT TOLERANT ARCHITECTURES

The challenge in developing any type of system is creating a system architecture that is sufﬁciently
ROBUST to tolerate and cope with various types of internal and external vulnerabilities. Then,
when confronted with these conditions, the processing must be able to continue without signiﬁcant
performance degradation or catastrophic failure.
     Depending on system design objectives, there are numerous ways of developing fault-tolerant
architectures. Typically, a failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) addresses potential failure
modes, system effects, single points of failure (SPF), and so on. A more comprehensive expansion
of a FMEA includes a criticality analysis (FMECA) to identify speciﬁc components that require
close attention. The FMEA/FMECA assess and recommend compensating provisions—namely
design modiﬁcations and operating procedures to mitigate failure conditions.

Referral A summary of FMEA/FMECA is provided in Chapter 50 System Reliability, Avail-
ability, and Maintainability (RAM) practices.

The FMEA/FMECA, in conjunction with the system’s mission reliability requirement and resource
budgets, inﬂuence the system architecture approach. Speciﬁcation Developers are notorious for
specifying redundancy requirements without thorough analysis of the current system architecture
to determine if redundancy is a necessary and sufﬁcient condition to satisfy mission reliability
requirements. Avoid mandating design methods in speciﬁcations that increase cost and risk without
having compelling, fact-based evidence that motivates such actions.
    This brings us to a key point: key areas for developing fault tolerant systems.

Key Areas for Developing Fault Tolerant Systems
In general, design ﬂaws and internal component faults or malfunctions can cause or lead to system
failures. Examples include:
     1. Inadequate system architecture selection.
     2. Lack of system stability during various OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
     3. Internal component failures due to OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions, surges, or
        long-term effects.
     4. Latent defects due to improper or inadequate testing.
     5. Faulty control logic.
     6. Unknown modes and states.
     7. Preoccupation with trivial, molecular level computation processing.
     8. Poor work practices.
     9. Improper operation results from abuse, misuse, or misapplication of the system or product.
    10. Physical breaks in resource or data communications interfaces or supplies.
    11. Lack of preventive and corrective maintenance.
422     Chapter 36   System Architecture Development

      12. Physical intrusion such as hacking, spamming, malicious mischief, and sabotage by unau-
          thorized users and threats.
For systems in which a failure may be catastrophic, the system architecture decision making should
include design OPTION considerations such as redundancies. Again, compensating actions should
only be implemented after a determination that design reliability with a SPF is inadequate.

Guidepost 36.3 At this point we have established the commonly used types of system archi-
tectures. We now shift our focus to understanding how to improve the reliability of an architectural
implementation.


36.6 TYPES OF REDUNDANCIES

For most applications we can classify redundancies in terms of architectural conﬁguration and com-
ponent implementation.

Architectural Conﬁguration Redundancy
Architectural conﬁguration redundancy consists of conﬁguring redundant components either as
fully operational “on-line” or “off-line” devices during all or portions of mission phases. There a
three primary types of architectural redundancy: 1) operational, 2) cold or standy, and 3) k out of
n systems.

Operational Redundancy. Operational redundancy conﬁgurations employ backup items that
are activated or energized throughout the operating cycle of the system or product. All primary and
redundant elements operate simultaneously for a total of n elements. Some people refer to this as
hot or active redundancy. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 36.5
An aircraft may require a minimum number of engines to be operating within speciﬁed performance limits
for takeoff, cruising, or landing; independent inertial navigation systems required to continue a mission; or
tandem train locomotives for speciﬁc geographic and loading conditions.

     During SYSTEM operations, redundant items can also be conﬁgured to operate concurrently
and even share the loads. If one of the redundant items fails, the other item(s) assumes the load
performed by the failed item and continues to perform the required capability(s). In most cases, the
failed component is left in place or, assuming it does not interfere or create a safety hazard until
corrective maintenance is available.

Cold or Standby Redundancy. Cold or standby redundancy consists of components that are
not energized, activated, or conﬁgured into the system until the primary item fails. If the primary
item fails, the standby item is connected automatically or manually through direct or remote oper-
ator intervention. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 36.6
Cold or standby redundancies include an emergency brake on an automobile, adding mass transportation vehi-
cles (trains, buses, etc.) to support surges in consumer demand, emergency backup lighting switched on during
a power failure, and backup power generation equipment.
                                                                     36.6 Types of Redundancies     423

k-out-of-n Systems Redundancy. This is a hybrid system whereby there are a total of n ele-
ments in the system but only k elements (k out of n) are required to operate during speciﬁc phases
of a mission. For example, a car needs four of its ﬁve tires, including spare, to be in safe operat-
ing condition to complete a trip.
     You may ask: What is the difference between operational redunancy and k-out-of-n redun-
dancy. Operational redundancy assumes all components are conﬁgured into the system, can only
be turned on/off, but not easily removed during a mission such as an engine on an aircraft or gyro.
K-out-of-n redundancy factors in spares as replacements such as the car tire example.

Redundancy Implementation Approaches
Once a conﬁguration redundancy concept is selected, the next step is to determine HOW to phys-
ically implement the concept, either by identical components or unlike components that are similar
in function.

Like Redundancy Conﬁguration. Like redundancy is implemented with identical compo-
nents—vendor product model part numbers—that are employed in an operational or standby redun-
dancy conﬁguration.

Unlike Redundancy Conﬁguration. Unlike redundancy consists of components that are not
physically identical—different vendors—but provide the functionality and performance required to
perform the capability.
     Both implementation approaches offer advantages and disadvantages. If the components used
for like redundancy are sensitive to certain OPERATING ENVIRONMENT characteristics, having
identical components may not be a solution. If you purposely choose unlike redundancy and the
same situation occurs, redundancy may only exist over a limited operating range if one component
has higher reliability. If components identical only in function and performance are qualiﬁed over
the full operating range, unlike redundancy may offer advantages.

Reducing Component SPF Risk
One method of reducing the component SPF risk requires operating identical or redundant com-
ponents in several types of conﬁgurations. Redundancy type examples for electronic systems
include:
    • Processing redundancy
    • Voted k out of n redundancy
    • Data link redundancy
    • Service request redundancy
Figure 36.8 provides a graphical view to support the discussions that follow.

Processing Redundancy. Returning to an earlier discussion of decentralized processing via dis-
tributed components, detection of a processor failure and dynamic reallocation of processing tasks
to an available processor enhances fault tolerance. So SUBSYSTEMs A and B both include redun-
dant processing components, A¢ and B¢.

Voted “k out of n” Component Redundancy. Some systems have redundant, peer-level
processors that employ an operational hot or active redundancy conﬁguration. Individual processor
results Subsystems A and B are routed through a central decision-making mechanism that determines
if k out of n results agree. If k out of n results agree, transmit the results to a speciﬁc destination.
424    Chapter 36           System Architecture Development

                                            Primary Data Communications Network
   Firewall
    Firewall                                    Redundant Network (Option)




                            HW             HW                                 HW                     HW



                            SW             SW                                 SW                     SW
                    Component           Component                        Component                Component
                       A                   A’                               B                        B’
External
 Power                         Subsystem A                                         Subsystem B
                                                         Power


                 UPS
                  UPS
                                                            Where: HW = Hardware
               (Back-Up)                                           SW = Software
                (Back-Up)
                                                                   UPS = Universal Power Supply

Figure 36.8 System Architecture Element Relationships




Data Link Redundancy. There is an old adage: “Systems break at their interfaces.” From an
interface reliability perspective, this adage holds true. System developers often take great pride in
creating ELEGANT system designs that employ redundant processing components. Then, they
connect the redundant components to an external interface that is a single point of failure (SPF).
     One way to AVOID this problem is to employ redundant networks as shown in Figure 36.8.
Obviously, if interconnecting components such as cables are placed in a stable/static position, not
subjected to stressful OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions, and interfaced properly, there is
a good chance that additional independent connections are unnecessary and can be avoided.
     For applications that employ satellite links or transmission lines that may be switched period-
ically, it may be necessary to employ backup links, such as land lines, as a contingency.

Service Request Redundancy. Some systems may be designed to automatically transmit mes-
sages one or more times. Using Figure 36.8 as an example, SUBSYSTEMs A and B automatically
retransmit messages to each other. Others may issue service requests to repeat messages, acknowl-
edgments, or data responses. As illustrated in Figures 15.3 and 15.4, this example is equally appli-
cable to external systems.


36.7 ERROR CORRECTION CONSIDERATIONS

Some systems employ data communication protocols that request retransmission IF errors are
detected. In general, error correction may or may not be considered an explicit redundancy method.
However, when it is employed, it provides comparable beneﬁts.

Guidepost 36.4 The development of a system architecture requires more than simply innova-
tion and creation, it also requires other architectual considerations:
                                               36.8 Other Architectural Selection Considerations   425

    1. Compliance with local, state, federal, and international statutes and regulations.
    2. Sustainment of resources.
    3. Recognition of the cause and effect the architecture has on the public and the environment.
We now shift the discussion to these considerations.

36.8 OTHER ARCHITECTURAL SELECTION CONSIDERATIONS

Developing a system architecture to provide capabilities to support all phases of the mission is only
part of what is required. The architecture must also include other key considerations. These include:
    • Power source architectural considerations.
    • Environmental, safety, and health (ES&H) architectural considerations.
    • Fire detection and suppression architectural considerations.
    • System security architectural considerations.

Power System Architectural Considerations
The preceding discussions highlight HOW to enhance the fault tolerance of the systems and prod-
ucts we build. If they are electrically powered, no matter how elegant the redundancy solution, it
only works WHEN power is applied. The loss of power involves several issues:
    1. Safe storage of critical mission and system data immediately following the event to prevent
       data loss.
    2. Safe evacuation of personnel from facilities to prevent injury or loss of life.
    3. Sustainment power to critical processes that must process to completion and place the
       system in a SAFE mode.

Sustaining Operations and EQUIPMENT Resulting from Loss of Power. When a power
loss event occurs, systems require a ﬁnite amount of time to store mission and system data. To
ensure a continuation of power for a speciﬁed time, rechargeable batteries or an uninterruptible
power supply (UPS), offer potential solutions. Depending on mission and system application, alter-
native power solutions include external fuel-based generators, solar panels, fuel cells, and other
technologies.

Power Quality Considerations. Another factor that requires architectural consideration is
power quality. Power surges, brownouts, overvoltage, noise, and stability conditions wreak havoc
with some systems that require power conditioning. So, make sure these considerations are fully
addressed by the architecture within resource constraints.

Environmental, Safety, and Health (ES&H)
Architectural Considerations
System architecting, in general, tends to focus on EQUIPMENT architectures rather than the effects
of the EQUIPMENT on the Users, public, and NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. Therefore, when
evaluating a system architecture, the system architect and others should factor in considerations for
environmental, safety, and health (ES&H).
426    Chapter 36   System Architecture Development


 EXAMPLE 36.7
At a minimum, considerations of the effects of EQUIPMENT by-products on the User(s), public, and envi-
ronment should include the following considerations:
• Moisture
• Condensation
• Water
• Shock and vibration
• Atmospheric pressure
• High pressures
• Noise
• Refuse
• Spills
• Leaks
• Laser radiation
• Nuclear waste
• Ergonomics



 EXAMPLE 36.8
At a minimum, safety examples include the following considerations:
• Walk space
• Hazardous conditions
• Ingress and egress
• Emergency exits
• Warning notices and cautions
• Visual and audio alarms
• Electrical shock protection
• Perimeter fencing
• Lockout tags on damaged or out-of-calibration equipment
• Doors and stairwells
• Video surveillance
• Grounding schemes



 EXAMPLE 36.9
At a minimum, health examples include the following considerations:
• Toxic chemicals and fumes
• Air quality
• Ergonomics
• Noise
                                                                                 36.10 Summary      427

Fire Detection and Suppression
Architectural Considerations
Another key architectural consideration is ﬁre detection and suppression systems. Since personnel,
equipment, and facility safety are paramount, the system architecture should include features that
enable a rapid response when ﬁres are detected including suppression systems that eliminate the
source of the ﬁre following personnel evacuation.

System Security Architectural Considerations
For those systems that involve sensitive or classiﬁed data, system security should be a key archi-
tectural consideration. This includes reasonable measures for physical security, operational secu-
rity, communications security, and data security.

Final Thought
All considered effects should include both the short-term effects and the long-term effects. Com-
pensating actions for any effects may require accomplishment via one or more of the SYSTEM’s
architectural system elements—EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, PROCEDURAL DATA, and so
forth.


36.9 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system architecture development practices.

Principle 36.1 An architecture expresses stakeholder concerns via views that comply with
viewpoint conventions for constructing the view.

Principle 36.2 Every SYSTEM/entity has four architectural views: requirements, operations,
behavior, and physical, each consistent with and traceable to the other.

Principle 36.3 System architectural redundancy is a design method for achieving a challenging
reliability requirement, and not a speciﬁcation requirement.

Principle 36.4 An architecture represents the totality of the integrated conﬁguration of system
capabilities required to perform its use cases and cope with use case scenarios without regard to
element frequency of usage.

Principle 36.5 Every system architecture must be compliant with its speciﬁcation requirements
and applicable laws, regulations, and cultural values.

Principle 36.6 Every system architecture must factor in considerations for the environment,
safety, and health.


36.10 SUMMARY

The discussion of system architecture development practices of this chapter serve as a precursor for the
Requirements, Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions that follow. System architectures
428    Chapter 36   System Architecture Development

provide the means to communicate the key stakeholder concerns and engineering viewpoints required to
develop each SYSTEM or entity’s four solution domains—consisting of Requirements, Operations, Behav-
ioral, and Physical Domain Solutions.
      During our discussions we introduced and deﬁned the origin of the term architecture as well as other
architecture-related terms. We discussed the need to delineate the type of system architecture—operational,
behavioral, and physical—when someone boldly proclaims an intent to develop the “system’s” architecture.
      Speciﬁc architecture view implementations are described in the respective Requirements Domain Solu-
tion, Operations Domain Solution, Behavioral Domain Solution, and Physical Domain Solution practices that
follow.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Who are the system’s stakeholders?
   (b) What are their views and concerns of the system’s architecture?
   (c) How would these views and viewpoint concerns be captured in the Requirements, Operations,
       Behavioral, and Physical Domain architectures?
   (d) What are potential trade-off areas require consideration in formulating the architecture?
3. Identify an example of each of the types of system architectures and design options listed below:
   (a) Centralized architecture
   (b) Decentralized architecture
   (c) Hot redundancy
   (d) Standby redundancy
   (e) k out of n redundancy
   (f) Like redundancy
   (g) Unlike redundancy


ORGANIZATION CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organizations command media.
   (a) What requirements are levied on programs for development of system architectures?
   (b) How are system architectures to be evaluated?
2. Contact a small, a medium, and a large contract program in your organization.
   (a) What types of system architectures are used?
   (b) Does the architecture include redundant elements? Were they required by contract?
   (c) Are there redundant elements; what is the rationale?
   (d) What compelling evidence—such as meeting reliability, availability, and maintainability (RAM)
       requirements—drove them to redundancy?
   (e) Was redundancy a requirement in the SPS or development speciﬁcation? Why?
                                                                                           Additional Reading       429

REFERENCES

Buede, Dennis M. 2000. The Engineering Design of               IEEE 1471-2000. 2000. IEEE Recommended Practice for
  Systems. New York: Wiley.                                      Architectural Description of Software-Intensive Systems.
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.                 Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE)
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th         New York, NY.
  ed. Defense Acquisition University Press, Ft. Belvoir, VA.   “Systems always break at their interfaces.” (Anonymous)


ADDITIONAL READING

Leitch, R.D. 1988. BASIC Reliability Engineering Analy-        Rechtin, Eberhardt, and Maier, Mark W. 2000. Systems
  sis. Stoneham, MA: Butterworth.                                Architecting: Creating and Building Complex System, 2nd
Pidd, Michael. 1998. Computer Simulation in Manage-              ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
  ment Science, 4th ed. Chichester: Wiley.
Rechtin, Eberhardt. 1991. Systems Architecting: Creat-
  ing and Building Complex Systems. Englewood Cliffs,
  NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Chapter              37

      Developing an Entity’s
      Requirements Domain Solution

37.1 INTRODUCTION

The Requirements Domain Solution bounds an entity’s—SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM,
etc.—solution space within technical, technology, support, cost, and schedule constraints and risks.
The Requirements Domain Solution speciﬁes:
      1. WHAT capabilities and performance characteristics are required from the system, product,
         or service.
      2. WHAT levels of performance are expected—and HOW WELL.
      3. System element accountability for accomplishing capability-based requirements.
      4. WHEN the capability is required.
      5. Under WHAT OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions and interactions.
      6. WHAT outcomes or results are expected to satisfy the User’s operational needs and suc-
         cessfully achieve the system and mission objectives.
This chapter expands on the Requirements Domain Solution description introduced in our discus-
sion of the SE Process Model in Chapter 26. Our discussion addresses the Requirements Domain
Solution: objectives, key elements, sequence in the SE Process Model work ﬂow, development
responsibility, dependencies, development methodology, challenges, and work products.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What is the objective of the Requirements Domain Solution?
       2. What are the key elements of the Requirements Domain Solution?
       3. What is the relationship of the Requirements Domain Solution to the SE Process Model?
       4. Explain the relationships of the Requirements Domain Solution to the Operations, Behav-
          ioral, and Physical Domain Solutions?
       5. What is the methodology used to develop the Requirements Domain Solution?
       6. What are the steps of the methodology employed to derive the Requirements Domain
          Solution?
       7. How do you develop the Requirements Domain Solution architecture?



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

430
                                                                            37.1 Introduction   431

     8. What are the exit criteria of the Requirements Domain Solution?
     9. What are some of the challenges in developing the Requirements Domain Solution?
    10. What work products do the Requirements Domain Solution activities produce?
    11. How is the Requirements Domain Solution is veriﬁed and validated?


Requirements Domain Solution
Development Activity Objective(s)
The objectives of the Requirements Domain Solution development activity are to:
    1. Accurately, precisely, consistently, and completely bound the solution space and identify
       the required capabilities—the functions and performance, and characteristics required to
       satisfy the User’s (contextual role) validated operational need(s).
    2. Provide objective evidence as a work product to support entity veriﬁcation and formal
       acceptance.

Author’s Note 37.1 The usage of the term “contextual role” above refers to multi-level devel-
opment. For example, at the SYSTEM Level, the Acquirer and System Developer organizations
establish a contractual agreement for requirements via the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
Within the System Developer’s program organization, the System Engineering and Integration Team
(SEIT) establishes item development speciﬁcations (IDS) with PRODUCT level integrated product
teams (IPTs), other development teams, or issues subcontracts to develop PRODUCTS. In this latter
context, the SEIT serves as an Acquirer (role) and the IPT, development teams, or subcontractors
serve as System Developers (role) for their respective PRODUCTS.


Key Elements of the Requirements Domain Solution
The key elements of the Requirements Domain Solution and their interrelationships include the fol-
lowing entities: problem space, solution space, operating constraints, capabilities, Mission Event
Timeline (MET), speciﬁcations, veriﬁcation methods, functions, measures of performance (MOP),
critical operational/technical (COIs/CTIs) issues, and clariﬁcations.


Requirements Domain Solution Dependencies
As discussed in earlier sections, the Requirements Domain Solution development is a multi-level,
highly iterative process that requires close collaboration and coordination with the evolving Oper-
ations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions as shown in Figure 26.3. Iterative analysis and
technical reviews are required, preferably by independent reviewers, to ensure that the SYSTEM
OF INTEREST (SOI) is properly balanced—meaning optimal—from an overall development and
life cycle perspective in terms of technical, cost, schedule, support, and risks.


Requirements Domain Solution Development Sequencing
As the initial stage of SYSTEM and entity development, the Requirements Domain Solution devel-
opment occurs ahead of the Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions as shown in
Figure 23.2. As the technical speciﬁcation of a contract or task agreement, this solution ultimately
establishes the legal basis for determining formal contract-based acceptance of the physical system,
product, or service by the Acquirer and User.
432     Chapter 37   Developing an Entity’s Requirements Domain Solution

Requirements Domain Solution Responsibility
Responsibility for the Requirements Domain Solution resides with the program’s Technical Direc-
tor or Project Engineer and is usually delegated to a Lead SE for the program. The Lead SE facil-
itates the development of the Requirements Domain Solution by ensuring that all operational and
disciplinary stakeholder interests are represented in the development and review of the System Per-
formance Speciﬁcation (SPS) and each entity’s item development speciﬁcations.
     Once the speciﬁcation requirements baselines are approved and released, Conﬁguration Man-
agement (CM) administers formal change management in accordance with direction from a Con-
ﬁguration Control Board (CCB) or Software Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB) of SYSTEM or
entity stakeholders.

37.2 DEVELOPING THE REQUIREMENTS
SOLUTION ARCHITECTURE

The core infrastructure for design, development, and acceptance of any system, product, or service
resides in the requirements. The requirements scope and bound each entity’s operational, behav-
ioral, and physical capabilities, performance characteristics, and properties. From the ﬁrst abstract
requirement describing an operational objective or need through the lowest level of system design
(nuts and bolts, code, etc.), the requirements must be linked to allow traceability back to their source
or originating requirements. This point establishes a fundamental rule of traceability that governs
the basis for formulation of a system design solution:
      • Each requirement has a cost to implement within contract or task cost and schedule per-
        formance measurement baseline constraints. If any requirement is not traceable back to a
        source or originating requirement, either eliminate the requirement or renegotiate cost and
        schedule constraints and replan the effort.
    We refer to the hierarchical and horizontal requirements infrastructure as the Requirements
Architecture. In practice, the Speciﬁcation Tree provides the framework for linking multi-level spec-
iﬁcation requirements.

Referral For more information about speciﬁcations, refer to Chapters 28 to 33 System Speciﬁ-
cation Practices.

37.3 REQUIREMENTS SOLUTION
DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY

The Requirement Domain Solution is developed as a key element of the SE Process Model as
shown in Figure 26.1. The highly collaborative and iterative integration of the Operations Domain
Solution with the Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions can be chaotic and
confusing.
    We can minimize the chaos and confusion by applying an iterative methodology that enables
us to create the Requirements Domain Solution. The methodology represents one of many
approaches to developing the Requirements Domain Solution. View these steps as an example strat-
egy and tailor them to suit your own business domain and systems application.
Step 1: Understand the problem and solution space(s).
Step 2: Capture and bound entity requirements.
Step 3: Analyze and reconcile entity speciﬁcation requirements.
                                         37.3 Requirements Solution Development Methodology     433

Step 4:   Derive and assimilate entity capabilities.
Step 5:   Resolve requirements issues and clariﬁcations.
Step 6:   Verify and validate the Requirements Solution.
Step 7:   Establish and maintain a Requirements Solution baseline.

Step 1: Understand the Problem and Solution Space(s)
The ﬁrst step in developing the Requirements Domain Solution is to understand:
    1. WHAT problem or issue the User is attempting to solve.
    2. WHAT speciﬁcation requirements are required to bound the solution space within technol-
       ogy, cost, schedule and risk constraints.
Conduct a mission and operations analysis, ﬁeld interviews with the User, analyze existing system
trouble reports, and understand the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT and its players and threats.

Step 2: Capture and Bound Entity Requirements
If an entity’s item development speciﬁcation requirements are undeﬁned, you need to capture, allo-
cate, and ﬂow down higher level requirements to the entity. Accurately, concisely, consistently, and
completely bound the entity’s required capabilities and their associated levels of performance as
well as document operational, physical, design, and construction constraints. Work with the
requirements stakeholders to prioritize the speciﬁcation requirements.
     As entity requirements are captured, bound each one within the framework of the entity’s
required operational capabilities and characteristics. Does each requirement specify:
    1. WHAT action is to be performed?
    2. WHO/WHAT mechanism is accountable for performing the action?
    3. WHEN the action is to be performed?
    4. HOW WELL the action is to be performed?
    5. Under WHAT operating scenarios and conditions?
    6. WHAT outcome or result is expected from the action?
Finally, perform a reasonableness check on each requirement.
     How do we do this? Formulate a mini-veriﬁcation plan. Write a one- or two-sentence veriﬁ-
cation strategy to validate that the requirement can be veriﬁed—that it is measurable, testable, and
realistically achievable—within allocated resource constraints—budgetary, schedule, facilities, and
test environment constraints.

Step 3: Analyze and Reconcile Entity
Speciﬁcation Requirements
As the entity’s requirements are established, analyze the requirements to ensure that you under-
stand WHAT:
    1. Capabilities are required of the deliverable system, product, or service.
    2. Levels of performance bound the capabilities.
    3. Physical characteristics—such as size, weight, and reliability.
    4. Design and construction constraints are levied on those capabilities.
    5. Veriﬁcation methods are required to verify achievement of each capability.
434    Chapter 37   Developing an Entity’s Requirements Domain Solution

Since speciﬁcations sometimes contain missing, misplaced, duplicated, or conﬂicting requirements,
the requirements analysis should strive to discover, clarify, or resolve any deﬁciencies, issues, and
concerns. The work product of the exercise should be a set of speciﬁcation requirements that are
necessary and sufﬁcient to support development of the entity’s Operations, Behavioral, and Phys-
ical Domain Solutions.

Step 4: Derive and Assimilate Entity Capabilities
Ideally, the initial System Requirements Document (SRD) provided in the formal Request for Pro-
posal (RFP) solicitation, the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS), and entity item development
speciﬁcations explicitly identify and bound the required capabilities of the proposed solution via
requirements statements. In general, there should be a one-to-one correlation between the require-
ments and the required capabilities. Best practices recommend that speciﬁcation requirements state
one and only one requirement for a capability as illustrated by Figure 37.1.

Referral For more information regarding development of requirements statements, refer to
Chapter 33 Requirements Statement Development Practices.

The realities of system development, however, indicate this is not always the case. When speciﬁ-
cation developers write requirements statements as paragraphs containing multiple sentences with
compound requirements, SEs must delineate and assimilate the required capabilities. Sometimes
this is easy; other times not.
     If you are confronted with a feature-based speciﬁcation written as a RANDOM set of thoughts,
you may have to derive a set of capabilities using the method shown in Figure 37.1 and link the
capabilities back to speciﬁcation requirements. The physical linking can be accomplished with a
spreadsheet or preferably with an object-oriented (OO) requirements traceability tool based on a
relational database.


                                                     1   Derived Capabilities




        2
 Multi-Level
Specification
Requirements
 Hierarchy




                                3   One Requirement for Each Capability or Performance Parameter
                                                                                              1
Figure 37.1 Requirements Driven Capabilities
                                                         37.3 Requirements Solution Development Methodology        435

Referral For more information regarding feature-based speciﬁcations, refer to Chapter 31 Spec-
iﬁcation Development Practices.

To illustrate how this occurs, consider the table shown in Figure 37.2. The left side provides a
tabular listing of speciﬁcation requirements that include a reference identiﬁer (REQ_ID), speciﬁ-
cation paragraph number, and requirements statement. Ideally the speciﬁcation requirements are
written as singular requirements statements that specify one and only one operational or functional
capability.
     We can extract individual capabilities from requirements statements containing singular and
compound requirements as shown on the right side of Figure 37.2. The capabilities are then assim-
ilated into a hierarchy of capabilities, each linked to applicable speciﬁcation requirements.

Step 5: Resolve Requirements Issues and Clariﬁcations
Multi-level decision making requires that issues at higher levels be resolved quickly.
      1. Investigate the accuracy, consistency, and completeness of the set of requirements and inter-
         faces to other sets of requirements.
      2. Resolve any critical operational issues (COIs) or critical technical issues (CTIs).
      3. Resolve any missing, misplaced, conﬂicting, duplicated, or compound requirements.
      4. Verify that each requirement is applicable to the entity. If not, place it in the appropriate
         entity’s item development speciﬁcation.
      5. Eliminate any irrelevant or non-valued-added requirements; clarify any ambiguous
         requirements.
      6. Verify that each requirement is realistic, achievable, measurable, testable, and veriﬁable.



                                                          3   Ideal
 1                                                                    2
     Specification Requirements Table                                               Capability Table
     Reqmt.     Specification        Requirement                          CAP ID      Capability     Performance
       ID         Para. #             Statement                                                      Constraints
     REQ_48      3.2.1           Singular Requirement                     CAP_100    Capability A
     REQ_49      3.2.1.1         Singular Requirement                     CAP _101 Capability A1
     REQ_50      3.2.1.2         Singular Requirement                     CAP _102 Capability A2
     REQ_51      3.2.1.2.1       Singular Requirement                     CAP _103 Capability A21
     REQ_52      3.2.1.2.2       Singular Requirement                     CAP _104 Capability A22
     REQ_53      3.2.1.2.3       Singular Requirement                     CAP _105 Capability A23
     REQ_54      3.2.1.3         Requirements A and B                     CAP _106 Capability A3

     REQ_55      3.2.1.3.1       Requirements A and B                     CAP _107 Capability A31

     REQ_56      3.2.1.3.2       Requirements A,B, & C                    CAP _108 Capability A32
                                                                          CAP _109 Capability A321
                                                                          CAP _110 Capability A322

                                    Reality      4                        CAP _111 Capability A323
      Where:
      FCI = Functional Configuration Item                                 CAP _112 Capability A3


Figure 37.2 Extracting FCIs from Speciﬁcation Requirements
436     Chapter 37   Developing an Entity’s Requirements Domain Solution

Step 6: Verify and Validate Requirements Solution
Throughout the development of the Requirements Domain Solution, you should continuously
verify:
      1. The integrity of SPS or item developmental speciﬁcation requirements to User source and
         contract documentation.
      2. Relevance of each requirement to the entity as bounded by the contract or task scope.
      3. Achievement of each requirement within technology, cost, schedule and risk constraints.
      4. Whether all requirements issues and concerns have been resolved to the satisfaction of all
         stakeholders.
      5. Whether the evolving Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions are traceable
         to and fully compliant with the Requirements Domain Solution.
The Requirements Domain Solution should also be validated with Users and other key stake-
holders via Technical Interchange Meetings (TIMS), interviews, technology demonstrations, rapid
prototypes, and models and simulations.
    When the Requirements Domain Solution reaches maturity, technical review events such as
the System Requirements Review (SRR), Hardware Speciﬁcation Review (HSR), Software Spec-
iﬁcation Review (HSR), and In-Process Reviews (IPRs) should be conducted. The events should
communicate and obtain consensus buy-in from key stakeholders, as appropriate, of the Require-
ments Domain Solution.

Referral For more information about technical reviews, refer to Chapter 54 Technical Review
Practices.

Step 7: Establish and Maintain Requirements
Solution Baseline
Once the Requirements Domain solution is approved, establish an entity Requirements Baseline—
such as a System Requirements Baseline—for requirements allocations to lower levels, future deci-
sion making, and change control of the requirements. Incorporate each entity’s Requirements
Baseline into the evolving Developmental Conﬁguration.
    Using this methodology, let’s identify some of the Requirements Domain Solution challenges.


37.4 REQUIREMENTS DOMAIN SOLUTION CHALLENGES

When the Requirements Domain Solution is developed, there are several challenges that the User,
Acquirer, and System Developer(s) need to address. Consider the following challenges:

Challenge 1: Understanding of the Problem Space
Do we thoroughly understand and have we articulated the problem or issue—the problem space—
the User is attempting to solve?

Challenge 2: Development of the “Right” System
Do the requirements specify necessary and sufﬁcient capabilities, performance, and characteristics
for a deliverable system, product, or service that fulﬁlls the solution space(s)?
                                                                      37.6 Guiding Principles   437

Challenge 3: Stakeholder Operational Needs
If we develop the system according to these requirements, will the deliverable system, product, or
service fulﬁll the User’s intended operational needs—validation of achievement?

Challenge 4: Stakeholder Interest Representation
Do the requirements represent the consensus and prioritized interests of key stakeholders and life
cycle phases within resource constraints?

Challenge 5: Requirements Veriﬁability
Are the requirements realistic, achievable, testable, measurable, and veriﬁable?

Challenge 6: Fitness-for-Use Criteria
Do the requirements, as stated, satisfy “ﬁtness-for-use” criteria required by the Operations, Behav-
ioral, and Physical Domain Solutions?

Challenge 7: Development Risks
Do the requirements, as stated, pose any unacceptable technical, technology, operational, support,
cost, and schedule risks?

Challenge 8: Contract Risks
Can the requirements, as stated, be implemented by a competent organization with a given level
of capability within the allowable cost and schedule constraints?

37.5 REQUIREMENTS DOMAIN SOLUTION WORK PRODUCTS

The Requirements Domain Solution:
    1. Is characterized via a hierarchical speciﬁcation tree of multi-level entity development,
       process, and material speciﬁcations, System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) as well as
       User operational needs.
    2. Consists of a set of derived capabilities with linkages to speciﬁcation requirements.
    3. Includes a Requirements Traceability Matrix (RTM) that documents requirements alloca-
       tion to lower levels and vertical traceability to the SPS and User operational needs, and
       horizontal traceability between requirements.
    4. Is supported by working papers and tools such as analyses, models, and simulations that
       document the technical and scientiﬁc basis for informed decision making.

37.6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern developing an entity’s Requirements Domain Solution practices.

Principle 37.1 The ﬁrst step in developing any SYSTEM/entity solution begins with creating,
bounding, and specifying the requirements domain solution.
438    Chapter 37   Developing an Entity’s Requirements Domain Solution

Principle 37.2 Every requirement must be traceable to a source or originating requirement
and a cost to implement; untraceable requirements should be eliminated or linked to a source
requirement.


37.7 SUMMARY

Our discussion of the Requirements Domain Solution highlighted the key elements and work products of the
solution space. Remember the Requirements Domain Solution is highly collaborative and iterative with the
Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions. Requirements established for this solution bound
the solution space from which the Operations, Behavioral, and Physical Solutions are developed.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Create a multi level system architecture hierarchy diagram.
   (b) Derive the system’s speciﬁcation tree from the system architecture
   (c) Describe and bound what development speciﬁcations are required for the system and provide
       rationale.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media. What guidance is provided regarding developing of the
   Requirements Domain Solution? Document and report your results.
2. Contact a contract program within your organization. Interview the lead SEs and research HOW the
   program: 1) formulated its Requirements Domain Solution, 2) manages the requirements baselines, and
   3) links the Requirements Domain Solution to the Operations Domain Solution.
3. Select one of your organization’s system speciﬁcations and develop an architectural framework (hierarchy)
   for the Requirements Domain Solution.
   (a) How well do the requirements and capabilities map?
   (b) Are there missing, misplaced, conﬂicting, or duplicated requirements?
   (c) Test the syntax of each requirement. Does the set of requirements comply with criteria discussed later
        in Chapter 33 on requirements statement development?
   (d) Identify any technical issues in the set of requirements.
Chapter              38

     Developing an Entity’s
     Operations Domain Solution

38.1 INTRODUCTION

At this point, you should have an understanding of the Requirements Domain Solution. The next
step is to derive the entity’s Operations Domain Solution. The Operations Domain Solution focuses
on HOW the User intends to deploy, operate, and support the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)—
namely the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM—to perform organizational missions
and achieve mission objectives.
     This chapter addresses the Operations Domain Solution identiﬁed in the SE Process Model.
Our discussions address objectives, key elements, and sequence in the SE Process Model work-
ﬂow, development responsibility, dependencies, development methodology, challenges, and work
products.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
     1. What is the objective of the Operations Domain Solution?
     2. What are the key elements of the Operations Domain Solution?
     3. What is the relationship of the Operations Domain Solution to the SE Process Model?
     4. What is the relationship of the Operations Domain Solution with the Requirements, Behav-
        ioral, and Physical Domain Solutions?
     5. What is the relationship between required operational capabilities and mission operations?
     6. What methodology is employed to develop the Operations Domain Solution?
     7. What are the work products that represent the Operations Domain Solution?
     8. How do you verify and validate the Operations Domain Solution?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
     • Operational Architecture A model-based representation depicting HOW role-based
       system elements (actors) are integrated to deliver products, by-products, or services to
       achieve performance-based organizational mission objectives outcomes.
     • Operational Asset A physical system, product, or service that an organization employs to
       perform or support missions and achieve organizational objectives.



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                              439
440     Chapter 38   Developing an Entity’s Operations Domain Solution

      • Operations Function “Tasks, actions, and activities performed with available resources to
        accomplish deﬁned mission objectives and tasks environments planned or expected.”
        (Source: Adapted from former MIL-STD-499 DRAFT, Appendix A, Glossary, A.3 Deﬁni-
        tions, p. 37)

Operations Domain Solution Development Objective
The objective of the Operations Domain Solution activity is to identify, formulate, and document
HOW the User envisions deploying, operating, supporting, and disposing of the deliverable system,
product, or service to accomplish organizational missions and successfully achieve the mission
objectives.

Key Elements of the Operations Domain Solution
The Operations Domain Solution consists of a number of key elements that require consideration
during the development of the solution. Operational elements include missions, mission objectives,
Mission Event Timeline (MET), operational assets, OPERATING ENVIRONMENT entities, use
cases, and use case scenarios.

Operations Domain Solution Dependencies
The multi-level Operations Domain Solution is highly iterative and requires close collaboration
and coordination with the development of the Requirements, Behavioral, and Physical Domain
Solutions as shown in Figure 26.3. Iterations are also required to ensure that the SYSTEM OF
INTEREST (SOI) is properly balanced—that is, optimal—from an overall development and life
cycle perspective—in terms of technical, cost, schedule, support, and risks.

Operations Domain Solution Development Sequencing
The Operations Domain Solution evolves slightly behind but concurrently with the Requirements
Domain Solution and ahead of the Behavioral and Physical Domain Solutions as shown in Figure
23.2.

Operations Domain Solution Development Responsibility
Responsibility for the Operations Domain Solution resides with the program’s Technical Director
or Project Engineer and is usually delegated to a Lead SE for the program. The Lead SE facilitates
the development of the Operations Domain Solution by ensuring that all operational and discipli-
nary stakeholder interests are represented in the operational architecture and System Concept of
Operations (ConOps).
     As key elements of the Operations Domain Solution are approved and released, Conﬁguration
Management (CM) administers formal change management in accordance with direction from a
Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB) or Software Conﬁguration Control Board (SCCB) of SYSTEM
or entity stakeholders.


38.2 DEVELOPING THE OPERATIONAL ARCHITECTURE

The Operations Domain Solution is structured around a framework referred to as the operational
architecture. The operational architecture identiﬁes the entities that interact during all phases of the
mission. These entities include persons, places, roles, or things—that is, objects. The Uniﬁed Mod-
eling Language (UMLTM) refers to these as actors. Whereas Figure 17.2 symbolizes actors as ana-
lytical “stick ﬁgures,” the operational architecture typically employs “clip art” objects such as
                                                38.3 Operations Domain Solution Development Methodology             441

                       GPS
             2       Navigation                                                 GPS
                                                                              Navigation
                                                                                           3



      Mobile                                                                               5
Telecommunications                                                                                   Mobile
                                       8                                                       Telecommunications


  6                                                                      1                                   4
                                       Tunnel
                                                 7




      9                           12                        13
           OPERATING                     GPS
                                          GPS
          ENVIRONMENT                  Navigation
                                        Navigation
                                                                  Geophysical &        14
                                                                     Natural              SystemofofInterest
                                                                                         System      Interest
      10                                                         Communications                (SOI)
                                                                                                (SOI)
                                  11
             External
              External                                               Threats
                                         Mobile
                                          Mobile
           Human-Made
            Human-Made             Telecommunications
                                    Telecommunications
             Systems
              Systems


Figure 38.1 Mobile Transportation System Operational Architecture Example


buildings, trucks, and computers that more closely resemble the real world. Figure 38.1 provides
an illustration of a Car-Driver System and how it communicates with other systems.
     While operational architectures can be developed for any entity within a system,
most are developed for the upper system levels of abstraction—SYSTEM, PRODUCT, or SUB-
SYSTEM—from a User’s perspective. Consider the following example:


  EXAMPLE 38.1
An operational architecture of a printed circuit board in a desktop computer system may be of limited
interest to most computer Users. In contrast, NASA’s JPL Mars Exploration Program users are very interested
in various aspects of the operational architectures for landing systems and deployment of their rovers includ-
ing HOW events during those phases may impact the designs of their EQUIPMENT.

The key elements of an operational architecture originate and are derived using the System Element
Architecture template shown in Figure 10.1. In general, the intent of the operational architecture
is to EXPOSE the actors, relationships, and interactions of the MISSION SYSTEM, SUPPORT
SYSTEM, and their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Typically, two or more interoperable, orga-
nizational assets—such as the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM—are operationally
conﬁgured and integrated to conduct missions to achieve outcome-based results.


38.3 OPERATIONS DOMAIN SOLUTION
DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY

The Operations Domain Solution is developed as a key element of the SE Process Model as shown
in Figure 26.1. The highly collaborative and iterative integration of the Operations Domain Solu-
tion with the Requirements, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions is often very chaotic and
confusing.
442     Chapter 38   Developing an Entity’s Operations Domain Solution

     We can minimize the chaos and confusion by applying an iterative methodology that enables
us to create the Operations Domain Solution. The methodology represents one of many approaches
for developing the Operations Domain Solution. View these steps as an example and tailor them
to suit your business domain and systems applications.
Step 1:     Conduct a mission analysis.
Step 2:     Identify system elements and actors.
Step 3:     Develop actor-based operational architecture.
Step 4:     Develop system operations workﬂow sequences.
Step 5:     Allocate mission operations to phases of operation.
Step 6:     Establish the Mission Event Timeline (MET).
Step 7:     Translate mission operations into system use cases and scenarios.
Step 8:     Identify the system modes and states of operation.
Step 9:     Derive system capabilities from use cases and scenarios.
Step 10:    Develop the system Concept of Operations (ConOps).
Step 11:    Resolve critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs) and risks.
Step 12:    Verify and validate operational solution.
Step 13:    Establish and maintain the Baseline Concept Description (BCD).

Referral For additional information about the SE Process Model, refer to Chapter 26.

Step 1: Conduct a Mission Analysis
The System Architect, in collaboration with the System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT),
begins by developing a full understanding of the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) opera-
tional requirements. During the formulation of the concept, the System Architect or LSE collabo-
rates with various system stakeholders to fully understand and validate their operational needs and
vision for the new system within the scope established by the contract and SPS.
     Stakeholder analysis is accomplished in conjunction with a mission analysis of the Level 0
SYSTEM—the User’s SYSTEM. The purpose of the analysis is to understand HOW the User envi-
sions operating and maintaining the MISSION SYSTEM to achieve organizational objectives
within the prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. The analysis should:
      1. Identify types of missions and system use cases for each type of mission.
      2. Address all aspects of MISSION SYSTEM operations including pre-mission, mission, and
         post-mission operations
      3. Identify OPERATING ENVIRONMENT threats and most likely scenarios within each
         phase and mode of operation.
Mission analysis should be conducted in conjunction with Understand and Bound the Problem and
Solutions Space step of the SE Process Model and Requirements Domain Solution methodology.
The analysis should identify any gaps between the SPS or entity’s item development speciﬁcation
requirements and WHAT capabilities and characteristics are required to successfully accomplish
the mission and objectives.
     If “gaps” exist between MISSION operational needs and documented requirements, confer
with the entity’s owner or program’s Technical Director. As appropriate, the program has a pro-
fessional obligation to inform the Acquirer and User regarding the gaps and provide a recommended
                                   38.3 Operations Domain Solution Development Methodology      443

course of action to resolve the “gaps” to support an informed decision by the Acquirer based on
collaborative consultation with the User.
     The mission analysis should also produce a Mission Event Timeline (MET) that establishes the
time-based performance benchmark for allocating and assessing mission operations. The MET and
operations should be synchronized, modeled, and simulated for resolution of conﬂicts. Below the
SYSTEM level, internal timelines should be established and allocated as entity capability per-
formance budgets and margins.
     Most likely and worst-case scenarios anticipated to be encountered during the pre-mission,
mission, and post-mission operations should also be identiﬁed and prioritized in terms of likelihood
or probability of occurrence. These include:
    1. MISSION SYSTEM interruptions and malfunctions.
    2. SUPPORT SYSTEM maintenance and supply interruptions.
    3. Hostile, worst-case NATURAL and INDUCED ENVIRONMENTS.

Step 2: Identify System Element Actors
Based on the mission analysis, assimilate and identify what types of use case operational actors—
such as SUPPORT SYSTEM facilities, supply, training, and data—are required to support appli-
cation of the MISSION SYSTEM to achieve organizational missions and objectives during all
phases of operation—pre-mission, mission, and post-mission.

Step 3: Develop Actor-Based Operational Architecture
Using the actors identiﬁed above, FORMULATE an operational architecture that depicts the User’s
Level 0 SYSTEM implementation of the MISSION SYSTEM within the prescribed OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT. Tools such as N ¥ N (Refer to Figure 39.2) matrices and N2 diagrams provide
an excellent means of graphically depicting the interactions among operational assets.

Step 4: Develop System Operations Workﬂow Sequences
Given the operational architecture, develop an operational workﬂow that depicts the integrated
MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM elements sequences required to:
    1. Prepare for, conﬁgure, train, and deploy for a mission.
    2. Conduct the mission.
    3. Recover and maintain the MISSION SYSTEM following the mission.
For this activity, functional ﬂow block diagrams (FFBDs), entity relationship diagrams (ERDs),
and UMLTM sequence diagrams and interaction diagrams are among the methods used to describe
the overall mission workﬂow and operations. The Operations Domain Solution is captured as a
series of concurrent, multi-level, integrated System Element operations—such as EQUIPMENT,
PERSONNEL, and SUPPORT—that interact as a system to perform the system’s mission and
accomplish its objectives. Figures 18.1 and 18.2 serve as examples.

Author’s Note 38.1 Note that the description above represents an initial starting point. As the
Behavioral and Physical Domain Solutions evolve and mature, downstream design decisions may
force some rethinking and revision of the operations workﬂow. In some cases this may continue
after system deployment when Users have had an opportunity to “ﬁnd a better way or approach”
to more efﬁciently and effectively perform mission operations. Obviously, we strive to “ﬁnd a
better way or approach” up front before we design the system, product, or service. Stakeholder
444     Chapter 38   Developing an Entity’s Operations Domain Solution

assessments of models, simulations, prototypes, and demonstrations are excellent tools for ferret-
ing out some of these operational issues during early system development.

Step 5: Allocate Mission Operations to Phases of Operation
Based on the operational workﬂow sequences documented in Step 4, allocate each operation
or task to the pre-mission, mission, and post-mission phases of operation. For each phase of
operation:
      1. Identify speciﬁc mission-related objectives to be accomplished.
      2. Mark the beginning of each phase of operation with a key event.
      3. Identify key milestones that represent critical control, staging, or waypoints to assess
         progress in accomplishing phase objectives.
Since operations and tasks may be vague, create an Operations Dictionary to document, scope,
and identify the objectives, inputs/outputs, outcomes, and excepted results of each operation.

Step 6: Establish the Mission Event Timeline (MET)
The identiﬁcation of critical control, staging, or waypoints in Step 5 leads to a key question. For
a given system phase and mode of operation, what are the SYSTEM performance time constraints
that must be met to achieve the mission, phase, and mode objectives? The answer to this question
requires that we establish operational performance budgets and design safety margins derived from
the Mission Event Timeline (MET) for each entity. The MET establishes the critical staging points
where the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM must be synchronized to:
      1. Be conﬁgured, prepared, and in a state of mission readiness—or system availability—to
         conduct the mission—pre-mission.
      2. Conduct the mission—mission.
      3. Extract mission data and prepare and deploy the system for the next mission—post-mission.
For each of the phases of operation identiﬁed in Step 6, establish the Mission Event Timeline (METs)
that depicts the sequences and timing of the phases of operation and their key milestones. Figures
16.1 and 49.2 serve as examples.

Referral For more information about performance budgets and safety margins, refer to Chapter
49 System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins Practices.

Step 7: Translate Mission Operations into System Use
Cases and Scenarios
For each mission operation, identify system use cases that depict HOW the User envisions per-
forming the operation. For each use case, identify the most likely and worst-case scenarios that are
anticipated to occur. For each use case:
      1. IDENTIFY the attributes discussed in Chapter 17 System Use Cases and Scenarios.
      2. QUANTIFY the risk—probability of success times the consequences of failure.
      3. PRIORITIZE for resource allocation.
Realistically, the expanse of potential or desired use cases is much greater than the available orga-
nizational development resources or contract value. Therefore, once the uses cases are identiﬁed,
prioritize and negotiate to “ﬁt” within your resource constraints.
                                    38.3 Operations Domain Solution Development Methodology       445

Author’s Note 38.2 The previous point MUST be accomplished during the proposal phase of
a system. Once the contract is awarded and your organization failed to reconcile the “cost to win”
with “price to win” during the proposal effort, and signed up to everything, negotiation favors the
Acquirer. Do yourself and your organization a favor, investigate these priorities during the pro-
posal phase; negotiate PRIOR TO Contract Award.

In general, it is impractical for the User, Acquirer, and System Developer to address every con-
ceivable operational scenario that could occur. However, to ignore most likely scenarios leaves the
SOI vulnerable, not only from a mission perspective but also the cost of the EQUIPMENT and
PERSONNEL safety and lives. You can, however, plan and budget for the most probable or likely
scenarios. The challenge is: How do you identify these most probable or likely scenarios?
     The prioritized results should be discussed with User stakeholders and reconciled with the avail-
able budget. The most probable or likely scenarios that are determined to be within the scope of the
contract should be documented. Once the most probable or likely scenarios are identiﬁed for each
mode, link them to the system phases, modes, and use cases of operation.

Unanticipated or Unscheduled MISSION SYSTEM Events and Conditions. Depend-
ing on a SYSTEM’s mission and application use cases, systems often encounter unanticipated or
unscheduled events and conditions (scenarios, malfunctions, etc.) in their OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT. Scenarios originate with: 1) the SOI, 2) NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, 3) INDUCED
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, or 4) external HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS. From a system safety,
reliability, vulnerability, and survivability perspective, the system should be designed with a degree
of robustness that enables it to tolerate, respond to, and survive these situations. You may be asking
the question: WHY should we be concerned with use case based scenarios? The answer lies in the
response: WHAT are the necessary and sufﬁcient level of capabilities and robustness that will
enable the system solution to respond and react to the most likely scenarios and achieve its required
mission reliability?

Author’s Note 38.3 Note the operative term “robustness.” You will often hear System Devel-
opers refer to their “robust” design. But, what does it mean? In general, the term refers to the
system’s ability to cope with and tolerate internal and external failures as well as OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT threats during the conduct of its mission and still accomplish most or all mission
objectives.

If your analysis reveals that certain scenarios are not within the scope of your contract, the System
Developer has a professional and ethical obligation to inform and discuss the matter with the
Acquirer via contracting protocol. A remedy should be negotiated, as appropriate.

Referral For additional information about system phases and modes of operation refer to Chapter
19 System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation.

Step 8: Identify the System Modes and States of Operation
Abstract mission operations and their use cases into modes of operation are illustrated in Figure
19.2. For each mode of operation, identify the triggering events (scenarios, interrupts, malfunc-
tions, time-based events, etc.) that force a transition to the other modes of operation.

Author’s Note 38.4 It is very important to delineate the context of usage of modes of operation.
For the User’s Level 0 SYSTEM, phases and modes represent the operational aspects of employing
the SYSTEM OF INTEREST as an element of the Level 0 system operational architecture.
446    Chapter 38     Developing an Entity’s Operations Domain Solution

    As requirements are ﬂowed down to the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS), the System
Developer may create a set of modes of operation unique to each of the deliverable system, product,
or service physical conﬁgurations. The names of those modes may or may not be identically
matched to the speciﬁcation.

Finally, for each mode of operation, identify the system’s operational states and conditions that are
allowable. Examples include ON/OFF, loading, accelerating, braking, and inspecting.

Step 9: Derive System Capabilities from
Use Cases and Scenarios
For each use case and its most likely, probable, and worst case scenarios within each mode of oper-
ation, derive the hierarchical set of system capabilities. Figure 38.2 provides an example. A spread-
sheet matrix or a relational database should be used. Remember, since operational capabilities are
linked to the Requirements Domain Solution, the linking of system capabilities to modes establishes
traceability from SPS or entity item development speciﬁcation (IDS) requirements to the modes of
operation. We refer to these as modal capabilities.

Step 10: Develop the System Concept of Operations (ConOps)
Using the information developed in the steps above, develop a SYSTEM Level Concept of Oper-
ations (ConOps) to document HOW the MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM are envi-
sioned to perform organizational missions. This includes developing the sequential and concurrent
mission operations workﬂows. Some organizations refer to this effort as the operational concept
description (OCD), baseline concept description (BCD), or simply ConOps.
    At a minimum, the ConOps should address the following:




Note:                                                                              System
                                                                                    System
System capabilities must accommodate use cases
amd most probable scenarios applicable to various
                                                      Pre-Mission                    Mission            Post-Mission
System Phases & Modes of Operation                     Pre-Mission                    Mission            Post-Mission
                                                         Phase                       Phase                 Phase
                                                          Phase                       Phase                  Phase


                      Prioritized by           Mode   Mode   Mode    Mode   Mode   Mode   Mode   Mode   Mode   Mode
                      Probability of            1      2      3       4      5      6      7      8      9      10
                       Occurrence
                                       1.1
                             1
Use Cases &                            1._
Most Probable                          2.1
 Operational                 2
                                       2._
  Scenarios
                                       3.1
                             3
                                       3._

                                       4.1
                             4
                                       4._

                                       n.1
                            “n”
                                       n._


Figure 38.2 Modal Scenarios Inﬂuencing System Design Solution
                                   38.3 Operations Domain Solution Development Methodology      447

    1. System operational architecture.
    2. MISSION SYSTEM actor roles, responsibilities, and authorities.
    3. MISSION SYSTEM modes of operation, use cases, and use case scenarios.
    4. SUPPORT SYSTEM actor roles, responsibilities, and authorities.
    5. Pre-mission, mission, and post-mission operations workﬂows.
    6. Operations Dictionary that identiﬁes, scopes, and bounds each operation.
    7. Mission Event Timeline (MET).

Referral For additional information about the ConOps, refer to Chapter 18 System Operations
Model.

Step 11: Resolve Critical Operational and
Technical Issues and Risks
As the Operations Domain Solution evolves, the System Developer inevitably encounters various
critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs), each with a level of criticality and urgency.
Each issue and risk should be resolved quickly to enable lower level decision making to proceed.
This includes:
    1. Capturing in a database.
    2. Linking to the respective contract work breakdown structure (CWBS) element.
    3. Resolving, as appropriate, with the Acquirer and User via contracting protocol.

Step 12: Verify and Validate Operational Solution
Throughout the development of the Operations Domain Solution, the System Developer should
continuously verify and validate the integrity of the evolving solution. This is accomplished via
traceability to the Requirements Domain Solution and User source requirements. Coordinate and
collaborate with the Acquirer and User—the stakeholders—as applicable, via technical interchange
meetings (TIMS), technical reviews and the like.
     As the Operations Domain Solution matures, conduct internal process reviews (IPRs) and
technical reviews with stakeholders, prototypes, and demonstrations. Technical reviews such as
the System Design Review (SDR), Hardware and Software Speciﬁcation Reviews (HSRs/SSRs),
Preliminary Design Reviews (PDRs), and Critical Design Reviews (CDRs) provide a forum for
reviewing the Operations Domain Solution at various stages of development maturity.

Referral For additional information about the technical reviews, refer to Chapter 54 Technical
Review Practices.

Step 13: Establish and Maintain the Baseline
Concept Description (BCD)
Once the system ConOps is approved, the document and relevant supporting documentation—the
operational architecture, modes and states of operations, and mission event timeline (MET)—are
baselined by conﬁguration management and incorporated into the evolving developmental con-
ﬁguration. The collection of information constitutes the Baseline Concept Description (BCD).

Author’s Note 38.5 Although the discussion above addressed the methodology in a linear step-
by-step basis, these steps are highly iterative and have implicit feedback loops to preceding steps.
448   Chapter 38   Developing an Entity’s Operations Domain Solution

Similar iterations occur between the Operations Domain Solution and the Requirements, Behav-
ioral, and Physical Domain Solutions until the total system design matures.


38.4 OPERATIONS DOMAIN SOLUTION
DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

When the Operations Domain Solution is developed, there are several challenges that the User,
Acquirer, and System Developer(s) need to address. Examples include:

Challenge 1: ConOps Acceptance
Do the stakeholders agree with the system Concept of Operations (ConOps) document?

Challenge 2: Use Case Identiﬁcation and Priorities
Do the stakeholders agree with: 1) the use cases and 2) use case priorities?

Challenge 3: Most Likely or Worst-Case
Scenarios and Conditions
Do the system phases and modes of operation reﬂect the anticipated OPERATING ENVIRON-
MENT application and most likely or worst-case scenarios and conditions?

Challenge 4: “Gaps” in Operational Capabilities
Based on a review of the system phases, modes, and states of operation, are there any missing capa-
bilities that have not been speciﬁed or included in the cost estimate?

Challenge 5: “Fitness-for-Use” or Acceptance Criteria
Are the capabilities allocated to system phases and modes of operation necessary and sufﬁcient to
achieve the mission, phase, and mode of operation objectives?

Challenge 6: Performance Timeline(s)
Does the Mission Event Timeline (MET) allocated to system phases and modes of operation pass
the reasonableness test?


38.5 OPERATIONS DOMAIN SOLUTION WORK PRODUCTS

The Operations Domain Solution is documented via a series of work products that represent HOW
the User intends to deploy and employ the MISSION SYSTEM to accomplish various organiza-
tional missions and scenarios. The overall Operations Domain Solution is documented initially in
the System Concept of Operations (ConOps) document.

Author’s Note 38.6 Most people tend to limit their thinking of the Operations Domain Solu-
tion to the SYSTEM level. As requirements are allocated to lower levels by the respective entity/item
development speciﬁcation owners, EACH entity will have its own unique operational concept
description (OCD) of how it will operate and support to fulﬁll the higher level entity’s operations.
For example, a PC board or movable part should have its own unique OCD or Theory of Opera-
tion that serves as the foundation for deriving the Behavioral and Physical Domain Solutions.
                                                                                   General Exercises   449

38.6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis to establish guiding principles that govern
development of an entity’s Operations Domain Solution.

Principle 38.1 The Operations Domain Solution is a derivative of the Requirements Domain
Solution and serves as the foundation for developing the Behavioral Domain Solution.

Principle 38.2 The Operations Domain Solution must be consistent with and traceable to the
Requirements, Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions.


38.7 SUMMARY

The development of the Operations Domain Solution is highly iterative with the Requirements, Behavioral,
and Physical Domain Solutions as they evolve. As the Operations Domain Solution matures, it serves as the
high-level abstraction from which the Behavioral Domain Solution is derived.
     The Operations Domain Solution is:
    1. Derived from the system capability and performance requirements established by the Requirements
       Domain Solution.
    2. Establishes the operational architecture that expresses how system elements interact.
    3. Establishes the system phases and modes of operation and associated use cases.
    4. Creates the Mission Event Timeline (MET).
    5. Maps required operational capabilities to the system phases and modes of operation.
    6. Deﬁnes the system capability operations and tasks.
    7. Allocates MET performance to system capability operations and tasks.
Based on an understanding of the Operations Domain Solution practices, we are now ready to discuss the
development of the Behavioral Domain Solution practices.


NOTE

The Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML®) is a registered trademark of the Object Management Group (OMG).


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. You have been hired as a consultant by an Acquirer to make recommendations for the system
   selected.
   (a) Develop a system operations model that captures HOW the system is envisioned to be operated based
       on interviews with the User.
   (b) Develop an outline for a ConOps to be used to describe the system operations model.
   (c) Describe how the Operations Domain Solution links to its Requirements Domain Solution.
450    Chapter 38    Developing an Entity’s Operations Domain Solution

ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media. What guidance is provided regarding development of the
   Operations Domain Solution? Document and report your results.
2. Contact a contract program within your organization. Interview the Lead SEs and research HOW the
   program:
   (a) Formulated its Operations Domain Solution.
   (b) Manages the requirements baselines.
   (c) Links the Requirements Domain Solution to the Operations Domain Solution.
3. Select one of your organization’s system speciﬁcations and develop a high-level Operations Domain
   Solution.


REFERENCE

MIL-STD-499B (cancelled draft). 1994. Systems Engineering. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

DI-IPSC-81430. 1994. Operational Concept Description. DoD Data Item Description (DID). Washington, DC: Department
  of Defense (DoD).
Chapter              39

     Developing an Entity’s
     Behavioral Domain Solution

39.1 INTRODUCTION

As the Operational Domain Solution evolves and matures, the next stage is to establish the entity’s
Behavioral Domain Solution. During this stage of SE design we elaborate HOW the User might
envision the system sensing, reacting to, processing inputs, and responding to stimuli and cues
internal and external to the system. We do this by identifying WHAT behavioral interactions occur
between Operational Domain Solution elements to accomplish mission objectives. This stage also
represents what may be the:
     1. Most critical and neglected stage of SE design.
     2. Source of many problems that do not surface until System Integration, Test, and Evalua-
        tion (SITE).
When new system development is started, engineers often begin at the wrong end of the system
design solution—which is the Physical Domain Solution. They tend to prematurely focus on hard-
ware and software designs, graphical user interfaces (GUIs), data communications rates, and hard-
ware and software selection. They do this without stopping to understand:
     1. HOW the system is expected to react and respond to operator and external stimuli.
     2. HOW WELL the responses are to be performed.
As a design paradigm, this is a model for disaster. The design paradigm is exacerbated by inex-
perienced, egotistical decision makers who charge ahead and mandate that if you are not “cutting
metal, coding software, and soldering PC board components” the FIRST week after Contract
Award, the program is behind schedule.

Author’s Note 39.1 The design paradigm noted above can be characterized as a “hobby shop”
approach. There are well-founded instances where the paradigm may be valid—as minor modiﬁ-
cations to existing equipment. The context of this observation relates to complex, medium- to large-
scale system development programs. Well-disciplined and experienced SEs understand the fallacies
and pitfalls of this approach and understand how to tailor the methodology to ﬁt within program
constraints without diluting the integrity of the methodology.

The message here is do the job RIGHT “up front” for $X+ or pay $2X+ and consume
2X+ schedule attempting to correct these premature and immature approaches to system develop-

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                451
452     Chapter 39   Developing an Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution

ment. The decision ultimately comes down to “Are you running a hobby shop for amateurs or a
highly efﬁcient and effective performing engineering organization?”
    This chapter expands on the Behavioral Domain Solution description provided in our discus-
sion of the System Solution Domains. Our discussion addresses the components of the Behavioral
Domain Solution: objectives, key elements, sequence in the SE Process Model workﬂow, devel-
opment responsibility, dependencies, development methodology, challenges, and work products.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is the objective of the Behavioral Domain Solution?
      2. What are the key elements of the Behavioral Domain Solution?
      3. What is the relationship of the Behavioral Domain Solution to the SE Process Model?
      4. Explain the relationship of the Behavioral Domain Solution to the Requirements, Opera-
         tions, and Physical Domain Solutions?
      5. What is the relationship between speciﬁcation requirements and capabilities?
      6. What is the methodology used to develop the Behavioral Domain Solution?
      7. What are the work products that represent the Behavioral Domain Solution?
      8. How do you verify and validate the Behavioral Domain Solution?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Transaction “In software engineering, a data element, control element, signal, event, or
        change of state that causes, triggers, or initiates an action or sequence of actions.” (Source:
        IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Transaction Analysis “A software development technique in which the structure of a system
        is derived from analyzing the transactions that the system is required to process.” (Source:
        IEEE 610.12-1990)

Behavioral Domain Solution Objective
The objective of the Behavioral Domain Solution development activity is to conceptualize, for-
mulate, and translate the Operations Domain Solution use cases, scenarios, and capabilities into a
set of behavioral capabilities, interactions, and responses that support all phases of operation—pre-
mission, mission, and post-mission.


39.2 KEY ELEMENTS OF THE BEHAVIORAL
DOMAIN SOLUTION

The Behavioral Domain Solution is characterized by several elements that provide the basis for
formulating system behavioral reactions and responses. These include scenarios, stimuli, capabil-
ities, resources, constraints, and responses. Capabilities are implemented by one or more system
operations that may consist of at least two or more system tasks. Each system operation and task:
      1. Communicates via one or more interactions.
      2. Is bounded by at least one or more performance budgets and safety margins.

Referral For more information about performance budgets and safety margins, refer to Chapter
49 System Analysis, Performance Budgets, and Safety Margins Practices.
                                                   39.3 Developing the Behavioral Architecture   453

The Need for the Behavioral Domain Solution
You may ask: why do we need a Behavioral Domain Solution? The answer lies in understanding
HOW System Developers, as humans, approach design problems.
      As humans, we have differing levels of training, knowledge, and experience. Within a design
team, some members focus on WHAT the system is required to accomplish—its behavior—while
others are focused on HOW a circuit will be designed, WHAT data exchange protocol to use, or
WHAT software operating system language is to be used—its implementation.
      As an SE, you have to exhibit leadership and establish control of these wanderings and diver-
sions; otherwise, frustration, chaos, and havoc can prevail. So get the group focused on one task
at a time. First, understand WHAT the system is required to accomplish via the Behavioral Domain
Solution. Then, as the Behavioral Domain Solution gains some maturity, shift to the second task—
concurrent development of the Physical Domain Solution that addresses HOW to implement the
Behavioral Domain Solution via physical components.

Behavioral Domain Solution Dependencies
The multi-level Behavioral Domain Solution is highly iterative and requires close coordination and
collaboration with the Requirements, Operations, and Physical Domain Solutions as they as shown
in Figure 26.3. Iterations are also required to ensure that the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) is
optimally balanced from an overall development and life cycle perspective of technical, cost, sched-
ule, support, and risks.

Behavioral Domain Solution Development Sequencing
The Behavioral Domain Solution is a multi-disciplined activity lead by the entity’s Lead SE. The
Behavioral Domain Solution evolves slightly behind but concurrently with the Requirements and
Operations Domain Solutions and ahead of the Physical Domain Solution, as shown in Figure 23.2.

Behavioral Domain Solution Development Responsibility
Responsibility for the Behavioral Domain Solution resides with the program’s Technical
Director or Project Engineer and is usually delegated to a Lead SE for the program. The Lead SE
facilitates the development of the Behavioral Domain Solution by ensuring that all operational and
disciplinary stakeholder interests are represented in the logical/functional architecture and its
description.
     As key elements of the Behavioral Domain Solution are approved and released,
Conﬁguration Management (CM) administers formal change management in accordance with direc-
tion from a Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB) or Software Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB)
of SYSTEM or entity stakeholders.


39.3 DEVELOPING THE BEHAVIORAL ARCHITECTURE

As the SYSTEM or entity’s operational architecture evolves and matures, the next step is to under-
stand HOW the SYSTEM and its entities—the UML® actors—interact and respond to various
operator and external system stimuli and cues. The foundation for this understanding begins with:
    1. The entities identiﬁed in the operational architecture.
    2. Capabilities speciﬁed in its speciﬁcation—such as System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
       or item development speciﬁcation.
454   Chapter 39   Developing an Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution

At this stage of the SYSTEM or entity’s development, the entity is simply an abstraction. As an
analytical abstraction, we refer to it as having logical or associative relationships. The challenge
here is creating a logical/functional framework that captures these relationships. We refer to it as
the logical or functional architecture.

Foundation for the Logical Architecture
The logical or functional architecture exposes the key, multi-level logical or functional capabili-
ties and interrelationships between the Operations Domain Solution elements. The logical/
functional architecture provides a framework to depict the behavioral interactions of HOW the
SYSTEM or entity responds to its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT for various missions and
scenarios.
     As the SYSTEM or entity processes inputs, it exhibits behavioral patterns and characteristics.
To accomplish the internal processing, a SYSTEM or entity provides one or more capabilities to
transform the set of inputs into behavior, products, by-products, and services. If the system is
required to interact with friendly, benign, or hostile external entities in its OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT, additional capabilities ensure a level of interoperability with or survivability during
interactions with those entities.

Referral For more information about system interactions, refer to Chapter 15 System Interac-
tions with Its Operating Environment and Chapter 43 System Interface Analysis, Design, and
Control Practices.

As we analyze this environment, we discover there are virtual and physical system entities or actors
(UML®)—namely people, capabilities, operations, functions, events, roles, constraints, and con-
trols—that interact with each other or represent the behavior, products, by-products, or services
produced by the system. We generically classify people, capabilities, operations, functions, events,
roles, constraints, and controls as objects, entities, or actors within the SYSTEM. In general, the
actors, objects, or entities are identiﬁed as nouns—the same as persons, places, or things.
     The logical/functional architecture portrays WHAT relationships and interactions are required
to contribute capabilities to enable the SYSTEM to perform its missions. Note that this character-
ization DOES NOT address HOW these objects and interactions will be physically implemented;
the Physical Domain Solution addresses HOW via its physical architecture. As the cliché goes,
function always precedes form and ﬁt.

Logical/Functional Architecture Development Methodology
We have established that the logical/functional architecture exposes the objects, entities, or actors
that exist within a given system level of abstraction and class entity—such as PRODUCT SUB-
SYSTEM, and ASSEMBLY and their interdependency relationships. The question is: HOW do we
develop the architecture?
     One approach is to employ a simple methodology that consists of the steps listed below:
Step 1:   Identify logical objects or entities.
Step 2:   Identify each entity’s capabilities.
Step 3:   Create a logical interactions matrix.
Step 4:   Create the logical/functional architecture.
Let’s elaborate further on each of these steps.

Step 1: Identify Logical Objects or Entities. The ﬁrst step in developing a logical or func-
tional architecture is to simply identify the SYSTEM or entity’s required capabilities; create a list.
                                                                      39.3 Developing the Behavioral Architecture           455

Then, translate the list into a hierarchy tree similar to the one shown in Figure 39.1, which illus-
trates a Car-Driver SYSTEM.

Step 2: Identify Each Entity’s Capabilities. Once you identify the SYSTEM or entity’s key
capabilities, the next step is to establish their interrelationships. The method used depends on the
size and complexity of the SYSTEM or entity. If you attempt to start with system block diagram
SBD, the leap may be too challenging. You may discover that you are not only contending with
the relationships but also the graphics. Interconnecting lines may be criss-crossing everywhere,
making the diagram unnecessarily complex and confusing.

Step 3: Create a Logical Interactions Matrix. So, how do we model system logical/functional
and interactions? First, we need to understand which capabilities have logical associations. We can
do this by creating a matrix as shown in the upper left section of Figure 39.2. The N ¥ N or N2 matrix
allows us to link one capability to another as well as system stimuli—the inputs—and responses—
the outputs. Capability A has a logical entity relationship to Capability B, B to C, and so forth. For
large, complex systems, a summary matrix is invaluable as a foundation for the next step.

Author’s Note 39.2 Although it appears to create an extra step, the matrix serves as an impor-
tant analytical pairwise comparison method. Under the pairwise method we focus on one element
and then determine if it has entity relationships with each of the remaining elements across a row
of the matrix. The next step involves creating a graphical rendering of the logical architecture for
presentation purposes. If we had attempted to create the next step ﬁrst, we would have lacked a
clean method of ensuring every interaction is considered, which is the strength of the matrix and
N2 approaches.

Step 4: Create the Logical/Functional Architecture. Once the logical interaction matrix is
established, we translate the interactions into a graphic referred to as an N2 diagram as shown
in the lower right portion of Figure 39.2. Each of the capabilities represents a multi-level set of


                                        1
                                                Car-DriverSystem
                                               Car-Driver  System
                                            Logical Architecture Elements
                                             Logical Architecture Elements




 2                                             3
         Driver                                      Car
          Driver                                      CarSystem
                                                          System
         Capability                                   Capability
                                                       Capability
          Capability




                   5                           7                             9                         11
                       Observation
                        Observation                  Propulsion
                                                      Propulsion                  Lighting
                                                                                   Lighting                   Resources
                                                                                                               Resources
                         Capability
                          Capability                  Capability
                                                       Capability                 Capability
                                                                                   Capability                 Capability
                                                                                                               Capability



     4                          6                               8                       10
                                      Command,
                                       Command,                     Passenger
                                                                     Passenger
            Chassis
             Chassis                                                                         Environmental
                                                                                              Environmental
           Capability                  Control,&&
                                      Control,                        Cab
                                                                       Cab                      Capability
            Capability              Communications                  Capability                   Capability
                                     Communications                  Capability
                                       Capability
                                        Capability

Figure 39.1 Car-Driver System Logical Elements
456                Chapter 39             Developing an Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution

                               N x N Matrix
                                      Capability
                          Input                            Output
                                  A         B          C
          Input                       1
                                                                                    What Relationships Exist
 Capability




                 A                             2

                 B                    3                4                             Between Capabilities ?
                 C                                           5

       Output                                                                                 N2 Diagram

                                                       Input                    Capability
                                                                                 Capability
                                                                    1                                  2
                                                                                   AA


                                                                                      3          Capability
                                                                                                  Capability             4
                                                                                                    BB


                                                                                                                Capability
                                                                                                                 Capability          5       Output
                                                                                                                   CC


Figure 39.2 Behavioral Solution Capability Interactions


                      1
                                  System                                                        System
External                                                         External                     Attributes
                                  A                C                                          • Attribute 1
 Input                                                           Output             2
                                                                                              • Attribute 2
                                                                                              • Etc.
                                           B
                                                                                              Operations
                                                                                              • Capability 1
                                                                                              • Capability 2
                                                                                              • Etc.



 3                                    4                                 5                         6                          7
 External Input                            Capability A                     Capability B               Capability C              External Output

              Attributes                    Attributes                       Attributes                 Attributes                Attributes
              • Attribute I1                • Attribute A1                   • Attribute B1             • Attribute C1            • Attribute O1
              • Attribute I2                • Attribute A2                   • Attribute B2             • Attribute C2            • Attribute O2
              • Etc.                        • Etc.                           • Etc.                     • Etc.                    • Etc.

              Operations                    Operations                       Operations                 Operations               Operations
              • Operation I1                • Operation A1                   • Operation B1             • Operation C1           • Operation O1
              • Operation I2                • Operation A2                   • Operation B2             • Operation C2           • Operation O2
              • Etc.                        • Etc.                           • Etc.                     • Etc.                   • Etc.



Figure 39.3 Object-Oriented Representation of Logical Entities


operations or tasks that perform the actions required to produce the expected outcome and levels
of performance. Both the N ¥ N and N2 methods enable us to focus on interactions without being
distracted with “packaging” the graphic.
     An alternative to the N2 method is the object-oriented (OO) approach shown in Figure 39.3.
This method illustrates each capability’s name, attributes, and operations. Similar annotations could
be added to the N2 diagram shown in Figure 39.2.
                                                         39.3 Developing the Behavioral Architecture      457

Guidepost 39.1 At this point we have introduced HOW to construct the basic logical/functional
architecture. The key here is identifying the primary capabilities of the SYSTEM or entity. HOW
we identify these elements depends on whether a system is precedented or unprecedented—thereby
avoiding unnecessarily analyses if the basic architectural elements are known.

Precedented System Logical/Functional
Architecture Development
As discussed in Part I, most human-made systems are precedented systems. Their proven archi-
tectures and technologies improve on existing designs. Consider the following example:



 EXAMPLE 39.1
As a precedented system, a car has a chassis, engine, and so forth. Although you need to avoid paradigms
that limit creative design solutions and help us to “think outside the box,” we do not have to functionally re-
derive a car’s fundamental design—create the chassis, engine, and body from a blank piece of paper. We
simply defer to a conventional vehicle architecture as an initial starting point.

     Hypothetically, if you had two control groups and tasked each to create the logical architec-
ture for the same system, the graphics may and probably will be different. Is one architecture
RIGHT and the other WRONG? Generally, no. ALWAYS have multiple approaches to solving the
same class of engineering problem. We see this in commercial products such as automobiles, com-
puters, and TVs. In general, they ﬁll similar market solution space abstractions—in this example,
transportation, steering, and the like.

Unprecedented System Logical/Functional
Architecture Development
In contrast, unprecedented systems may require new “thinking outside the box” approaches to a
SYSTEM’s logical/functional architecture. Consider the following example:



 EXAMPLE 39.2
Although the NASA had previously landed unmanned probes on the Moon, the Apollo Lunar Lander was a
ﬁrst in the design of a manned lunar landing and launch craft.



 EXAMPLE 39.3
NASA’s Skylab program represented a ﬁrst for human habitation in a space-based laboratory environment,
particularly in performing human tasks in a weightless environment for an extended period of time.

Where unprecedented systems are the case, the development team derives the logical/functional
architecture from abstract mission or scientiﬁc objectives—namely “Do great and wonderful
science.” In these cases SEs, in collaboration with principal investigators, derive and extract
the SYSTEM’s capabilities. Some Acquirers may initiate study contracts or proof of concept
demonstration contracts, deriving SYSTEM capabilities via a series of “down select” contracting
stages.
458     Chapter 39   Developing an Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution

Modeling the Logical/Functional Architecture
Logical/functional architectures employ model-based representations via system block diagrams
(SBDs), object diagrams, among other graphical methods, to expose SYSTEM or entity embedded
elements and their relationships. However, SBDs DO NOT expose the logical sequences of data
exchanges or behavioral interactions that occur between actors or objects. Therefore, behavioral
modeling tools are employed, in combination with timelines and performance budget and safety
margin allocations, to evaluate the overall effectiveness of each candidate architecture solution.
Behavioral modeling tools include N2 diagrams, UML® interaction diagrams, functional ﬂow block
diagrams (FFBDs), and control and data ﬂows.
    You may ask: WHY do we need to create a model of a logical/functional architecture?
Logical/functional architecture modeling and its internal capability processing are crucial for:
      1. Driving out or exposing undiscovered requirements.
      2. Establishing SYSTEM or entity performance budgets and margins.
      3. “Load” balancing to optimize system performance.
      4. Allocating and ﬂowing down requirements to lower levels via item development
         speciﬁcations.

Referral For more information about performance budgets and safety margins, refer to Chapter
49 System Analysis, Performance Budgets, and Design Safety Margins.

Referral For more information about modeling architectures, refer to Chapter 20 Modeling
System and Support Operations Practices and Chapter 51 System Modeling and Simulation.

Final Thoughts
Logical entity relationships enable us to communicate the associations or connectivity required
between two or more logical entities based on a validated operational need. Since these are need-
based interactions, the emphasis is on:
      1. WHO interacts with WHOM.
      2. WHAT is to be interacted or communicated.
      3. WHEN the behavioral interactions occur.
      4. Under WHAT conditions.
Based on this discussion, let’s describe the basic methodology used to develop the Behavioral
Domain Solution. Tailor the methodology to ﬁt your speciﬁc business needs.

Guidepost 39.2 At this juncture, we have described HOW to create the logical/functional archi-
tecture that serves as the framework for the Behavioral Domain Solution. We now shift our focus
to the methodology for creating the overall Behavioral Domain Solution for a SYSTEM or entity.

39.4 BEHAVIORAL DOMAIN SOLUTION
DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY

The Behavioral Domain Solution is developed as a key element of the SE Process Model. The
highly collaborative and iterative convolution of the Behavioral Domain Solution with the Require-
ments, Operations, and Physical Domain Solutions is often very chaotic and confusing.
                                     39.4 Behavioral Domain Solution Development Methodology         459

     We can minimize the chaos and confusion by applying an iterative methodology that enables
us to create the Behavioral Domain Solution. View these steps as an example strategy and tailor
them to suit your business domain and systems application.

Referral For additional information about the SE Process Model, refer to Chapter 26 SE Process
Model.

Author’s Note 39.3 The Behavioral Domain Solution is one area where there are multiple
approaches and methods for deﬁning the solution and its work products. There seems to be no con-
sensus regarding a RIGHT approach or method; we all have our own approach or recipe.
     Our discussions here are intended to focus on the strategy or methodology of Behavioral Solu-
tion Development. The takeaway from this discussion should be key insights as to HOW you might
approach developing a Behavioral Domain Solution. Then, formulate an approach that works for
you, your team, and system development application, and apply the appropriate tools to support
your methodology.

    The methodology consists of the following steps:
Step 1:   Establish the multi-mode logical architecture.
Step 2:   Model mode-based system interactions.
Step 3:   Allocate entity performance budgets and design safety margins.
Step 4:   Analyze system failure modes and effects.
Step 5:   Evaluate and optimize system behavioral performance.
Step 6:   Resolve critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs).
Step 7:   Verify and validate behavioral domain solution.
Step 8:   Establish and maintain the entity behavioral solution baseline.
Let’s elaborate further on each of these steps.

Step 1: Establish the Multi-Mode Logical Architecture
The ﬁrst step in developing the Behavioral Domain Solution is to understand the entity relation-
ships between system capabilities. The relationships and their associated interactions provide the
basis to construct a framework referred to as the logical/functional architecture. Based on the
MISSION SYSTEM, SUPPORT SYSTEM, and OPERATING ENVIRONMENT interactions, for-
mulate a logical architecture that integrates mode-based capabilities, behavior, and interactions. If
appropriate, identify alternative logical architectures. Model, simulate, evaluate, and conduct trade-
offs of the set of architectures. Select the logical architecture that best represents the proper balance
of system performance for all modes of operation. Figure 31.2 provides a high level example of a
logical architecture that captures associative relationships between system capabilities.

Step 2: Model Mode-Based System Interactions
Using the high-level interactions as a foundation, capture the MISSION SYSTEM’s interactions
as a function of phase and mode of operation. Based on each mode’s use cases, model the behav-
ioral interactions “thread” from input to output through the system’s capabilities as shown in Figure
39.4.
460         Chapter 39                Developing an Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution

 Capability Operations
                                                      Capability A                    Capability B                      Capability C
                                                      Pre-Mission                     Pre-Mission                       Pre-Mission
                                                      Operations                      Operations                        Operations
         Pre-Mission


                                                 Capability A                         Capability B                    Capability C
           Mission
                                                 Mission Phase                        Mission Phase                   Mission Phase
                                                  Operations                           Operations                      Operations
         Post -Mission
                                                       Operation                        Operation                         Operation
                                         1                A1                               B1                                C1
                                                                                                                                              5
                                                       Operation          2             Operation                         Operation
                                                                                                             4
                                                          A2                               B2                                C2



   Note: Due to space                                  Operation                        Operation                         Operation
                                                                              3
   restrictions, Capability A,                            A3                               B3                                C3
   B, and C concurrent
   control flows prior to Pre-
   Mission Operations and                                 ?                                 ?                                 ?
   following Post-Mission
   Operations are not shown.

                                                  Capability A                        Capability A                     Capability C
                                                  Post-Mission                        Post-Mission                     Post-Mission
                                                   Operations                          Operations                       Operations

Figure 39.4 Capability Interactions

                                                          Mission Event Timeline (MET)
          t0                                                              t1                    t2                                    t3

           1                                                                  2 Capability B         3                                     Time
                                  Capability A Time Allocation                   Capability B         Capability C Time Allocation
                                   Capability A Time Allocation                   Allocation           Capability C Time Allocation
                                                                                   Allocation


                          4                   Late
 Input                                       Finish
                 Operation
                  Operation PM
                    A1
                     A1                      5
                         Early          Operation
                                         Operation PM
                         Finish            A2
                                            A2                     6
                                                              Operation
                                                               Operation PM
                                                                 A3
                                                                  A3              7
                                                                                  Operations
                                                                                   B1 - Bn
                                                                                                         8
   Where:
   • PM = Performance Margin (includes Design Safety Margin)                                         Operation
                                                                                                      Operation PM
   • Statistical Distributions may be Normal or LogNormal                                               C1
                                                                                                         C1              9
                                                                                                                                           Output
                                                                                                                     Operation
                                                                                                                      Operation PM
                                                                                                                        C2
                                                                                                                         C2                   5
Figure 39.5 Capability “Thread” Time Performance Allocations

Step 3: Allocate Entity Performance Budgets
and Safety Margins
For each phase, mode, use case, and scenario of operation, link capability interactions and per-
formance to time-constrained performance—such as the Mission Event Timeline (MET). Allocate
performance BUDGETS and design safety MARGINS to each logical entity. Include timing per-
formance allocations derived from the Mission Event Timeline (MET), as shown in Figure 39.5.
                                      39.5 Behavioral Domain Solution Development Challenges     461

Step 4: Analyze System Failure Modes and Effects
For those systems that are mission critical or may have the potential to damage EQUIPMENT,
PERSONNEL, the public, or the environment, conduct a Failure Modes and Effects Analysis
(FMEA). For mission critical elements that may involve hazards that are high risk, expand the
FMEA into a Failure Modes, Effect, and Criticality Analysis (FMECA). Former Mil-Std-1629A
Military Standard Procedures for Performing a Failure Modes, Effects, and Criticality Analysis
provides guidance.

Step 5: Evaluate and Optimize
System Behavioral Performance
Evaluate and optimize Behavioral Domain Solution performance relative to the SPS or each entity’s
item development speciﬁcation requirements. For each phase and mode of operation, validate that
each mode’s capabilities and performance interactions will withstand and survive the most likely
and worst case scenarios subject to technical, technology, cost, and schedule constraints.

Step 6: Resolve Critical Operational
and Technical Risks and Issues
As the Behavioral Domain Solution evolves, identify, clarify, and resolve critical operational and
technical issues (COIs/CTIs) and risks. Link the issues and risks to the appropriate CWBS ele-
ments and speciﬁcation requirements. When and where appropriate, collaborate with the Acquirer
and User to resolve the COIs/CTIs via contracting protocol.

Step 7: Verify and Validate Behavioral Domain Solution
Throughout the development of the Behavioral Domain Solution, continuously verify and validate
the completeness and integrity of the evolving solution via document reviews, technical reviews,
prototypes, technology demonstrations, and modeling and simulation. Verify that all aspects of the
Behavioral Domain Solution are traceable back to the source or originating requirements as doc-
umented in the System Requirements Document (SRD)—by way of a formal Request for Proposal
(RFP) solicitation—or in the contract, as applicable via the system’s hierarchical speciﬁcation tree.

Step 8: Establish and Maintain the
Entity Behavioral Solution Baseline
As the SYSTEM and each entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution are approved, establish a formal
baseline to serve as the basis for requirements allocation and ﬂow down, future technical decision
making, and change control. Incorporate the Behavioral Domain Solution and its updates into the
evolving Developmental Conﬁguration.

39.5 BEHAVIORAL DOMAIN SOLUTION
DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

When the Operations Domain Solution is developed, there are several challenges that the User,
Acquirer, and System Developer(s) need to address. Examples include:
Challenge 1: Requirements traceability
Challenge 2: Stakeholder collaboration
Challenge 3: Stakeholder reviews
462     Chapter 39   Developing an Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution

Challenge 4:     Critical issue risk mitigation
Challenge 5:     Baseline management
Challenge 6:     Realism
Challenge 7:     Behavioral solution system description
Challenge 8:     CWBS traceability
Let’s explore some of the key questions that represent challenge to developing the Behavioral
Domain Solution.

Challenge 1: Requirements Traceability
Is the Behavioral Domain Solution traceable to the following?
      1. Requirements Domain Solution System documented in Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
         and development speciﬁcations.
      2. Operations Domain Solution documented in System Concept of Operations (ConOps),
         Mission Event Timelines (METs), system phases and modes of operation, etc.
      3. Physical Domain Solution documented in Physical system architecture, Bills of Materials
         (BOMs) etc.

Challenge 2: Stakeholder Collaboration
Did you consult and collaborate with key stakeholders in developing the Behavioral Domain
Solution?

Challenge 3: Stakeholder Reviews
Have the key stakeholders reviewed and approved, as appropriate, portions or all of the Behavioral
Solution?

Challenge 4: Critical Issue Risk Mitigation
Have all critical operations, technical, technology, support, cost, and schedule risks been identiﬁed
and mitigated?

Challenge 5: Baseline Management
Have the Behavioral Domain Solution work products been incorporated into the evolving Allocated
Baseline of the Developmental Conﬁguration?

Challenge 6: Realism
Can the Behavioral Solution implementation be realistically achieved with physical components
and technologies with an acceptable level of risk within the available cost and schedule constraints?

Challenge 7: Behavioral Solution System Description
Has the Behavioral Domain Solution been adequately documented in the System/Subsystem Design
Description (SSDD) or Interface Design Description (IDD) to a level of detail that permits pro-
curement or development and maintenance of the system or entity?
                                                                                                   Note    463

Challenge 8: CWBS Traceability
Are the elements of the Behavioral Domain Solution traceable to the Contract Work Breakdown
Structure (CWBS) elements?

Behavioral Domain Solution Work Products
Key work products of the Behavioral Domain Solution consist of:
     1. Interaction diagrams for multi-level system capabilities.
     2. UML® sequence diagrams representing processing capabilities.
     3. A logical or functional architecture—such as FFBDs and ERDs.
     4. Capability performance timelines.
     5. Allocations of time-based performance to operations and tasks required to implement the
        capability.


39.6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern development of an entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution practices.

Principle 39.1 The Behavioral Domain Solution is a derivative of the Operations Domain Solu-
tion and provides the foundation for developing the Physical Domain Solution.

Principle 39.2 The Behavioral Domain Solution must be consistent with and traceable to the
Requirements, Operations, and Physical Domain Solutions.


39.7 SUMMARY

Our discussions of the Behavioral Domain Solution highlighted the need for and the evolution of the Behav-
ioral Domain Solution and its logical architecture. We noted the importance of the following:
     1. Identify the logical entities that provide system capabilities.
     2. Understand WHAT capabilities the logical entities are intended to provide.
     3. Express HOW the logical entities relate and interact.
     4. Link logical performance to system performance metrics.
This solution, as typical of the others, progresses to maturity over time. This is accomplished by a lot of col-
laborative iterations, interactions, and negotiations with the Requirements, Operations, and Physical Domain
Solutions.
     Based on this discussion and understanding, we are now ready to address the Physical Domain Solution.


NOTE

The Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML®) is a registered trademark of the Object Management Group (OMG).
464    Chapter 39    Developing an Entity’s Behavioral Domain Solution

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. You have been hired as a consultant by an Acquirer to make recommendations for the system
   selected.
   (a) Identify the actors of the system’s Behavioral Domain Solution.
   (b) Develop the system’s logical or functional architecture.
   (c) Create a matrix to captures the logical entity relationships and interactions.
   (d) Develop high-level interaction diagrams and sequence diagrams that depict actor interactions.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media. What guidance is provided regarding developing of the
   Behavioral Domain Solution? Document and report your results.
2. Contact a contract program within your organization. Interview the lead SEs and research HOW the
   program:
   (a) Formulated its Behavioral Domain Solution.
   (b) Documented the Behavioral Domain Solution.
   (c) Links the Behavioral Domain Solution to the Requirements, Operations, and Physical Domain
       Solutions.
3. Select one of your organization’s system speciﬁcations and create a high-level Behavioral Domain
   Solution.


REFERENCES

IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary        MIL-STD-1629A (Cancelled) 1984. Military Standard Pro-
  of Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of     cedures for Performing a Failure Mode, Effects, and
  Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York,    Criticality Analysis. Washington, DC: Department of
  NY.                                                      Defense (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

Buede, Dennis M. 2000. The Engineering Design of          Lano, R.J. 1977. The N2 Chart. System and Software
  Systems: Models and Methods New York: Wiley.              Requirements Engineering. IEEE Computer Society Press.
Chapter              40

     Developing an Entity’s
     Physical Domain Solution

40.1 INTRODUCTION

Based on the preceding discussions of the Requirements Domain Solution, Operations Domain
Solution, and Behavioral Domain Solution, we have:
     1. Established a SYSTEM/entity’s required operational capabilities.
     2. Developed a system Concept of Operations (ConOps) describing its system phases and use
        cases or modes of operation based on its System Operations Model.
     3. Developed behavioral capability interactions and deﬁned their relationships and time/
        performance based interactions.
The question now is: HOW do we implement the Behavioral Domain Solution via physical com-
ponents such as PRODUCTS, SUBSYSTEMS, and ASSEMBLIES? The answer resides in the
Physical Domain Solution.
    The Physical Domain Solution represents:
     1. A preferred solution selected from a set of viable candidate solutions.
     2. The physical implementation of the Behavioral Domain Solution in terms of PERSONNEL,
        FACILTIES, EQUIPMENT, and PROCEDURAL DATA.
When operating, the Physical Domain Solution validates the correctness of engineering form, ﬁt,
and function assumptions and decisions. Though analytical up to this point, SEs for the User,
Acquirer, and System Developer must ask the following types of system delivery questions:
     1. VERIFICATION Did the System Developer inplement the SYSTEM/entity RIGHT (i.e., cor-
        rectly) in compliance with its speciﬁcations and design requirements?
     2. VALIDATION Did we, the Acquirer, specify and bound the RIGHT product for the User’s
        operational need?
This chapter addresses the Physical Domain Solution: objectives, key elements, sequence in the SE
Process Model workﬂow, development responsibility, dependencies, development methodology,
challenges, and work products.




System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                             465
466     Chapter 40   Developing an Entity’s Physical Domain Solution

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is the objective of the Physical Domain Solution?
      2. What are the key elements of the Physical Domain Solution?
      3. What is the relationship of the Physical Domain Solution to the SE Process Model?
      4. What is the relationship of the Physical Domain Solution with the Requirements, Opera-
         tions, and Physical Domain Solutions?
      5. What is the relationship between speciﬁcation requirements and capabilities?
      6. What is the methodology used to develop the Physical Domain Solution?
      7. What are the work products that represent the Physical Domain Solution?
      8. How is the Physical Domain Solution is veriﬁed and validated?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Component A physical entity that implements one or more logical entities and its capabil-
        ities to produce SYSTEM RESPONSES.
      • Physical Architecture A multi-level conﬁguration used that identiﬁes the physical compo-
        nents of the system, how they interconnect, and contribute to produce behavior, products,
        by-products, and services to fulﬁll the system’s mission and accomplish its objectives.
As a generic entity, an item applies to: 1) externally procured products, such as commercial off-
the-shelf (COTS) items and nondevelopmental items (NDI), and 2) internally developed systems
or products, such as conﬁguration items (CIs) or modiﬁed COTs/NDIs.

Referral For more information about items, refer to Chapter 42 System Conﬁguration Identiﬁ-
cation Practices.

Author’s Note 40.1 Since most people are comfortable with the term, “component,” we use it
here as a generic representation of any physical item such as a PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, or
ASSEMBLY. Later, in our system conﬁguration identiﬁcation discussion, we use the term “item”
recognized by Conﬁguration Management when referring to generic physical entities. For now,
component should be adequate.


40.2 KEY ELEMENTS OF THE PHYSICAL DOMAIN SOLUTION

The Physical Domain Solution has several key elements that provide the basis for selecting phys-
ical components. The physical system architecture is characterized by one-to-many relationships
with Standard Operating Practices and Procedures (SOPPs), physical elements, constraints, inputs,
and behavioral responses and resources.

Physical Domain Solution Development Activity Objectives
The objectives of the Physical Domain Solution development activity are to:
      1. Select a physical architecture from a set of viable alterative solutions.
      2. Select physical components to satisfy architecture element requirements.
      3. Translate component requirements into detailed design requirements that can be used to
         procure, develop, or modify the components.
                                                       40.3 Developing the Physical Architecture    467

    4. Optimize the performance of the preceding items to achieve an optimal balance of techni-
       cal, cost, and schedule performance with acceptable risk to the stakeholders.
Based on this introduction, let’s begin our discussion with the key elements of the Physical Design
Solution.

Physical Domain Solution Dependencies
The multi-level Physical Domain Solution is highly iterative. It requires close coordination and
collaboration with the Requirements, Operations, and Behavioral Domain Solutions as they as
shown in Figure 26.3. Iterations are also required to ensure that the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
is properly balanced (i.e., optimal) from an overall development and life cycle perspective in terms
of technical cost, schedule, support, and risks.

Physical Domain Solution Development
The Physical Domain Solution evolves slightly behind but synchronized with the Requirements,
Operations, and Behavioral Domain Solutions as shown in Figure 23.2. This solution ultimately
deﬁnes the physical system, product, or service that is to be veriﬁed and delivered in accordance
with the Terms and Conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract and its System Performance Speciﬁcation
(SPS) or an entity’s item development speciﬁcation (IDS).

Physical Domain Solution Development Responsibility
The System Architect or Lead SE collaborates with the System Engineering and Integration (SEIT)
members to formulate and select the Physical Domain Solution from a set of viable candidate alter-
natives. The System Architect, via the SEIT, oversees the development of the Physical Domain
Solution and its integration with the Requirements, Operations, and the Behavioral Domain
Solutions.


40.3 DEVELOPING THE PHYSICAL ARCHITECTURE

As the Behavioral Domain Solution and its logical/functional architecture evolve and mature, SEs
direct their attention to formulating and selecting a physical architecture. Physical architectures
represent the transition point from the abstract analytical world to the physical world. Whereas the
Behavioral Domain Solution focuses on WHAT is the SYSTEM or entity required to accomplish,
the Physical Domain Solution focuses on HOW to identify the physical conﬁguration and entities
to implement WHAT is to be accomplished.

Formulating and Selecting Candidate Physical Architectures
In general, as discussed in Chapter 39 about the logical/functional architecture, the physical archi-
tecture is selected from a set of viable candidate architectures based on a pre-deﬁned set of deci-
sion criteria and weights. The previous statement sounds simple; however, it may be misleading
in terms of HOW the physical architecture is selected. How so?
      The reality is the physical architecture should represent the best value, acceptable risk, minimal
life cycle support costs approach to fulﬁlling the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or entity’s
item development speciﬁcation (IDS) requirements.

Developing the Product Structure Tree. The ﬁrst step in developing the physical architec-
ture is to identify generic physical items that comprise the SYSTEM or entity. Create a Product
468     Chapter 40        Developing an Entity’s Physical Domain Solution


                                              1
                                                   CAR-DRIVERSYSTEM
                                                  CAR-DRIVER  SYSTEM
                                                     PhysicalArchitecture
                                                    Physical  Architecture
Level 1 Physical SYSTEM
                                                        2
   OPERATING                           MISSION                                                     OPERATING
    OPERATING        PROCEDURAL         MISSION             EQUIPMENT        FACILITIES             OPERATING      PERSONNEL
  CONSTRAINTS         PROCEDURAL      RESOURCES              EQUIPMENT        FACILITIES          ENVIRONMENT       PERSONNEL
   CONSTRAINTS       DATA Element      RESOURCES              Element          Element             ENVIRONMENT       Element
     Element          DATA Element      Element                Element          Element              Element          Element
      Element                            Element                                                      Element




  Level 2 Physical SYSTEM

 3                           5                      7                         9                       11
     Engine                       Heating&&
                                 Heating
      Engine&&Gear
               Gear                                         Electrical               Fuel                   Braking
         Train                    Cooling                    Electrical               Fuel                   Braking
          Train                    Cooling              SUBSYSTEM                 SUBSYSTEM                SUBSYSTEM
      SUBSYSTEM                  SUBSYSTEM               SUBSYSTEM                 SUBSYSTEM                SUBSYSTEM
       SUBSYSTEM                  SUBSYSTEM

                 4                     6                        8                          10                    12
                                                                                                Instrument
                                                                                                 Instrument
                      Chassis
                       Chassis                Body
                                               Body                 Environmental
                                                                     Environmental                                      Audio
                                                                                                                         Audio
                     SUBSYSTEM             SUBSYSTEM                 SUBSYSTEM
                                                                                                   Panel
                                                                                                    Panel          SUBSYSTEM
                      SUBSYSTEM             SUBSYSTEM                 SUBSYSTEM                 SUBSYSTEM           SUBSYSTEM
                                                                                                 SUBSYSTEM

Figure 40.1 System Element-Based Physical Architecture


Structure hierarchy tree such as the one shown in Figure 40.1 for a Car-Driver System. Although
SEs often generically refer to this as a hierarchy tree, the proper designation is the SYSTEM’S
Product Structure. Ultimately, the Product Structure captures the hierarchical pieces and parts of
the physical item.
     When you develop the Product Structure, a good rule of thumb is to avoid having more than
six to eight components at any level of abstraction. If you have more than this number, you may
have inadvertently mixed components from different levels of abstraction. Tailor appropriately to
your own system application.

Author’s Note 40.2 Several things should be noted here.
      • Figure 40.1 represents the “ﬁrst pass” at a physical architecture structure, an initial start-
        ing point.
      • Once the make/buy/modify decisions are made, physical items from the initial hierarchical
        structure may be combined or separated as peer level items on subsequent passes and shown
        appropriately in the physical architecture diagram.

Developing the Physical Architecture SBD. As the Product Structure evolves, create the
physical architecture’s system block diagram (SBD). Physical items at the SYSTEM level or enti-
ties within a given level of the Product Structure are linked via physical entity interfaces to their
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

Linking the CWBS to the Physical Architecture
As the physical architecture evolves, develop the Contract Work Breakdown Structure (CWBS)
Mission Equipment Element to reﬂect the physical architecture’s levels of abstraction and physi-
cal conﬁguration items (PCIs). Figure 40.1 illustrates a decomposition or expansion of the EQUIP-
MENT Element in terms of the physical architecture. Note that it links to and provides the
PRIMARY hierarchical structure for the CWBS Mission Equipment Element.
                                                     40.3 Developing the Physical Architecture   469

Author’s Note 40.3 Observe that we noted “PRIMARY hierarchical structure.” The reason is
the CWBS also includes the (entity) Integration, Test, and Checkout Element at each Integration
Point (IP) within in the Mission Equipment hierarchy.

COTS/NDI Physical Item Realities
COTS/NDI suppliers typically develop hardware and software for marketplace needs; not your
unique program needs unless your organization is a strategically valued customer. Therefore, you
will have to investigate and evaluate potential COTS/NDI candidate hardware and software prod-
ucts and determine which one best ﬁts your needs, assuming they do.
     Since the COTS/NDI items may or may not provide the required level of functionality you
require, you may have to supplement the lack of functionality with internal development. Organi-
zations often refer to adapting COTS/NDIs to meet interface requirements as “wrappers.”
     So, HOW does this affect the architecture decisions? It means that the initial physical
architecture:
    1. Product structure may have to be revised to reﬂect the new mix of internal develop-
       ment and COTS/NDI items for a speciﬁc entity—such as PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, or
       ASSEMBLY.
    2. The entity’s architecture (SBD, ABD, FBD, object, etc.) may have to be modiﬁed to reﬂect
       the item selections and their interfaces.

Physical Architecture Attributes
Physical architectures are more than simply solution conﬁgurations; most have to support a variety
of User needs. If we analyze the spectrum of User requirements, we identify several attributes that
warrant consideration when developing speciﬁcations. Buede (2000, p. 233), for example, identi-
ﬁes several key attributes that include:
    • Flexibility The capability of an architecture to be reconﬁgured to support a variety of
      mission applications.
    • Scalability The capability to expand processing capabilities and performance to accommo-
      date a range of mission applications.
    • Fault Tolerance “The capability to adjust operations when one of the hardware or software
      elements fails.” (Source: Buede, 2000, p. 233)
    • Open Architecture The ability to accept architectural elements based on interface standards
      of modularity and interchangeability.
    • Transparency An operational characteristic that enables the User to interact with the archi-
      tecture without requiring knowledge of its true physical architecture.

Human–System Interface (HSI) Decision Making
Most human-made systems require humans to perform some or all of the command and control
(C2) functions. From an SE perspective this requires human-system interfaces (HSIs).
     Philosophically, the intent is to optimize system performance by trading-off and allocating
required SYSTEM capabilities between the PERSONNEL and EQUIPMENT elements. In effect,
capability allocation decisions focus on optimizing overall system performance based on WHAT
HUMANS DO BEST versus WHAT EQUIPMENT-BASED SYSTEMS DO BEST. Operationally,
human operators must have the capability to manually override and control the system subject to
various safety and security constraints.
470   Chapter 40   Developing an Entity’s Physical Domain Solution

40.4 PHYSICAL DOMAIN SOLUTION
DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGY

The Physical Domain Solution is developed as a key element of the SE Process. The highly collab-
orative and iterative convolution of the Physical Domain Solution with the Requirements, Opera-
tions, and Behavioral Domain Solutions is often very chaotic and confusing.
     We can minimize the chaos and confusion by applying an iterative methodology that enables
us to create the Physical Domain Solution. The methodology represents one of many approaches
to developing the Physical Domain Solution. View these steps as an example and tailor them to
suit your business domain and systems application.
     The methodology consists of the following steps:
Step 1:    Formulate candidate physical architectures.
Step 2:    Allocate capabilities and requirements to physical architecture items.
Step 3:    Evaluate and select physical architecture.
Step 4:    Perform make versus buy decisions.
Step 5:    Identify physical architecture conﬁguration states.
Step 6:    Establish physical item performance budgets and design safety margins.
Step 7:    Link physical conﬁguration states to phases and modes of operation.
Step 8:    Allocate specialty engineering requirements.
Step 9:    Conduct a FMEA or a FMECA.
Step 10:   Assess environmental, safety, health, and security compliance.
Step 11:   Professional engineering design certiﬁcation.
Step 12:   Evaluate and optimize physical system performance.
Step 13:   Resolve critical operational and technical risks and issues.
Step 14:   Verify and validate physical solution performance.
Step 15:   Establish and maintain physical solution baseline.

Step 1: Formulate Candidate Physical Architectures
When we develop systems, the intent is to minimize development and life cycle costs and meet or
exceed System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or item development speciﬁcation requirements.
From an accounting perspective, these costs are of two types: nonrecurring (i.e., developmental)
or recurring (i.e., operational). In either case, both contribute to total ownership cost (TOC). The
User’s objective is to minimize both the recurring and the non-recurring costs. HOW the system
is physically implemented, its operational performance, and its ability to be maintained are crucial
drivers in the cost equation.
     The strategy to minimize the total ownership cost (TOC) drives the need to ﬁnd alternative solu-
tions or combinations of solutions. As a result, SEs should begin development of the Physical Domain
Solution by formulating a number of viable candidate architectures. Analyze the Behavioral Domain
Solution and formulate viable physical architectures that may be candidates for selection as the phys-
ical system architecture. Remember, the intent is to identify the Physical Domain Solution that pro-
vides the best balance among technical, technology, development and life cycle cost, schedule, and
support requirements and risks.
     Although every system and application is unique, identify at least two to four viable candi-
dates. Formulate, analyze and construct each candidate architecture using methods such as the
matrix, N2 diagram, system block diagram (SBD), and Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML®).
                                              40.4 Physical Domain Solution Development Methodology   471

Author’s Note 40.4 Use common sense when identifying candidate physical system architec-
tures. A good rule of thumb is to identify two to four candidate architectures or variations. Some
architectures may be top contenders; others may not. Since trade studies consume valuable
resources, perform a high-level trade study selection and identify the top two to four candidates.
Then, apply resources for an in-depth trade study on the two MOST PROMISING candidates.

Step 2: Allocate Capabilities and Requirements
to Physical Architecture Items
Based on the behavioral interactions between SYSTEM or entity capabilities developed as part of
the Behavioral Domain Solution, allocate and link the capabilities to physical architecture items
and conﬁguration items (CIs). Since capabilities link to requirements, linking requirements to phys-
ical items also provides a linkage to capabilities, especially with automated tools such as require-
ments management tools.
      As you formulate each candidate architecture, make sure each one incorporates the logical
entity capabilities identiﬁed in the Behavioral Domain Solution. We do this by allocating the capa-
bilities to the appropriate physical architecture elements via a matrix mapping method as shown in
Figure 40.2.

Author’s Note 40.5 As a reminder, DO NOT allocate highly interdependent capabilities across
physical CI boundaries. (For more information on this topic, refer to the discussion of System Inter-
face Analysis, Design, and Control Practices in Chapter 43 and Figure 40.4).

Logically group and allocate closely coupled interactions to a single item such as a PRODUCT, a
SUBSYSTEM, or an ASSEMBLY. This avoids degrading system performance and increasing the
likelihood of technical risks due to disconnected or disrupted interfaces. Figure 40.3 illustrates how



                                                                           1

                                                          System Product Structure
                                                                (Physical Hierarchy)




                             3
                Logical Configuration Items
                          (LCIs)




Multi-Level
                2
Behavioral
Capability
Operations
and Tasks




Figure 40.2 Behavioral Allocations to Product Structure Items
472           Chapter 40     Developing an Entity’s Physical Domain Solution

                                              Allocated to                                                   To Capability
                                               Physical                               From           3            18   23     34    55
                                               Device A                          Capability #3                    1
External
Input #1          Capability                                                     Capability #18          2
                   Capability
                     #3
                      #3
                                      1                                          Capability #23                                      3

                                                                                 Capability #34                                      4

                                  Capability            Output #1                Capability #55
                             2     Capability                                                                           5
                                     #18
                                      #18
External
Input #2                                                 Capability
                                                          Capability                    3
                                                            #23
                                                             #23
External
Input #3                                                                        Capability
                                                                                 Capability          4
                                                                                   #34
                                                                                    #34
                                  Allocated to
                                   Physical
                                                                                                     Capability
                                                                                                      Capability                   Output #2
                                   Device B                                       5
                                                                                                        #55
                                                                                                         #55


Figure 40.3 Example—N2 Chart Logical Grouping



      Approach 1                                                              Approach 2
 1                                        6                                                                        9
       SUBSYSTEM A                            SUBSYSTEM A                                                               SUBSYSTEMB
               Initial                                Initial                                                                 Initial
                State                                  State                                                                   State
      2                                         7                      8     Interface #1 Issues                       10
          ComputeAA
         Compute                                                               • Performance Delay
                                                     ComputeAA
                                                    Compute                                                                  ComputeBB
                                                                                                                            Compute
                                                                                  • Adaption Cost
      3                                                                     • Physical Connection Risk

           ComputeBB
          Compute                              12                             Interface #2 Issues            11
                                                    Compute                    • Performance Delay
                                                     ComputeCC
      4                           ?                                               • Adaption Cost
                                                                            • Physical Connection Risk
           ComputeCC
          Compute
                                                                       13                                              14
                                                                              Interface #3 Issues
          5                                                                    • Performance Delay
                                                                                                                            Decision
                                                                                                                             Decision
                                                                                  • Adaption Cost
              Decision                                  Final               • Physical Connection Risk
               Decision
                                                        State
                                                                              Interface #4 Issues            15
                                                                               • Performance Delay
                     Final                                                        • Adaption Cost
                     State                                                  • Physical Connection Risk                 Final
                                                                                                                       State


Figure 40.4 Allocaing Capabilities Across Physical Boundaries


an N2 diagram is used to analyze capability groupings. The gray ovals represent areas of closely
coupled interactions that can and should be allocated to a single physical component. Remember,
a key objective of this exercise is to minimize the level of interaction across physical item bound-
aries as illustrated in Figure 40.4. Otherwise, we:
      1. Degrade system performance.
      2. Increase risk.
                                      40.4 Physical Domain Solution Development Methodology       473

    3. Increase costs due to increased complexity.
    4. Reduce reliability.
     Make sure that closely coupled capabilities such as CSCIs are allocated to a single physical
item, not across multiple items. Figure 40.4 illustrates HOW splitting closely coupled interactions
across physical interface boundaries creates potential performance problems.
     Investigate and establish standards to promote modularity, interchangeability, and interoper-
ability. Determine the type of architecture to be implemented to meet requirements—centralized
versus decentralized/distributed, client-server, and so forth.

Step 3: Evaluate and Select the Physical Architecture
Evaluate each candidate SYSTEM or entity’s physical system architecture by conducting trade
studies using:
    1. Pre-deﬁned architecture selection criteria—such as technology, performance, cost, sched-
       ule, support and risk.
    2. Criteria weights.
    3. Models and simulations provided by decision support (refer to Chapter 51).
     Prioritize results of the architecture evaluations for recommendations. Some level of OPTI-
MIZATION may be required as part of the evaluation. Based on recommendations from the trade
study, select a preferred physical architecture.
     Finally, periodically stop what you are doing. Back away from being immersed in the details—
to avoid analysis paralysis—and perform a reality and reasonableness check. Ask yourself: Is the
conﬁguration as simple as it can be? Is there any aspect we may have ignored, overlooked or dimin-
ished in level of signiﬁcance? What are we not asking ourselves that later on we may wish we had?
Does the Physical Domain Solution meet the minimum requirements?

Step 4: Perform Make versus Buy Decisions
For each item within the architecture, determine the best approach for implementation. Chapter 42
on System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation Practices presents various decision making options such as
reuse of existing components, procurement of COTS/NDI, and internal development.

Step 5: Identify Physical Architecture Conﬁguration States
As the Physical Domain Solution matures, we may discover that the physical system architecture
implementation represents the convolution of several conﬁgurations. These conﬁgurations may
range from physical add-on payload components—such as the satellites in the Space Shuttle’s Cargo
Bay—to physical reconﬁguration of the system or product’s structure—such as wings ﬂaps and
landing gear on aircraft—during various phases and modes of operation.
     In effect, the total physical system design represents the integration of these various conﬁgura-
tions into a single architecture. Thus, the architecture integrates the physical implementation of
the capabilities required to support a speciﬁc phase or mode(s) of operations. Once completed, the
physical conﬁguration states constitute the ﬁnal part of the system phases, modes, and states of
operation.

Author’s Note 40.6 Engineers who lack formal SE training often pick up the jargon of “phases,
modes, and states” without understanding the appropriate time to identify system operational and
physical states during the evolution of the system solution. As a result, you will hear people erro-
474     Chapter 40   Developing an Entity’s Physical Domain Solution

neously refer to identifying the system’s physical (instead of operational) states of operation as one
of the initial steps of the SE design process. Although there may be instances where this can occur,
a behavioral FUNCTION drives the system’s physical domain’s FORM and FIT conﬁguration.

Step 6: Establish Physical Item Performance
Budgets and Design Safety Margins
For each capability allocated to and implemented by a physical item, allocate and assign per-
formance budgets and design safety margins to behavioral interactions—inputs, outputs, interfaces,
and so forth.

Referral For more information about performance budgets and margins, refer to Chapter 49 on
System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins Practices.

Step 7: Link Physical Conﬁguration States to
Phases and Modes of Operation
For each mode of operation, identify and link each physical system architecture conﬁguration state
to one or more modes of operation. Thus, for a given mode of operation, conﬁgure the physical
system architecture into one or more physical states to provide the necessary and sufﬁcient capa-
bilities to support the use cases associated with that mode.

Referral For more information about phases and modes of operation, refer to Chapter 19 on
System Phases, Modes, and States of Operation.

Step 8: Allocate Specialty Engineering Requirements
The selection of the physical architecture and its elements simply provide the framework for devel-
oping the Physical Domain Solution. Specialty engineering requirements—such as reliability, avail-
ability, and maintainability (RAM); producibility; environmental, safety, and health (ESH); human
engineering; vulnerability and survivability; and lethality—must be analyzed, allocated, and ﬂowed
down to SYSTEM components at all levels of abstraction.

Referral For more information about RAM, refer to Chapters 47 through 52 on Decision Support
Practices.

Step 9: Conduct FMEA or FMECA
For system architectures that have mission critical components or may have the potential to damage
EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, the general public, or the environment, review and update the Failure
Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) initiated as part of the Behavioral Domain Solution. If nec-
essary, expand the FMEA into a Failure Modes, Effects, and Criticality Analysis (FMEA). Former
MIL-STD-1629A Military Standard Procedures for Performing a Failure Modes, Effects, and Crit-
icality Analysis provides guidance. Ask key questions:
      1. What can go wrong with the EQUIPMENT or one of its components or interfaces?
      2. How can the EQUIPMENT be misapplied, misused, or abused?
      3. Is the system stable in all phases, modes, and states of operation?
                                      40.4 Physical Domain Solution Development Methodology      475

Step 10: Assess Environmental, Safety, Health,
and Security Compliance
Review all elements of the Physical Domain Solution relative to environmental, safety, and health
(ES&H) as well as security compliance. Ensure that:
    1. All EQUIPMENT components are properly marked with appropriate safety and security
       notices (warnings, cautions, etc.).
    2. Supporting PROCEDURAL DATA (i.e., operators and user’s manuals) are properly docu-
       mented with this information.
Avoid just “reading” the documentation; investigate HOW the guidance can be misinterpreted.

Step 11: Professional Engineering Design Certiﬁcation
For those design applications such as buildings, bridges, and structures that require certiﬁcation by
a licensed and registered, practicing, professional engineer, employ the services of these profes-
sionals. Make sure that all aspects of the Physical Domain Solution, as well as other domain solu-
tions, are fully addressed as part of the certiﬁcation review, analysis, and approval process.

Step 12: Evaluate and Optimize Physical System Performance
EVALUATE and OPTIMIZE the physical performance of the SYSTEM or entity based on criteria
established by the SPS or entity’s item development speciﬁcation. As appropriate, solicit User
inputs and participation in SE design activities that provide subjective look and feel feedback
related to system optimization efforts of operator-based EQUIPMENT element. Record and
assess any discrepancies relative to criticality and scope of the contract or task activities and
resources.

Step 13: Resolve Critical Operational and Technical Issues
(COIs/CTIs) and Risks
As the Physical Domain Solution evolves, identify and capture critical operational and technical
issues (COIs/CTIs) and risks. Where appropriate, resolve the issues with the Acquirer and User via
contracting protocol. As appropriate, develop prototypes, mockups, and demonstrations that solicit
constructive feedback from the Users.

Step 14: Verify and Validate Physical Solution Performance
Throughout the development of the Physical Domain Solution, continually verify and validate
the completeness and integrity of the evolving solution via document reviews, technical reviews,
prototypes, technology demonstrations, and modeling and simulation.
     Conduct a SYSTEM level or Entity—PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, and ASSEMBLY—Critical
Design Review (CDR) to assess the status, progress, maturity, and risks with the Physical Domain
Solution. Initiate corrective action as necessary.

Referral For more information about technical reviews, refer to Chapter 54 Technical Reviews.

Step 15: Establish and Maintain Physical Solution Baseline
As the SYSTEM and each entity’s Physical Domain Solution are reviewed and approved, if appli-
cable, by the Acquirer, the acceptance of CDR documentation, presentations, meeting minutes, and
476        Chapter 40         Developing an Entity’s Physical Domain Solution

closure of action items enable establishment of a formal baseline. The baseline serves as the basis
for requirements ﬂow down and allocation, future technical decision making, and change control.
Incorporate the Physical Domain Solution into the Developmental Conﬁguration.


40.5 LINKING THE BEHAVIORAL AND
PHYSICAL ARCHITECTURES

As the overall system solution matures, the behavioral (i.e., logical) and physical system architec-
tures are linked via requirements traceability. To see these links, let’s focus on the Requirements,
Behavioral, and Physical Domain Solutions. Figure 40.5 provides a graphical view using an entity
relationship diagram (ERD).

40.6 PHYSICAL DOMAIN SOLUTION CHALLENGES

When the Physical Domain Solution is developed, there are several challenges that the User,
Acquirer, and System Developer(s) need to answer. The challenges manifest themselves as ques-
tions SEs need to be able to answer.

Challenge 1: Solution Space Validation
In its physical manifestation, will the Physical Domain Solution satisfy the User’s validated
operational need?

Challenge 2: Technical Design Integrity
Are all elements of the Physical Domain Solution fully traceable back to the source System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements?


       Behavioral Domain                                           1                                        Physical Domain
           Solution                   Requirements                                                              Solution
        6                                                                  Specification
                                                                            Specification                  11
                                        Domain
           Candidate                                                                                           Candidate
                                                                                                                Candidate
            Candidate                   Solution                                   Consists of
            Logical                                                                                             Physical
                                                                                                                 Physical
              Logical
          Architecture                                             2                                          Architecture
                                                                                                               Architecture
           Architecture
           Solutions                                                       Requirements                        Solutions
                                                                                                                Solutions
             Solutions                                                      Requirements
   Selected from                       4                                     Statement
                                                                              Statement                 Selected from
                                             External
   7                                        System(s)/                             Specified by            12
       Logical/Behavioral
        Logical/Behavioral                 Interface(s)                                                           Physical
                                                                                                                   Physical
         Architecture                                                  3                                        Architecture
          Architecture                                                                      Implement            Architecture
            Solution                                                       Capability(s)
                                                                            Capability(s)                         Solution
             Solution                                     Represents                                               Solution

                   Configures                                                                                           Configures
       8                                              5                                                 13
              Logical
               Logical                                                                                         Physical
                                                          Performance
                                                           Performance                                          Physical
           Configuration
            Configuration                                                                                    Configuration
                                                          Parameters
                                                           Parameters           Bounded                       Configuration
               Items
                Items                                                                                        Items
                                                                                by                            Items(PCIs)
                                                                                                                    (PCIs)
                   Provides                                        Allocated as                                         Consists of
      9                                          10                                                     14
              Logical/ /
             Logical                                Performance
                                                     Performance                   Constrained by                 Physical
                                                                                                                   Physical
            Behavioral
             Behavioral                            Budgets&&Design
                                                  Budgets    Design
                                   Constrained                                                                   ItemDesign
                                                                                                                Item  Design
            Capabilities
             Capabilities                           SafetyMargins
                                                   Safety  Margins
                                            by

       Implement


Figure 40.5 Requirements, Logical, & Physical Domain Solution Relationships
                                                  40.7 Physical Domain Solution Work Products    477

Challenge 3: Multi-domain Solution Agreement
Is the Physical System Solution consistent with and traceable to the Requirements, Operations, and
Behavioral Domain Solutions?

Challenge 4: Risk Identiﬁcation and Mitigation
Does the Physical Domain Solution impose any unacceptable technical, technology, support, oper-
ations, cost, or schedule risks?

Challenge 5: Environment, Safety, and Health (ESH)
Does the Physical Domain Solution pose any noncompliant or unacceptable environment, safety,
and health issues and concerns to the operators or the general public?

Challenge 6: System Solution Stability
Is the Physical Domain Solution stable and controllable in all system phases, modes, and states of
operation?

Challenge 7: System Support
Is the system, product, or service supportable—in terms of maintenance, training, and logistics—
within budgetary cost, time, and resource constraints?

Challenge 8: Interfaces
For each interface, have the appropriate allocation decisions been made to ensure that interface per-
formance has been optimized based on the inherent capabilities of the interfacing components. Are
humans doing what they do best and machines doing what they do best? Do the interfaces meet
security and survivability criteria?

Challenge 9: System Optimization
Has physical system performance for all or speciﬁc modes of operation been optimized based on a
set of pre-deﬁned set of weighted criteria supported by stakeholders?

Challenge 10: Phases and Modes of Operation
Does the Physical Domain Solution provide all of the capabilities required to support MISSION
SYSTEM operations and most likely and worst case scenarios in all planned phases and modes of
operation?


40.7 PHYSICAL DOMAIN SOLUTION WORK PRODUCTS

The Physical Domain Solution deﬁnes and documents the physical characteristics as design
requirements that will be used to procure, fabricate, assemble, code, inspect, and test the compo-
nents that will be integrated to form the system to be veriﬁed and validated.
    Work products that capture the Physical Domain Solution consist of the following:
    • Item development speciﬁcations (IDS)
    • Performance budgets and design safety margins
478     Chapter 40   Developing an Entity’s Physical Domain Solution

      • Physical system architecture
      • Interface control documents (ICDs)
      • Interface design descriptions (IDDs)
      • Assembly drawings
      • Wiring diagrams
      • Schematics
      • Bill of materials (BOM)
      • Program design language (PDL)
      • Source code
      • Software design descriptions (SDDs)
      • System descriptions
      • Analyses
      • Trade studies
      • Technical reports
      • Requirements traceability matrices (RTMs)
      • Prototypes
      • Technical demonstrations
      • Models and simulations
      • Test data and results
      • Timing diagrams
      • Engineering change proposals (ECPs)
      • Change requests (CRs)
      • Test plans and procedures
      • Brieﬁngs
      • Conference minutes and action items


40.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern development of an entity’s Physical Domain Solution practices.

Principle 40.1 The Physical Domain Solution represents a physical conﬁguration of items that
implement one of more elements of the Behavioral Domain Solution allocated to the items.

Principle 40.2 The Physical Domain Solution must be consistent with and traceable to the
Requirements, Operations, and Physical Domain Solutions.

Principle 40.3 Investigate ALL Physical Design Solution documentation, especially User
guides, for ways the guides can be misinterpreted.

Principle 40.4 Increases in physical item part counts decrease system reliability; investigate
ways to reduce parts counts to improve system reliability.
                                                                                     Additional Reading     479

40.9 SUMMARY

We described the system solution development methodology steps used to derive the physical system archi-
tecture. The discussion described how the Behavioral Domain Solution provides the basis for:
     1. Formulating candidate physical system architectures.
     2. Evaluating, recommending, and selecting the physical system architectures.
     3. Linking the physical architecture to the requirements, operational, and behavioral architectures.
     4. Optimizing the physical system architectures.
     5. Linking the physical system architectures to system phases and modes of operation.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) The entity’s physical architecture solution.
   (b) Describe how it traces to its Requirements, Operations, and Behavioral Domain Solutions.
   (c) Describe the type of architecture (central, distributed, client server, etc.) best suited for this
       application?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media. What guidance is provided regarding development of the
   Physical Domain Solution? Document and report your results.
2. Contact a contract program within your organization. Interview the lead SEs and research HOW the
   program (a) formulated its Behavioral Domain Solution, (b) manages the requirements baselines, and
   (c) links to the Requirements Domain Solution, Operations Domain Solution, and Behavioral Domain
   Solution.
3. Select one of your organization’s system speciﬁcations and develop a high-level Physical Domain
   Solution.


REFERENCES

MIL-STD-1629A (cancelled). 1984. Military Standard Pro-   Buede, Dennis M. 2000. The Engineering Design of
 cedures for Performing a Failure Modes, Effects, and       Systems: Models and Methods. New York: Wiley.
 Criticality Analysis. Washington, DC: Department of
 Defense (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

Lano, R.J. 1977. The N2 Chart. System and Software Requirements Engineering. IEEE Computer Society Press.
Chapter              41

      Component Selection
      and Development

41.1 INTRODUCTION

The allocation of System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) and item development speciﬁcation
requirements to multi-level items is a highly iterative process driven by component selection deci-
sions. In general, System Developers have to answer the question: WHAT is the best value, lowest
cost, acceptable risk approach to selecting components to meet contract requirements?
      1. Are there in-house, reusable components already available?
      2. Do we procure commercially available components from external vendors?
      3. Are there commercially available components that require only minor modiﬁcations to meet
         our requirements?
      4. Do we procure commercially available components from external vendors and modify them
         in-house or have the vendor modify them?
      5. Do we obtain components from the User as Acquirer furnished property (AFP)?
      6. Do we create the component in-house as new development?
Depending on the outcome of these questions and the item’s required capabilities, the initial require-
ments may have to be reallocated to supplement capabilities of commercial components.
     Our discussion in this section focuses on component selection and development practices that
drive SE decision making. After a brief discussion of options available for system development,
we introduce the concepts of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) and nondevelopmental items
(NDIs). Next, we deﬁne a methodology that describes a decision-making method for selecting the
strategy for component development. We conclude with a summary of driving issues that inﬂuence
COTS/NDI selection.

Author’s Note 41.1 Typically the next chapter on system conﬁguration identiﬁcation should
precede component selection and development. However, conﬁguration identiﬁcation employs
terms such as COTS and NDI, which are deﬁned in this chapter. Therefore, we consider this
chapter’s material ﬁrst.




System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

480
                                                           41.2 Reducing System Costs and Risk      481

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
    1. What are the six primary approaches for developing components?
    2. What is a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) item?
    3. What is a nondevelopmental item (NDI)?
    4. What is Acquirer furnished property (AFP)?
    5. What is the source of AFP?
    6. How are COTS items procured?
    7. How are NDIs procured?
    8. What are the steps of the component selection methodology?
    9. What are the classes of criteria to be considered when selecting components from external
       vendors?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Acquirer Furnished Property (AFP) Physical assets such as equipment, data, software,
      and facilities provided by the User or other organizations via the Acquirer by contract to the
      System Developer for modiﬁcation and/or integration into a deliverable system, product, or
      service.
    • Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) Product “A standard product line item that is offered
      for general sale to the public by a vendor and requires no unique modiﬁcations or mainte-
      nance over the life cycle of the product to meet the needs of the procuring agency
      (Acquirer).” (Source: Adapted from DoD/FAR and DSMC, Glossary of Terms)
    • Legacy System An existing system that may or may not be operational.
    • Make–Buy–Modify Decisions Technical decisions that determine whether to develop an
      item or lower level item internally, procure as a COTS/NDI or subcontract item from an
      external vendor, or procure an item from an external vendor and modify internally to meet
      item development speciﬁcation requirements.
    • Nondevelopmental Item (NDI) A COTS item that has been modiﬁed or adapted (i.e., cus-
      tomized or tailored) to meet procurement speciﬁcation requirements for application in a spe-
      ciﬁc OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
    • Out-of-the-Box Functionality Speciﬁed capabilities and levels of performance inherent to
      a COTS product or NDI without additional development.
    • Outsourcing A business decision to procure systems, products, or services from external
      organizations based on cost avoidance resource availability, or other factors.


41.2 REDUCING SYSTEM COSTS AND RISK

One of the key objectives of SE is to minimize development and life cycle costs as well as risk.
Achievement of these objectives requires insightful strategies that include selection of components.
    Most engineers enter the workforce with noble aspirations to innovate and create elegant
designs. Although this is partially true, it is also a reﬂection of misunderstood priorities. New design
should be a LAST resort after attempts to ﬁnd existing components that meet speciﬁcation require-
ments have been exhausted. So, what should the priorities be? This brings us to item design imple-
mentation options and priorities.
482      Chapter 41     Component Selection and Development

                                           COTS/NDI/Reuse/
                                           New Development
                                            Hybrid Solution                      New Development
                                                                                     Solution
                                                                                  Best Approach

  Solution Space
  Requirements
                                COTS/NDI/                          New
  • xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  • xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx              Reuse                        Development
  • xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
  • xxxxxxxxxxxxxx               Solution                        Solution
  •
  • xxxxxxxxxxxxxx




                                         COTS Solution Best Approach

                                        Range of Solution Alternatives

Figure 41.1 COTS/NDI/Reuse/New Development Application Mixes to Fill Solution Space Requirements

Item Design Implementation Options and Priorities
The underlying philosophy of system design and development begins with a simple question: Are
there available commercial or other products or services that are more cost effective, less risky,
that will satisfy requirements allocated to a speciﬁc entity of item? Answering this question requires
exploration of at least six sequential design options that require consideration:
      1. Employ Acquirer furnished property (AFP).
      2. Reuse existing in-house component designs.
      3. Procure commercially available vendor products.
      4. Procure commercially available vendor products that can be easily modiﬁed by the vendor
         to meet our requirements.
      5. Procure commercially available products and modify the products in-house.
      6. Develop new designs.

Author’s Note 41.2 Be advised that reuse of existing designs may present legal and contractual
issues regarding the type of funding used to develop the product, data rights, and so forth. ALWAYS
consult with your program, contracts, legal, and export control organizations for guidance in these
areas.

Based on these design options, the system design solution for any item in the system, regardless
of level of abstraction, may consist of one or a combination of these implementations. As a result
the COTS/NDI/new development composition of any design implementation depends on the
application as illustrated in Figure 41.1. Note that design implementation ranges from all com-
mercial to all new development. So, the challenge for the System Engineering and Integration Team
(SEIT) and component selection decision makers is to determine the RIGHT combination of item
implementation options that REDUCE overall SYSTEM development and life cycle costs and risk.

41.3 COMMERCIAL PRODUCT TYPES

The preceding discussion addressed commercially available products as design implementation
options. In general, there are two basic classes of commercial products: commercial off-the-shelf
(COTS) items and nondevelopmental items (NDIs). Let’s scope each of these classes.
                                                      41.4 Component Selection Methodology     483

Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) Items
COTS products represent a class of products that can be procured by the public from a vendor’s
catalog by part number. Procurement of COTS products is accomplished via a purchase order or
other procurement mechanism. Generally, vendors provide a Certiﬁcate of Compliance (CofC) ver-
ifying that the product meets its published speciﬁcation requirements.


Nondevelopmental Items (NDIs)
NDIs represent COTS products that have been modiﬁed or customized to meet a set of application
requirements. Procurement of NDIs is accomplished via a purchase order that references a pro-
curement speciﬁcation that speciﬁes and bounds the capabilities and performance of the modiﬁed
COTS item. Prior to delivery, the Acquirer veriﬁes the NDI, in the presence of Acquirer (role) wit-
nesses, typically for compliance to its procurement speciﬁcation.


41.4 COMPONENT SELECTION METHODOLOGY

The selection of components to fulﬁll item development speciﬁcation (IDS) requirements requires
a methodology that enables the item’s development team to minimize technical, cost, schedule, and
risk. In general, the selection process involves answering the questions posed during the introduc-
tion to this practice. So, HOW do we answer these questions?
     One solution is to establish a basic methodology that enables selection from a range of alter-
natives. There are a number of ways the methodology can be created. The methodology described
below is one example.


COTS Selection Methodology
The methodology used to select item components can be described in an six-step, highly iterative
process as illustrated in Figure 41.2.
Step 1: Identify candidate components.
        Step 1.1. Identify potential in-house reusable solutions.
        Step 1.2. Assess in-house solution(s) feasibility, capabilities, and performance.
        Step 1.3. Identify potential COTS/NDI product solution(s).
        Step 1.4. Assess COTS/NDI solution(s) feasibility, capabilities, and performance.
        Step 1.5. Investigate the feasibility of modifying COTS products in-house.
Step 2: Evaluate system impact of component approaches.
Step 3: Validate component selection approaches (repeat Step 1).
Step 4: Solicit and evaluate vendor COTS/NDI proposals.
Step 5: Select component development approach.
Step 6: Implement component selection decision.


Component Selection Summary
When the component selection and development decision-making process are complete, each item
within the multi-level hierarchy of the system architecture and the CWBS may have a combina-
tion of various types of components such as in-house, COTS, and NDI that satisfy speciﬁcation
requirements allocated to the item.
     Now that we have established a basic methodology, let’s examine some of the driving issues
that inﬂuence COTS/NDI selection.
484        Chapter 41    Component Selection and Development


                1                                           1.1
 Initial             Identify Candidate                        Identify Potential In-House
  State                 Components                                 Reusable Solutions


               2                                               1.2
                     Evaluate System                                 Assess Feasibility
                   Impact of Component
                       Approaches                                                  Acceptable Reusable
                                                                                              In-House
               3
                    Validate Component                                          Unacceptable Solution
                                                             1.3
                    Selection Approaches                            Identify Potential
                                                                   COTS/NDI Solutions
                4
                    Solicit & Evaluate                             1.4
                    COTS/NDI Vendor                                   Assess Feasibility
                        Proposals
                                                  COTS             COTS                NDI           NDI
                5                                Solution                                          Solution
                     Select Component                                           No
                       Development
                                                             1.5
                         Approach                                    Assess In-House
                                                                   Modification of COTS
                6
                         Implement                                  Mod
Final                                                                                New Dev.
                        Component             In-House COTS         COTS                            New
State
                     Selection Decision         Modification                                    Development
                                                  Solution                                        Solution

Figure 41.2 Example Component Selection Methodology




41.5 DRIVING ISSUES THAT INFLUENCE
COTS/NDI SELECTION

COTS/NDI products may or may not be applicable to your contract application. Only you, your
organization, and the Acquirer/User, if appropriate, can make that determination. Let’s look at
examples of some of the types of questions, for your tactful ediﬁcation, that you should consider
asking when selecting COTS/NDI products.

Caution Every set of Acquirer requirements, applications, COTS/NDI products, and perspectives
is unique. Consult with SMEs in your organization or employ the services of a respected, credible
consultant to assist you in formulating the list of questions and thoroughly investigate potential
COTS products solutions before you commit to a decision.

COTS Product Line Example Questions
        1. What is the heritage and maturity of the COTS product line and family?
        2. What is the size of the COTS product user base?
        3. What organizations or industries are the primary users of the COTS product?
        4. What are the current technology trends relative to the product line directions?
        5. At what stage of maturity is the COTS product in its maturity cycle as well as the
           marketplace?
                                     41.5 Driving Issues That Inﬂuence COTS/NDI Selection    485

   6. How long has this version of the COTS product been produced?
   7. Is the COT product in alpha and beta testing? If not how long ago did this occur?

Customer Satisfaction Example Question
   8. Is the vendor willing to provide a list of customer references to discuss their experiences
      with the product?
   9. What is the degree of customer satisfaction with current COTS product and prior versions?
  10. Do customer testimonials, complaints, and applications of usage correlate?
  11. Is the customer satisfaction based on using the product in the operating environment
      prescribed by the vendor?

Corporate Commitment to and Stability of the COTS Product
Example Questions
  12. How long will the vendor commit on paper to: 1) producing and 2) supporting the version
      the COTS product under consideration?
  13. How ﬁnancially stable is the vendor and parent company?
  14. What is the vendor and parent company’s commitment to the COTS product line and family?
  15. How STABLE is the vendor’s workforce (i.e., turnover) that develops and supports the
      COTS product.
  16. For future reference, who are the vendor’s SMEs and how long they have been with the
      organization and COTS product?
  17. What are their roles relative to the COTS product?

COTS Product Design Example Questions
  18. Assuming you have some level of access to the vendor’s documentation, what is the quality
      and depth of COTS product documentation?
  19. What degree of veriﬁcation and validation has been performed on the COTS product?
  20. Was the veriﬁcation and validation performed internally, or did the vendor depend on the
      user community to “ﬁnd the defects”?
  21. Does the COTS product have documented and accessible test points, test hooks, entry/exit
      points in the design? Are these available to the developers and maintainers?
  22. Does the COTS product use an industry standard interface that fully complies with the
      standard or just a subset of the standard? What are the compliance exceptions.
  23. What liberties—meaning interpretations and assumptions—has the vendor taken with
      implementing the standard?
  24. Is the vendor willing to modify the COTS product interface to meet your system or
      product’s interface? To what degree?
  25. What systems or products does the vendor certify that the COTS product is compatible
      and interoperable with?
  26. What are the current known defects in the existing COTS product? Are there plans and
      priorities to correct them?
  27. How many known and latent defects remain in the current “new and improved” product
      version?
486     Chapter 41   Component Selection and Development

      28. How many undocumented and untested “features”—latent defects that can’t be or will not
          be corrected—remain in the COTS product?
      29. What detailed design information and “on call” support is available to support System
          Developer integration of the COTS product into their system or product? Are there fees
          required for this support?
      30. Will future versions of the COTS product be forward and backward compatible with the
          current version being considered?

COTS Product Production Example Questions
      31. What is the quality and discipline of the COTS vendor’s quality assurance (QA) organiza-
          tion as well as its conﬁguration management system and version control, assuming it exists?
      32. Are the COTS products serialized and tracked for upgrades and recalls?

COTS Product Support Example Questions
      33. What degree of 24/7 support (i.e., 24 hours per day/ 7 days per week) is the vendor willing
          to support the COTS product? From what country, time zone, and hours of availability;
          Internet on-line support and documentation; “live” support” via 800 numbers or “read what
          is on-line”?
      34. What level of responsiveness to technical support is the vendor willing to provide (4 hours,
          one-week, etc.)?
      35. What level of accessibility to COTS product SMEs is the vendor willing to provide?
      36. Does the COTS product have operations and support (O&S) and technical manuals?
      37. Are O&M and technical manuals delivered with the COTS product, available freely on-
          line, or do you have to purchase them? If purchase, how readily available are they?
      38. Are alignment and calibration procedures and data documented and available to System
          Developers?
      39. Does the vendor provide ﬁeld service support? How responsive? What constraints (days
          of the week, holidays, hours, etc.)?
      40. If you purchase the COTS/NDI product, are you required to contact the vendor to perform
          ﬁeld service on site to “remove and replace, align, and calibrate,” or can the System Devel-
          oper perform this?
      41. Who pays for ﬁeld service expenses?

COTS Product Warranty Example Questions
      42. Is each COTS product covered by an expressed or implied warranty? Will the vendor
          provide a copy?
      43. What actions or physical modiﬁcations by the Acquirer may invalidate or void the
          warranty?
      44. What are acceptable System Developer modiﬁcations to the COTS product that do not
          void the warranty?
      45. Is the vendor willing to modify the COTS product or do they recommend third parties?
      46. What impact do third-party modiﬁcations have on the on warranty?
                                                                                  41.7 Summary      487

COTS Product Procurement Example Questions
    47. Does the COTS product require usage licenses—software, hardware, and export control?
    48. Are licenses based on a per platform basis or is a site license available subject to a
        maximum number of “ﬂoating” users?
    49. If a site license is available, how is the number of users restricted (simultaneous, total
        population, number of available “keys,” etc.)?
    50. Are there “other bundled” products included in the COTS product or must be procured—
        for a small additional cost? Do they require licenses?
    51. Is there a minimum buy quantity requirement for the COTS product?
    52. If there is a minimum buy, is this on a per purchase basis, cumulative over the year, or
        cumulative over several years?
    53. What quantities are the price break thresholds?
    54. What product quality assurance processes are in place to ensure the quality of the COTS
        product?
    55. What certiﬁcations are the vendor willing to provide regarding the integrity of the product
        and its materials?
    56. Are COTS product speciﬁcations, processes, and test procedures available for review and
        inspection?


Bottom Line
    57. Always ask what you need to know about the product that you did not ask.
    58. Finally, caveat emptor—let the buyer beware!


41.6 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern practices.

Principle 41.1 System design should be a last resort option AFTER all practical efforts have
been made to identify reusable, COTS, NDI, or AFE components to meet entity requirements.

Principle 41.2 When procuring COTS/NDI, thoroughly INVESTIGATE and UNDERSTAND
the development and life cycle costs and support; otherwise, CAVEAT EMPTOR!


41.7 SUMMARY

In general, COTS/NDI solutions may be RIGHT for you and your application; in other cases, they MAY NOT
be. As an SE leading the selection process, you must make informed decisions based on:
    1. The facts.
    2. Trade-offs to meet requirements, minimize development and life cycle costs, and reduce risk to an
       acceptable level.
    3. Other User’s application experiences.
488     Chapter 41     Component Selection and Development

COTS products can be very powerful tool to reducing development and life cycle costs; they can become a
problem as well. Perhaps the best way to THINK of COTS is to use a mirage analogy: make sure that WHAT
you FIND when you implement the product matches the virtual image you perceived. Whatever decision you
make, you will have to live with your action(s) and consequences. Research component selections and vendors
carefully and thoroughly, incorporate ﬂexibility for contingency planning, and make wise choices. The bottom
line is: caveat emptor—let the buyer beware!


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research you organizational command media guidance for guidance about component selection and
   development.
   (a) What guidance is stated regarding make, procure, procure, and modify decisions?
   (b) What criteria are to be applied to these decisions?
   (c) What guidance is provided and approval process is required for procuring COTS, NDI, and AFP
       products?
2. Contact several contract programs or product lines within your organization. Investigate the following
   questions and document your ﬁndings and observations.
   (a) Does the program use internal and externally supplied components?
   (b) If COTS/NDI products were used, how were they selected?
   (c) How were the selection decisions documented?
   (d) How were COTS/NDI products procured?
   (e) What lessons learned has the program learned from COTS/NDI procurement?
   (f) What changes would they make next time?
3. Contact an organization that provides COTS products to the marketplace. Identify issues the COTS vendor
   must resolve in selling their products to System Developers.


ADDITIONAL READING

Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR). Parts 6, 10, 11, 12,      Defense, Ofﬁce of the Undersecretary of Defense for
  and 14. January 1995.                                         Acquisition and Technology.
Ofﬁce of Federal Procurement Policy. 1995. Guide To Best      SD-5. 1997. Market Research: Gathering Information about
  Practices For Past Performance, interim ed. Washington,       Commercial Products and Services, Washington, DC:
  DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce.                                Department of Defense, Ofﬁce of the Undersecretary of
DSMC. 1995. Integrated Logistics Support Guide. Fort            Defense (Industrial Affairs and Installtions).
  Belvoir, VA: Defense Systems Management College             SD-15. 1995. Performance Speciﬁcation Guide, Defense
  (DSMC) Press.                                                 Standardization Program, Washington, DC: Department
SD1. Standardization Directory. Published 4 times per year.     of Defense, Ofﬁce of the Assistant Secretary of Defense
  Defense Standardization Program, Washington, DC:              for Economic Security.
  Department of Defense.                                      Army Materiel Command Pamphlet 715-3. 1994. The Best
SD-2. 1996. Buying Commercial and Nondevelopmental              Value Approach to Selecting a Contract Source, Vol. 5.
  Items: A Handbook. Washington, DC: Department of              Washington, DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Chapter              42

     System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

42.1 INTRODUCTION

Systems, as multi-level abstractions of integrated capabilities, require a structural framework and
building blocks to integrate those capabilities. We refer to the structural framework as the system’s
architecture and the building blocks as items. The challenge for SEs is to determine HOW to:
     1. Conceptualize, formulate, and select the RIGHT architectural framework, especially for
        large highly complex systems.
     2. Partition the architecture into the respective levels of interconnected items.
SEs approach this challenge by partitioning large, complex problems into smaller, multi-level prob-
lems that can be easily managed and solved. We refer to the multi-level partitioning as hierarchi-
cal decomposition or expansion. To accomplish a decomposition of the architectural framework,
we apply requirements analysis, functional analysis, and object analysis methods and techniques
to decompose the multi-level speciﬁcations into a set of hierarchical capabilities. Each capability
is subsequently allocated to and performed by physical components we categorize as the system
elements—EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, and so on.
     During the hierarchical decomposition, several types of make versus buy versus buy-modify
decisions are made. The challenge question is: How do we translate System Performance Speciﬁ-
cation (SPS) capabilities of the Behavioral Domain Solution into manageable EQUIPMENT items
that can be designed, developed, procured, and the Behavioral Domain Solution and modiﬁed, and
integrated to fulﬁll the system’s overall capability?
     This chapter describes HOW elements of a system’s architectural conﬁguration are identiﬁed
and designated for conﬁguration tracking. Our discussions begin with establishing the conﬁgura-
tion management semantics and explain why these terms are often confusing. We explore HOW
architectural items are selected from external vendor commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) items or non-
developmental items (NDIs), or Acquirer furnished property (AFP), or they can be developed in-
house from legacy designs or new development. We provide illustrations of how items are assigned
to development teams. We conclude with a discussion of conﬁguration baselines—when they are
established—and contrast SE and conﬁguration management (CM) viewpoints of each one.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is a system or product conﬁguration?
      2. What is the Developmental Conﬁguration?
      3. What is an item?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                 489
490     Chapter 42   System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

       4. What is a conﬁguration item (CI)?
       5. What is the relationship between items and CIs?
       6. Who is responsible for identifying CIs?
       7. How are CIs selected?
       8. How do CIs relate to the speciﬁcation tree?
       9. How do COTS items and NDIs relate to items and CIs?
      10. What is a baseline?
      11. What is meant by conﬁguration effectivity?
      12. What is the relationship between baselines and the Developmental Conﬁguration?
      13. Describe the evolution of the Developmental Conﬁguration and its baselines.
      14. What is a line replaceable unit (LRU)?
      15. What are mission-speciﬁc and infrastructure CIs?
      16. What is the “As Speciﬁed” Conﬁguration, and when is it established?
      17. What is the “As Designed” Conﬁguration, and when is it established?
      18. What is the “As Built” Conﬁguration and when is it established?
      19. What is the “As Veriﬁed” Conﬁguration, and when is it established?
      20. What is the “As Validated” Conﬁguration, and when is it established?
      21. What is the “As Maintained” Conﬁguration, and when is it established?
      22. What is the “As Produced” Conﬁguration, and when is it established?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Allocated Baseline “The initially approved documentation describing a conﬁguration item’s
        (CI) functional and interface characteristics that are allocated from those of a higher level
        CI; interface requirements with other CIs; design restraints; and veriﬁcation required to
        demonstrate the achievement of speciﬁed functional and interface characteristics. Allocated
        baseline consists of the development speciﬁcations that deﬁne functional requirements for
        each CI.” (Source: DSMC, Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
      • Baseline A collection of conﬁguration-controlled, speciﬁcation and design requirements
        documentation for a conﬁguration item (CI) or set of CIs that represents the current,
        approved, and released design.
      • Baseline Management “In conﬁguration management, the application of technical and
        administrative direction to designate the documents and changes to those documents that for-
        mally identify and establish baselines at speciﬁc times during the life cycle of a conﬁgura-
        tion item.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Computer Software Conﬁguration Item (CSCI) “An aggregation of software that satis-
        ﬁes an end use function and is designated for separate conﬁguration management by the
        acquirer. CSCIs are selected based on trade-offs among software function, size, host or target
        computers, developer, support concept, plans for reuse, criticality, interface considerations,
        need to be separately documented and controlled, and other factors.” (Source: Former MIL-
        STD-498, p. 5)
      • Conﬁguration “(1) The performance, functional, and physical attributes of an
        existing or planned product, or a combination of products. (2) One of a series of sequen-
        tially created variations of a product.” (Source: ANSI/EIA 649-19116, Sec. 3, p. 3)
                                                                             42.1 Introduction   491

    • Conﬁguration Item (CI) “An aggregation of hardware, ﬁrmware, computer software, or
      any of their discrete portions, which satisﬁes an end use function and is designated by the
      (Acquirer) for separate conﬁguration management. Conﬁguration items may vary widely in
      complexity, size, and type. Any item required for logistic support and designated for sepa-
      rate procurement is a CI.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC Glossary: Defense Acquisition
      Acronyms and Terms)
    • Conﬁguration Management “A management process for establishing and maintaining con-
      sistency of a product’s performance, functional, and physical attributes with its requirements,
      design and operational information throughout its life.” (Source: ANSI-EIA-649-1998, p. 4)
    • Effectivity “A designation deﬁning the product range (e.g., serial, lot numbers, model,
      dates) or event at which a change to a speciﬁc product is to be (or has been) effected or to
      which a variance applies.” (Source: ANSI-EIA-649-1998, p. 4)
    • Hardware Conﬁguration Item (HWCI) “An aggregation of hardware that satisﬁes an end
      use function and is designated for separate conﬁguration management by the Acquirer.”
      (Source: Adapted from former MIL-STD-498, p. 5)
    • Item Any physical component of a system such as a PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEM-
      BLY, SUBASSEMBLY, or PART.
    • Line Replaceable Unit (LRU) “A unit designed to be removed upon failure from a larger
      entity (product or item) in the operational environment, normally at the organizational level.”
      (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G, Glossary, p. G-8)
    • Logical Conﬁguration Item (LCI) An optional designation assigned to a speciﬁc
      capability.
    • Physical Conﬁguration Item (PCI) An item that represents the physical instance of a con-
      ﬁguration item (CI). Each item is assigned a part number and may be serialized.
    • Product Structure Refer to deﬁnition provided in Chapter 9 System Levels of Abstraction
      and Semantics.
    • Requirements Baseline “Documentation describing a system’s/segments functional char-
      acteristics and the veriﬁcation required to demonstrate the achievement of those speciﬁed
      functional characteristics. The system or segment speciﬁcation establishes the functional
      baseline” (Source: DSMC Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
    • Variance, Deviation, Waiver, Departure “A speciﬁc written authorization to depart from
      a particular requirement(s) of a product’s current approved conﬁguration documentation for
      a speciﬁc number of units or a speciﬁed time period. (A variance differs from an engineer-
      ing change in that an approved engineering change requires corresponding revision of the
      product’s current approved conﬁguration documentation, whereas a variance does not.)”
      (Source: ANSI/EIA-649-1998, Section 3.0, Deﬁnitions, p. 6)

Items—Building Blocks of Systems
Large, complex systems are developed by groups of people working as Integrated Product Teams
(IPTs) or development teams with assigned roles and responsibilities for producing various system
products. Depending on the size and complexity of the system or item being developed, teams are
assigned tasks such as specifying, designing, developing, integrating, and verifying various com-
ponents within the system. This presents some signiﬁcant challenges:
    1. How do you partition the architecture of the EQUIPMENT element into multiple levels and
       instances of manageable physical items?
492     Chapter 42           System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

      2. How can people establish semantics that enable them to communicate with others about
         the types of items they are developing or procuring from external vendors?
      3. How can people communicate about the evolution of system components that go through
         various stages from abstract system speciﬁcation entities into physical components used to
         build the system?
The solution resides in integrated building blocks referred to as items, conﬁguration items (CIs),
hardware conﬁguration items (HWCIs), and software conﬁguration items (CSCIs). Each of these
building blocks represents semantics used to identify abstract entities within a system and their evo-
lution from SPS to deliverables.

42.2 UNDERSTANDING CONFIGURATION
IDENTIFICATION SEMANTICS

Conﬁguration identiﬁcation knowledge for most SEs typically comes from informal exposure via
verbal discussions in meetings, on-the-job-training (OJT), and observation over many years. Most
engineers have little or no training in the principles of conﬁguration management; most are self-
taught through observation and knowledge of general CM standards. By these means they feel able
to proclaim themselves to be conﬁguration experts.
     These rudimentary skills provide basic insights about system architectural conﬁguration deci-
sions. However, meanings and applications of the terms are often convoluted. Instead of seeking
insightful guidance from competent CM personnel, technical leads exercise their authority, make
decisions, and blunder down the road of regrets, while CM and others expend endless energy
contending with the consequences of these decisions. So, to minimize the confusion, let’s begin
by informally introducing key terms. Figure 42.1 depicts entity relationships to support our
discussions.



                                                                                                     Where:
                                                                                                     AFP = Acquirer/User Furnished Property
                                          System Architectural                                       CSC = Computer Software Component
                                             Configuration                                           CSU = Computer Software Unit
                                                                                                     COTS = Commercial-Off-the-Shelf
                                                                                                     CSCI = Computer Software Configuration Item
                                                                                                     HWCI = Hardware Configuration Item
                                                              Comprise
                                                                                 Items               NDI = Non-Developmental Item

          Consist of         Consist of        Consist of           Consist of
          1 .. *             1 .. *            1 .. *               1 .. *                          Consist of 1 .. *
  Internally            COTS              NDI                   AFP
                                                                                         Configuration Items
 Developed,            Products         Products               Items
  Reusable
 Components                                                                  Consist of 1 .. *
                                                     Integrated
                                                      into 1 .. *          HWCIs                 CSCIs              CSCs           CSUs


                                              Integrated
                                               into 1 ..*

                            Integrated into 1 .. *
          Integrated into 1 .. *


      Where:            = May or may not consist of
                        = Composition

Figure 42.1 System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation Elements
                                     42.2 Understanding Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation Semantics   493

Component Origins
Every entity within a SYSTEM, regardless of level of abstraction is referred to as an ITEM. If you
analyze most systems, you will discover that items originate from at least six different methods:
    1. Procured from a vendor’s catalog.
    2. Procured from a vendor’s catalog and customized/adapted in-house.
    3. Customized or modiﬁed versions of items found in a vendor’s catalog.
    4. Developed in-house by human intellect or procured as components or raw materials from
       suppliers.
    5. Developed in-house from customizations of existing, legacy designs.
    6. Provided by the Acquirer in accordance with the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the system
       development contract and integrated into the SYSTEM design.
Observe two types of themes above. First, items are procured externally, and second, items are
developed internally.

Externally Acquired or Procured Components
As introduced in Chapter 41, items procured from a vendor’s catalog are referred to as commer-
cial off-the-shelf (COTS) items. COTS items customized or modiﬁed for a speciﬁc application are
referred to as nondevelopmental items (NDIs). Acquirer provided items are referred to as Acquirer
furnished property (AFP).

Author’s Note 42.1 When the System Developer receives contract-based AFP from the User
via the Acquirer, each item must be recorded, tracked, and controlled in accordance with the terms
and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract. Planned modiﬁcations to AFP typically require authori-
zation by the Acquirer’s Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO). Make sure the Ts&Cs clearly delineate WHO
is accountable for:
    1. Providing AFP documentation.
    2. AFP failures while in the possession of the System Developer.

Conﬁguration Items (CIs)
When a System Developer decides to develop a MAJOR item such as a PRODUCT, SUBSYS-
TEM, or ASSEMBLY in-house, the program designates the item as a conﬁguration item (CI). CIs
require a speciﬁcation that speciﬁes and bounds the CI’s capabilities and performance.
    A CI, as a major item, integrates lower level components that may consist of: AFP, COTS
items, NDIs, and two other types developed by the System Developer in-house:
    • Hardware conﬁguration items (HWCIs)
    • Computer software conﬁguration items (CSCIs)

HWCIs and CSCIs
HWCIs are major hardware items and CSCIs are major software applications designated for con-
ﬁguration control.
    • As CIs, HWCIs and CSCIs may include COTS items, NDIs, internally developed or legacy
      items, or combinations of these.
494     Chapter 42   System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

      • Each HWCI is speciﬁed via requirements documented in an HWCI Requirements Speciﬁca-
        tion (HRS).
      • Each CSCI is speciﬁed via requirements docuemented in a CSCI Software Requirements
        Speciﬁcation (SRS).

Firmware
Some processor-based applications such as single board computers (SBC) employ software encoded
into an integrated circuit (IC) referred to as ﬁrmware. Firmware ICs, which are nonvolatile memory
device types, may be implemented with single-use, read only, and reprogrammable devices.
Firmware represents a hybrid instance of an item that evolves from a CSCI into an HWCI, as illus-
trated in Figure 42.2.
     Initially, the software program executed by the SBC is developed as a CSCI software appli-
cation and debugged on laboratory prototype SBC hardware, using emulators and other devices.
When the software application reaches maturity and is ready for ﬁnal integration, the CSCI’s code
is electronically programmed into the ﬁrmware IC device. Once programmed, the ﬁrmware IC is:
      1. Designated as an HWCI.
      2. Assigned a part number, serial number, and version.
Both the CSCI and HWCI are controlled in accordance with the CM procedures.

Guidepost 42.1 The preceding discussions introduced the semantics of conﬁguration identiﬁ-
cation. Some of these semantics apply to ANY level of abstraction. You should recall from our dis-
cussion in Chapter 9 System Levels of Abstraction and Semantics that one organization’s
SUBSYSTEM might be another organization’s SYSTEM. Our follow-on discussions illustrate WHY
the referential nature of conﬁguration identiﬁcation semantics when applied to levels of abstrac-
tion result in confusion.

Conﬁguration Semantics Synthesis
To understand how conﬁguration identiﬁcation semantics relate to multi-level system architectures,
Figures 42.1 and 42.3 depict the entity relationships. Table 42.1 provides a listing of entity rela-
tionship rules that govern the implementation of this graphic.



                           Computer
                            Computer
                            Software
                             Software
                         Configuration
                          Configuration
                           Item(CSCI)
                          Item  (CSCI)

                                                                         Firmware

                         Programming
                                                                          XXX-YYYY-2




                            Device

                                                 Hardware
                                                  Hardware
                                               Configuration
                                                Configuration
                                                Item(HWCI)
                                               Item  (HWCI)



Figure 42.2 Evolution of Firmware from Software to Hardware
                                                         42.2 Understanding Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation Semantics           495

                Designated
                        as             Consists
                                         of             Commercial-
                                                         Commercial-                                        Consists of
   SYSTEM
    SYSTEM                                              Off-the-Shelf
                                                         Off-the-Shelf
                                                        (COTS)Item(s)
                                                       (COTS)   Item(s)
                Designated
                        as
  PRODUCTs
   PRODUCTs
                                                        Configuration                    Consists of
                Designated
                                                         Configuration
                                                          Items(CIs)
                                                         Items  (CIs)
                        as
 SUBSYSTEMs
  SUBSYSTEMs
                Designated     Item                                                  Consists of
                                Item                        Non-
                                                             Non-
                        as                             Developmental
 ASSEMBLY(s)                             Consists       Developmental
  ASSEMBLY(s)                                           Items
                                           of            Items(NDIs)
                                                               (NDIs)
                Designated                                                                   Solution Set
                        as                                                                  Requirements
  SUBASSYs.                                         Consists of
   SUBASSYs.                                                                                  Solution          CSCI(s)
                                                                          HWCI(s)                                CSCI(s)
                Designated
                                                                           HWCI(s)           Operational
                        as                                                                    Solution
       PARTs
        PARTs                                                                                               Described
                                                        Acquirer
                                                         Acquirer                             Behavioral
                                                                                                               by
                                                       Furnished
                                                        Furnished            Described         Solution
                                  Consists             Equipment                by
   Where:                                               Equipment                               Physical
                                    of                   (AFE)
                                                          (AFE)                                 Solution
            = May or May Not


Figure 42.3 Item/Conﬁguration Items (CIs) Compositional Entity Relationships


Table 42.1 Conﬁguration semantics rules

Rule            Title                          Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation and Development Rule

42.1     Items                   Every entity within a system, regardless of level of abstraction, is referred to as
                                 an item.
42.2     Conﬁguration            Designate major items selected for internal development and conﬁguration
         items                   control.
42.3     Conﬁguration            Items may originate from several types of sources:
         items                   1. Replicated from existing, internally developed component designs.
                                 2. Acquired as COTS, NDI, or AFP.
                                 3. Acquired as COTS, NDI, or AFP and modiﬁed in-house.
                                 4. Developed as new designs such as an HWCI(s) or CSCI(s).
42.4     CI                      A CI’s composition may consist of one or more COTS products, NDIs, HWCIs,
         composition             CSCIs, AFPs, or combinations thereof.
42.5     CI                      Develop a performance or development speciﬁcation for each item designated as a
         speciﬁcations           CI.
42.6     HWCIs and               Develop an HWCI Requirements Speciﬁcation (HRS) for each HWCI; Develop a
         CSCIs                   CSCI Software Requirements Speciﬁcation (SRS) for each CSCI.
42.7     CI solution             Develop a Requirements Domain, Operations Domain, Behavioral Domain, and
         set                     Physical Domain Solutions for each CI, HWCI, and CSCI.
42.8     CSCIs                   The product structure of each CSCI consists of at least two or more CSCs that
                                 consist of at least two or more CSUs.
42.9     CI ownership            Assign accountability for the design, development, and integration and
                                 veriﬁcation for each CI, HWCI, and CSCI to an individual or IPT.
496     Chapter 42   System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

Guidepost 42.2 At this juncture we have established the context and composition of CIs. The
question is: HOW do we determine which items should be designated as CIs. This brings us to our
next topic on the selection of conﬁguration items.

Selection of Conﬁguration Items (CIs)
The preceding discussions established that CIs are MAJOR items developed in-house. While this
is an important criterion, CIs often require additional considerations. The best approach for select-
ing CIs is to simply establish a set of selection criteria. Then, perform a reasonableness check to
ensure that the selection:
      1. Is logical.
      2. Provides the proper visibility for technical, cost, and schedule tracking.
      3. Exposes development activities at a level that can be used for assessing risk.
Some organizations establish speciﬁc criteria for selecting CIs that go beyond simply deciding to
develop an item internally. These decisions should be made in collaboration with a program’s con-
ﬁguration manager, a subject matter expert (SME) in this domain.
    The selection of conﬁguration items often varies from one organization or business domain to
another. To standardize thinking about selecting CIs, MIL-STD-483A (cancelled) offers the fol-
lowing guidance in selecting CIs:
      1. Is it a critical high risk, and/or a safety item?
      2. Is it readily identiﬁable with respect to size, shape, and weight (hardware)?
      3. Is it newly developed?
      4. Does it incorporate new technologies?
      5. Does it have an interface with hardware or software developed under another contract?
      6. With respect to form, ﬁt, or function, does it interface with other conﬁguration items whose
         conﬁguration is controlled by other entities?
      7. Is there a requirement to know the exact conﬁguration and status of changes to it during
         its life cycle?
(Source: Former MIL-STD-483A, para. 170.9, pp. 118–119)

Conﬁguration Item (CI) Boundaries
Contrary to some beliefs, items and CIs SHOULD NOT be partitioned across physical device
boundaries; this is a violation of good design practice as noted in our earlier discussion of Figure
40.4. In general, CIs:
      1. Are bounded by a development speciﬁcation, HWCI Requirements Speciﬁcation (HRS) or
         CSCI Requirements Speciﬁcation (SRS).
      2. Reside within the boundaries of a physical item—such as SYSTEM, SUBSYSTEM,
         ASSEMBLY, or SUBASSEMBLY as a computer system, printed circuit board, software
         application, and so forth.
      3. Must be veriﬁed against their respective HRS or SRS.
To illustrate this point, consider the hypothetical example below:
                                        42.2 Understanding Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation Semantics     497


 EXAMPLE 42.1
As an example of an INCORRECT approach, an organization has a contract to develop a word processor soft-
ware application. Using the INCORRECT approach, the software CSCI would have CSCs implemented across
physical items:
1. A desktop computer (HWCI)
2. The printer (HWCI)
3. Other (HWCIs) on a network

So, if CIs, HWCIs, and CSCIs require stand-alone performance or development speciﬁcations to
specify and bound an integrated item that is SELF-CONTAINED within a physical item, How do
we test the software, as an item, when it resides across several HWCIs (boundaries)?
     Remember, CIs are tested and veriﬁed as standalone test articles—as a black box with inputs
and outputs—with all the necessary functionality self-contained. Adhering to the boundary con-
straints speciﬁed above, there is an expectation that the CSCI will be tested on a single HWCI
device such as a desktop computer. Obviously, this is not achievable since the CSCI’s CSCs are
implemented in several HWCI devices (desktop computer, printer, network, etc.) across the system.
The CORRECT approach requires a CSCI on each device.

Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation Responsibility
Conﬁguration identiﬁcation, as an informed, multi-discipline, decision-making process, requires
collaboration with those stakeholders. Contrary to what many people believe, it IS NOT a decision
by ONE individual exercising their discretionary authority in a vacuum without inputs from the
key decision stakeholders. As the multi-level entity architectures evolve, the Conﬁguration Manager
(CM) / Software Conﬁguration Manager (SCM), Lead SE, and other SEs collaborate to select the
CORRECT approach for identifying items and CIs that will endure the test of time and AVOID the
junk heap of POOR decisions.

Guidepost 42.3 At this point we have established the basic set of conﬁguration identiﬁcation
semantics and how they are applied to multi-level system architectures. These discussions high-
lighted the need during internal development to prepare a development speciﬁcation for each CI,
HWCI, and CSCI. For the ﬁrst article on Developmental Conﬁgurations, this is a straightforward
process. Two key questions:
    1. HOW are these speciﬁcations maintained for production systems that evolve over time as
       new capabilities and reﬁnements are added to established designs?
    2. How do these impacts affect systems or products that are already ﬁelded that may require
       RETROFITTING?
This brings us to our next topic, conﬁguration effectivity.

Conﬁguration Effectivity
Production systems may evolve over several years as newer technologies, capabilities, and improve-
ments are incorporated into the evolutionary system design solution. As such, the physical conﬁg-
uration changes. So the question becomes: HOW do we delineate the changes in conﬁguration to
a given CI, HWCI, or CSCI? Conﬁguration management addresses these conﬁgurations via a
concept referred to as conﬁguration effectivity.
498    Chapter 42   System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

     Every CI, HWCI, and CSCI is labeled with a unique identiﬁer that delineates it from all others.
This occurs at two levels: 1) model number and 2) serial numbers. So, when physical conﬁgura-
tions change over the years, some organizations simply reference the effectivity beginning with
Serial Number (S/N) XXX; others append a “dash number” to the model number—such as Model
123456-1—to indicate a speciﬁc version. Most organizations today afﬁx barcode labels to CIs,
HWCIs, and CSCIs to facilitate automated version or conﬁguration tracking.
     Versioning provides the System Developer a couple of options. It allows evolutionary track-
ing of a product line over its life span, and it provides a means to account for special customiza-
tions delivered to an Acquirer. In lieu of model numbers and versioning, some vendor’s employ
contract numbers and serial numbers to designate items.
     You may ask: Why is this important to SE?

Effectivity-Based Speciﬁcations
During the development of a system or product, multi-discipline SEs prepare item development
speciﬁcations (IDSs) for PRODUCTS, SUBSYSTEMS, HWCIs, and CSCIs that form the Devel-
opmental Conﬁguration. Although cost is a key constraint, most ﬁrst article systems or products
MAY NOT represent the most cost-effective solution due to schedule and other constraints. First
articles are simply a solution that meets speciﬁcation requirements. Typically, each deliverable is
assigned contract/model numbers and serial numbers.
     If a system is planned for production, Product Engineering initiates efforts to reduce the recur-
ring per unit cost via design improvements, component and material selection and procurement,
manufacturing methods, and so forth. Ultimately, the improvements culminate in a revised item
development speciﬁcation with effectivity beginning with S/N XXX forward.
     Once production starts, CIs, HWCIs, and CSCIs evolve over time. Whereas during the origi-
nal system development, revisions to the Developmental Conﬁguration speciﬁcations were issued
when changes occurred. So, when production item changes occur, you have to revise the speciﬁ-
cation level and the effectivity.
     When this occurs, the program has two choices: create a new speciﬁcation unique to a
conﬁguration, or designate model and serial number effectivity on the cover page and annotate
speciﬁcation requirements unique to the effectivity within the document.


42.3 ALIGNING ITEMS AND CIs WITH
THE SPECIFICATION TREE

Once CIs are identiﬁed, the key question is: HOW do you communicate their location within the
system’s product structure? The answer is: CIs should be explicitly identiﬁed in the speciﬁcation
tree based on derivation from the system architecture as shown in Figure 42.4.
     Here, the SEIT analyzes the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements to create
the SYSTEM level architecture, as shown in the lower left corner of the graphic. The architecture
consists of PRODUCTs A and B. PRODUCT B, which consists of ITEMs B_1 through B_3, will
be developed internally, and is designated as a CI.
     As the system architecture evolves, the speciﬁcation tree evolves, as shown on the right side
of the graphic. Based on the designation of CIs and items, item development speciﬁcations are
identiﬁed.
      • PRODUCT A has its own PRODUCT A development speciﬁcation.
      • PRODUCT B, as a CI, has its own unique PRODUCT B development speciﬁcation that
        includes requirements for ITEMs B_1 through B_3.
                                                         42.4 Assigning Ownership of Items and CIs        499


                                                   SYSTEM CI Product Structure
    System
  Performance
  Specification                                                SYSTEM
                                                                SYSTEM
     (SPS)



                                           PRODUCT                         PRODUCTBB
                                                                          PRODUCT
     SYSTEM Level Architecture              PRODUCTAA                    Configuration
                                                COTS                      ConfigurationItem
                                                                                        Item
                                                 COTSItem
                                                      Item
      3
           PRODUCTAA
          PRODUCT
            COTS Item
             COTS Item                                          ITEM        ITEM         ITEM
                                                                 ITEM
                                                                 B_1
                                                                             ITEM
                                                                             B_2          ITEMB_3
                                                                                               B_3
                                                                  B_1         B_2        Configuration
                                                                                          Configuration
                   PRODUCT B                                     COTS       COTS             Item
                                                                  COTS       COTS             Item
                  Configuration Item


           ITEMB_1
          ITEM  B_1           ITEMB_2
                             ITEM  B_2
           COTSItem
          COTS  Item          COTSItem
                             COTS  Item
                                                                  PRODUCT
                                            PRODUCT                                       PRODUCT
                   Item                                               B
                    ItemB_3
                         B_3                    A
                                                                 Development
                                                                                             B_3
                  Configuration
                   Configuration           Development                                   Development
                      Item
                       Item                                      Specification
                                            or Product                                    or Product
                                           Specification                                 Specification

Figure 42.4 System Conﬁguration Documentation



    • ITEM B_3 is designated as a CI for development and, as such, is required to have its own
      unique ITEM B_3 development speciﬁcation.

42.4 ASSIGNING OWNERSHIP OF ITEMS AND CIs

As the speciﬁcation tree evolves, CI development ACCOUNTABILITY should be assigned to
owners such as development teams or Integrated Product Teams (IPTs). Figure 42.5 provides an
illustrative example. Note how the system architecture decomposes along product structure lines.
This is a key point, especially the operative word “product.”
     For programs that establish Integrated Product Teams (IPTs), each IPT focuses on “product”
development and collaborates with interfacing IPTs developing items that interface to their assigned
product. For example, IPT 1 collaborates with IPT 2 on mutual interface design issues.
     Accountability for developing ONE product is assigned to ONE and only one IPT. Depending
on the size, complexity, and risk of the multi-level items, an IPT may be assigned accountability
for one or more products as illustrated in Figure 42.5. Accountability for developing PRODUCTs
A and B, which have a moderate degree of complexity and risk, is assigned to IPT 1. In contrast,
accountability for PRODUCT C is assigned to IPT 2 due to its complexity and risk. This brings us
to a ﬁnal point.
     Programs often get into trouble because SEs develop the IPT organizational structure ﬁrst and
then leave the IPTs to identify the architectural conﬁguration with limited, if any, oversight by the
SEIT. In this example, PRODUCTs A and B, by virtue of accountability by IPT 1 would be bundled
together, regardless of the lack of physical interfaces and be idenitiﬁed as a PRODUCT or SUB-
SYSTEM. Then, the IPT will attempt to develop a development speciﬁcation for the conglomeration.
     In many cases PRODUCTs A and B are unrelated, thereby indicating NO interfaces. Yet, the
IPT will be required to verify both PRODUCTs together as a “black box.” Avoid and correct these
system conﬁguration identiﬁcation decisions. Often these decisions are made by local “heroes” with
500     Chapter 42     System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

                                     Configuration
                                                                      SYSTEM
                                    Item Hierarchy                     SYSTEM



                                PRODUCTAA
                               PRODUCT                      PRODUCTBB
                                                           PRODUCT                             PRODUCTCC
                                                                                              PRODUCT
                               Configuration              Configuration
                                Configuration              ConfigurationItem
                                                                         Item                 ConfigurationItem
                                                                                             Configuration  Item
                                   Item
                                    Item

                                                 ITEM        ITEM         ITEM              ITEM         ITEM
                                                  ITEM        ITEM         ITEMB_3
                                                                                B_3          ITEM         ITEM
                                                  B_1
                                                   B_1        B_2
                                                               B_2        Configuration
                                                                           Configuration
                                                                                             C_1
                                                                                              C_1         C_2
                                                                                                           C_2
                                                                              Item
                                                                               Item
            Responsibility &                    IPT #1 Accountability                      IPT #2 Accountability
  IPT        Accountability
         IPT #1 Lead
         CI A Lead
 IPT #1 ITEM B_1 Lead
         ITEM B_2 Lead
         CI B_3 Lead
         IPT #2 Lead
 IPT #2 ITEM C_1 Lead
         ITEM C_2 Team Lead

Figure 42.5 CI Assigned Responsibility & Accountability


an ounce of knowledge about system architecture development and IPT implementation yet wield
authority and create programmatic situations that severely impact contract performance.


42.5 RECOGNIZING TYPES OF
ARCHITECTURAL ITEM BOUNDARIES

The Industrial Revolution introduced new concepts for standardizing and reproducing modular and
interchangeable components via predictable methods in order to leverage the beneﬁts of economies
of scale. Our discussions on SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEM-
BLY, and PART levels of abstraction expound on these themes.
     The concept of modularity can easily lead to the SE mindset that all items and CIs are con-
structed as modular plug and play boxes. The System of Systems (SOS) approach further reinforces
the mindset of “box” CIs integrated into a higher level system. However, there are systems whereby
INTEGRATION occurs ACROSS the traditional “box” boundaries.
     In general, systems often consist of two classes of PRODUCTs/SUBSYSTEMs:
      1. Mission speciﬁc PRODUCTs/SUBSYSTEMS.
      2. Infrastructure PRODUCTs/SUBSYSTEMS that transcend the mission-speciﬁc SUBSYS-
         TEM boundaries.
Figure 42.6 illustrates this type of architecture. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 42.2
Ofﬁce building systems, as MISSION SYSTEMs, consist of well-deﬁned architectural “box” boundaries. Hier-
archically, we could refer to the individual ﬂoors of ofﬁce buildings as SUBSYSTEM level CIs. However,
what about the plumbing and electrical, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) system CIs that
                                                       42.5 Recognizing Types of Architectural Item Boundaries      501

                                                                                                 Mission-Specific
Where:                                                       SYSTEM
                                                              SYSTEM                             SUBSYSTEMS
HVAC = Heating, Ventilation, & Air Conditioning




                                               Offices
                                                Offices               Laboratory
                                                                       Laboratory             Laboratory
                                                                                               Laboratory
           Infrastructure                   SUBSYSTEM
                                             SUBSYSTEM               SUBSYSTEM               SUBSYSTEM
                                                                      SUBSYSTEM               SUBSYSTEM
                                          (ConfigurationItem)
                                         (Configuration   Item)   (Configuration Item)    (Configuration Item)
           SUBSYSTEMS                                              (Configuration Item)    (Configuration Item)

           PowerDistribution
          Power   Distribution
             SUBSYSTEM
              SUBSYSTEM
           (ConfigurationItem)
          (Configuration   Item)


           Communications
            Communications
             SUBSYSTEM
              SUBSYSTEM
          (Configuration Item)
           (Configuration Item)


                HVAC
                 HVAC
             SUBSYSTEM
              SUBSYSTEM
           (ConfigurationItem)
          (Configuration   Item)


            Fire Protection
             Fire Protection
             SUBSYSTEM
              SUBSYSTEM
           (ConfigurationItem)
          (Configuration   Item)

Figure 42.6 System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation with Cross-Cutting Cis



TRANSCEND all of the ﬂoors and ofﬁce boundaries? We can declare the ﬂoors and ofﬁces as mission-based
SUBSYSTEMS. Infrastructure SUBSYSTEMS such as HVAC systems, would plumbing, electrical, and other
such systems, transcend each ﬂoor.

Systems such as aircraft and automobiles, exhibit similar conﬁgurations. Fuel systems and electri-
cal systems, for example, traverse the entire structure.

Relevance to SE
Now you are probably asking: WHY IS this relevant to SE? After all, this is simply a means of cre-
ating a SYSTEM architecture. The importance of this point is estimating the cost of a system during
the System Procurement Phase. SEs must:
      1. Recognize the existence of mission-speciﬁc and cross-cutting infrastructure systems.
      2. Appreciate the need to establish a consensus on system conﬁguration boundaries and delin-
         eate WHAT IS/IS NOT included within each mission-speciﬁc and infrastructure boundary
         via a CWBS Dictionary that scopes the contents.
The focal point for organizing cost estimating efforts, establishing work performance benchmarks,
and measuring planned versus actual work progress is the Contract Work Breakdown Structure
(CWBS). As we have reiterated numerous times, the CWBS, especially its Mission Equipment
Element, should be derived from the SYSTEM’s architecture. Unfortunately, most organizations
do just the reverse. They haphazardly create the CWBS and then try to contort the system archi-
tecture to match the ﬂawed CWBS!
     Returning to our ofﬁce building example, HOW do you estimate costs on the basis of:
      1. Hierarchical categories of rooms with embedded plumbing, electrical, HVAC, and struc-
         tural components?
502     Chapter 42   System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

      2. Hierarchical mission-speciﬁc rooms and separate infrastructure structural, electrical, plumb-
         ing, and HVAC systems?
For systems such as buildings, homes, and aircraft, the CWBS Dictionary scopes infrastructure
systems such as structural, electrical, plumbing, HVAC, and communications as separately cost ac-
countable CWBS elements. This is driven by that fact that for electrical, plumbing, HVAC, network,
and audio-visual communications elements, there are contractors who specialize in these areas.
     Contemplate what would happen if we structured the CWBS to merge home construction
mission-speciﬁc and infrastructure SUBSYSTEMs. The foyer, living room, kitchen, and bedroom
SUBSYSTEMs would include internal electrical, mechanical, and plumbing elements. By this
approach, from a veriﬁcation perspective, each of these SUBSYSTEMS would be individually
inspected and veriﬁed. Now imagine what would happen if you called the building inspectors to
“inspect and verify” the HVAC, electrical, and structural elements of the Dining Room SUBSYS-
TEM and called them back a week later to verify the same elements of the Family Room SUB-
SYSTEM. The approach is FLAWED!
     The bottom line is: decompose your system into a hierarchy of logical/behavioral and physi-
cal elements that can be speciﬁed, developed, procured, integrated, and veriﬁed with minimal sets
of interdependencies. Recognize that some PRODUCTs/SUBSYSTEMs are mission-speciﬁc;
others are infrastructure SUBSYSTEMs that transcend mission-speciﬁc SUBSYSTEMS. Structure
the CWBS to accommodate not only the SYSTEM architecture but also cost estimating and con-
tracting efforts.
     Additionally, this approach enables separate speciﬁcations for infrastructure CIs that can be
easily subcontracted out to vendors who specialize in those areas. If the infrastructure entities
were embedded within a mission-speciﬁc CI, SEs would have to partition out requirements for
infrastructure entities and create separate procurement speciﬁcations. The extra work is simply
unnecessary.


42.6 MULTIPLE INSTANCES OF CI IMPLEMENTATION

Although we tend to think that every item in a system is unique, systems and products often have
multiple instances of a single CI throughout the system. One of the roles of SE and the SEIT is to
reduce development cost, schedule, and risk. You do this by investigating the evolving system
design solution and searching for opportunities to STANDARDIZE components and interfaces. The
bottom line is: AVOID REINVENTING THE WHEEL by creating specialized CI designs that can
be satisiﬁed by one common CI design.


42.7 CONFIGURATION BASELINES

System development, as evidenced by previous discussions, requires translation of abstract System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements into a physical solution. The translation decomposes
or expands abstract complexity into more manageable lower levels of detail. Ultimately, a detailed
design matures to a point whereby design requirements such as drawings and software design are
sufﬁcient in detail to support procurement, fabrication, and coding of all items in the SYSTEM.
     Lower levels of design decisions, as reﬁnements of higher level decisions, are totally depend-
ent on maturing stability of the higher level design decisions. Otherwise, the entire solution evolves
into multi-level chaos. So, as higher level decisions stabilize, it is important to capture and control
the state of the evolving solution referred to as the Developmental Conﬁguration.
                                                                   42.7 Conﬁguration Baselines    503

The Developmental Conﬁguration
The Developmental Conﬁguration is characterized by a series of conﬁguration “snapshots” that
capture the evolving system design’s solution at various stages of maturity. Each conﬁguration
enables SEs to maintain intellectual control of the evolving and maturing system design’s solution
by controlling changes to the conﬁguration. Therefore, the scope of the Development Conﬁgura-
tion spans the time period from Contract Award until a system is committed to production.
     From an SE perspective, there are six types of conﬁguration classiﬁcations as listed below that
represent a level of maturity at various stages of development.
Stage 1:   “As Speciﬁed” Conﬁguration
Stage 2:   “As Allocated” Conﬁguration
Stage 3:   “As Designed” Conﬁguration
Stage 4:   “As Built” Conﬁguration
Stage 5:   “As Veriﬁed” Conﬁguration
Stage 6:   “As Validated” Conﬁguration
Stage 7:   “As Maintained” Conﬁguration
Stage 8:   “As Produced” Conﬁguration

Let’s brieﬂy synopsize each of these SE conﬁgurations.

    • “As Speciﬁed” Conﬁguration Represents the state of the SPS and lower level speciﬁca-
      tions as captured and maintained via the System Requirements Baseline.
    • “As Allocated” Conﬁguration Represents the allocation of requirements from the System
      Requirements Baseline speciﬁcations to items.
    • “As Built” Conﬁguration Represents the state of the Developmental Conﬁguration for ﬁrst
      articles at any level of abstraction prior to formal veriﬁcation. Generally, the “As Built” Con-
      ﬁguration employs serial number effectivity conﬁguration control methods to match the phys-
      ical system to its “As Designed” Conﬁguration.
    • “As Designed” Conﬁguration Represents the current, approved Developmental Conﬁgu-
      ration baseline derived from the “As Speciﬁed” Conﬁguration or System Requirements Base-
      line. The “As Designed” Conﬁguration is initially captured at the System Design Review
      (SDR) and maintained to incorporate any change modiﬁcations to the baseline.
    • “As Veriﬁed” Conﬁguration Represents the state of the physical SYSTEM at completion
      of its formal System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR) in which the “As Speciﬁed,” “As Designed,”
      and “As Built” Conﬁgurations mutually agree with each other and comply with speciﬁcation
      requirements.
    • “As Validated” Conﬁguration Represents the state of the physical system as VALIDATED
      by the User, or an Independent Test Agengy (ITA) representing the user, during the
      Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) under prescribed ﬁeld operating environments and
      conditions.
    • “As Maintained” Conﬁguration Represents the state of the physical system conﬁguration
      that is currently operated and maintained by the User in the ﬁeld. From an SE and a con-
      ﬁguration management perspective, the FAILURE to keep the “As Maintained” Conﬁgura-
      tion documentation current is a MAJOR RISK area, especially for developmental systems
      planned for production.
504     Chapter 42   System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

      • “As Produced” Conﬁguration Represents the state of the Production Baseline used to man-
        ufacture the system or product in production quantities.

Author’s Note 42.2 The “As Maintained” Conﬁguration is a crucial point for SE. It documents
the conﬁguration of the ﬁelded operational system(s). It is not uncommon for the User to become
LAX due to the lack of initiative or budgets in maintaining the “As Maintained” Conﬁguration doc-
umentation. The result is a physical system or product that DOES NOT identically match its con-
ﬁguration documentation, which is a MAJOR risk factor for the System Developer.

Developmental Conﬁguration Staging or Control Points
As the Developmental Conﬁguration evolves through a series of design and development stages,
it is important to establish agreement among the Acquirer, User, and System Developer about the
evolving and maturing system design solution. Depending on the type of contract and WHAT pro-
visions each party has in the decision-making process, we do this via staging or control points.
      Staging or control points, which consist of major technical review events, are intended to rep-
resent stages of maturity of the evolving system design solution as it advances into lower levels of
abstraction or detail over time. We do this via a series of Conﬁguration Baselines.
      From a conﬁguration management perspective, there are four conﬁguration baselines:
      • System Requirements or Functional Baseline
      • Allocated Baseline
      • Product Baseline
      • Production Baseline
    Note that our discussions identiﬁed two perspectives of the evolving and maturing Develop-
mental Conﬁguration: 1) an SE conﬁguration perspective and 2) a conﬁguration management per-
spective. Despite the semantics both sets correlate as illustrated in Table 42.2.


42.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system conﬁguration identiﬁcation practices.

Principle 42.1 Every component in a SYSTEM is an item. Some are designated as conﬁgura-
tion items (CIs) for internal development; others as commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) items or
nondevelopmental items (NDIs) for external procurement.

Principle 42.2 Development of a conﬁguration item (CI) should only occur when all other
COTS/NDI alternatives have proved to be impractical, not cost effective, or noncompliant with
technical, cost and schedule requirements.

Principle 42.3 Every SYSTEM/Entity has seven SE design conﬁgurations—As Speciﬁed, As
Designed, As Built, As Veriﬁed, As Validated, As Maintained, and As Produced—that must be
current and consistent.

Principle 42.4 Every SYSTEM has three primary Developmental Conﬁguration Baselines: 1) a
System Requirements or Functional Baseline, 2) a Allocated Baseline, and 3) a Product Baseline.
Systems in production have a Production Baseline.
                                                                                General Exercises    505

Table 42.2 Correlating SE conﬁguration and CM baseline perspectives

Staging or Control Point                          SE Conﬁguration                   CM Baselines
                                                    Perspective

System Requirements Review (SRR)            As Speciﬁed (system)             System Entity Requirements
                                                                              or Functional Baseline

System Design Review (SDR)                  As Allocated                     Allocated Baseline
                                            As Designed
                                            (system/subsystem)

Hardware Speciﬁcation Review (HSR)          As Speciﬁed (HWCIs)

Software Speciﬁcation Review (SSR)          As Speciﬁed (CSCIs)

Preliminary Design Review (PDR)             As Designed (HWCIs/CSCIs)

Critical Design Review (PDR)                As Designed

Completion of Component                     As Built
Procurement and Development

Test Readiness Reviews (TRRs)               As Veriﬁed (components)

System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR)             As Veriﬁed (system)              Product Baseline

Formal Qualiﬁcation Review (FQR)            As Validated (system)

Pre-Production Readiness Review (PPRR)      As Maintained

Production Readiness Review (PRR)           As Produced                      Production Baseline



Principle 42.5 As a contract element, the Acquirer owns and controls the System Performance
Speciﬁcation (SPS); the System Developer maintains the SPS in accordance with the contract direc-
tion authorized and provided by the Acquirer Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO).

42.9 SUMMARY

During system conﬁguration identiﬁcation discussions, we addressed how various elements of the EQUIP-
MENT system element are designated via a set of semantic terms. These are the terms that SEs use as a
common language to communicate. The intent is to enable the recipient to understand the context of each
application.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Based on an analysis of the multi-level system architecture, which items would you designate as
       conﬁguration items?
   (b) Which items might be procured as COTS or NDIs?
506     Chapter 42     System Conﬁguration Identiﬁcation

ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media. Identify what requirements are levied by the organization
   on programs regarding CIs, HWCIs, CSCIs, COTS, and NDIs?
2. Contact an internal contract program. Inquire as to how items, CIs, HWCIs, CSCIs, COTS, and NDIs are
   implemented in the program.
   (a) Does the contract specify criteria for selecting CIs?
   (b) Correlate CIs, HWCIs, and CSCIs with the speciﬁcation tree.
   (c) Report your ﬁndings and observations.
3. For the contract program noted above, investigate how ﬁrmware is developed, managed, and
   controlled.
4. Research Internet sites for instances of how other organizations specify and control CIs, HWCIs, CSCIs,
   COTS, NDIs, and ﬁrmware.


REFERENCES

ANSI/EIA-649-1998. 1998. National Consensus Standard          MIL-STD-483A (canceled). 1985. Conﬁguration Manage-
  for Conﬁguration Management, Electronic Industries           ment Practices for Systems, Munitions, and Computer
  Alliance (EIA). Arlington, VA                                Programs. Washington, DC: Department of Defense.
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of         MIL-STD-498 (canceled). 1994. Software Development and
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-      Documentation. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY.        (DoD).
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.              MIL-STD-973 (canceled). 1992. Conﬁguration Manage-
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th       ment. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
  ed. Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.


ADDITIONAL READING

DI-IPSC-8 1448A, 1999. DoD Data Item Description (DID).       Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASD-100 Architec-
  Firmware Support Manual (FSM). Washington, DC:                ture and System Engineering. National Air Space
  Department of Defense (DoD).                                  System—Systems Engineering Manual. Washington, DC:
MIL-HDBK-61. 1997. Conﬁguration Management Guid-                FAA.
  ance. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
Chapter              43

     System Interface Analysis,
     Design, and Control

43.1 INTRODUCTION

The identiﬁcation, design, and control of system interfaces are key activities for system architec-
ture development. The capability of the SYSTEM and item interfaces to cooperatively or defen-
sively interact and interoperate with external systems within the context of their OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT often determines mission survival and success.
     Our discussion expands that of Chapter 12, System Interfaces, into HOW SEs translate abstract
interface requirements into speciﬁcation requirements. Based on those requirements, analytical, sci-
entiﬁc, engineering, and management principles enable SEs to design the interface. The foundation
for interface design builds on our discussions of Chapter 8 The Architecture of Systems and Chapter
21 System Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation.
     We continue our discussion of generalized and specialized interfaces, deﬁne an interface design
methodology, investigate system ownership and control, address the need for standardization, and
deﬁne how interfaces are documented. We conclude with a discussion of the challenges and issues
in deﬁning the system interfaces.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. How are interfaces identiﬁed for and within a SYSTEM?
      2. How do you analyze interface interactions?
      3. How is the System Capability Construct applied to interface design?
      4. What is the methodology for designing interfaces?
      5. Who owns and controls SYSTEM and item interfaces at various levels of abstraction?
      6. What is an Interface Requirements Speciﬁcation (IRS)?
      7. What is an Interface Control Document (ICD)?
      8. What is an Interface Design Description (IDD)?
      9. How do you decide to develop and IRS, ICD, and/or IDD?
     10. What is an Interface Control Working Group (ICWG)?
     11. Who chairs the ICWG?
     12. What are some rules for analyzing, designing, and controlling SYSTEM or entity
         interfaces?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                507
508     Chapter 43   System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Compatibility Refer to the deﬁnition provided in Chapter 15 System Interactions with Its
        Operating Environment.
      • Coupling “The manner and degree of interdependence between software modules. Types
        include common-environment coupling, content coupling, control coupling, data coupling,
        hybrid coupling, and pathological coupling.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Interface Control Refer to the deﬁnition provided in Chapter 12 System Interfaces.
      • Interface Ownership The assignment of accountability to an individual, team, or organi-
        zation regarding the deﬁnition, speciﬁcation, development, control, operation, and support
        of an interface.
      • Line Replaceable Unit (LRU) Refer to deﬁnition in Chapter 42 on System Conﬁguration
        Identiﬁcation Practices.


43.2 IDENTIFYING AND ANALYZING
INTERFACE INTERACTIONS

Once logical entity relationships between the SYSTEM and external systems or between internal
items are identiﬁed, the next step is to analyze and bound the interactions. In Chapter 12, System
Interfaces, we noted that physical interfaces can be characterized as mechanical, electrical, optical,
acoustical, environmental, chemical, biological, and nuclear. The question is: How do we specify
and bound the operational and physical characteristics of the interface. Let’s answer each part of
this question separately.

Specifying and Bounding Interface Operational Characteristics
Interface operational characteristics are derived using UML® sequence diagrams as illustrated in
Figure 17.3. These diagrams, coupled with a Mission Event Timeline (MET), provide analytical
insights into HOW the interfacing entities interact and interoperate.

Specifying and Bounding Interface Physical Characteristics
Analysis of interacting systems requires investigation of a variety of classes of interactions. For
most systems the classes of interfaces include:
      • Electrical
      • Mechanical
      • Optical
      • Chemical
      • Biological
      • Acoustical
      • Human
      • Mass Properties
                                                                  43.2 Identifying and Analyzing Interface Interactions   509

One of the challenges of physical interface analysis is that SEs and analysts become intrigued and
immersed by a speciﬁc class of interaction and tend to overlook or ignore other classes that may
become SHOWSTOPPERS. One method of analyzing interfaces employs a matrix approach as
illustrated in Figure 43.1.

Author’s Note 43.1 The matrix provides a framework for illustrating the thought processes
required to understand all of the performance effecters that inﬂuence design considerations. Based
on these thought processes, your job as a system analyst or SE is to determine which one(s) of the
effecters warrants consideration for speciﬁc SYSTEM applications.

The matrix maps interactions between a MISSION SYSTEM interface classes (rows) and the
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT interface classes (columns). Since both domains of system ele-
ments have comparable classes of interfaces, SEs divide each domain into the various categories.
Note also that the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT includes the NATURAL, INDUCED and
HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS elements. To facilitate the analysis, we assign a unique identiﬁer to
each interaction (row-column intersection).
     Thus, for each interaction, at least one or more speciﬁcation requirements are written to specify
and bound the interaction and the expected outcome and performance of each interaction. To illus-
trate this point, consider the following example:


  EXAMPLE 43.1
In an environmentally controlled laboratory environment, electrical (class) interactions—such as electro-
magnetic radiation (EMI) and noise—are likely to occur and may have an effect on the test articles or
instrumentation. In contrast, chemical (class) interactions—such as salt spray—do not occur naturally in a
laboratory.




       MISSION                             OPERATING              OPERATING ENVIRONMENT Interface Classes
        MISSION                             OPERATING
       SYSTEM
        SYSTEM                           ENVIRONMENT
                                          ENVIRONMENT
                                                                         HUMAN-MADE SYSTEM Interface Attributes
                                                                               t

                                                                              t
                                                                            en

                                                                            en
                                                                           m

                                                                          m
                                                          ED iron

                                                                       ron
                                                                    vi




                                                                     s
                                                                     v




                                                                   ie
                                                                 En

                                                                 En




                                                                 rt
                                                             pe
                                                               l
                                                             L




                                                            ca




                                                           al
                                                           A




                                                           al
                                                          al




                                                          al




                                                         ro




          MISSION SYSTEM
                                                         ni




                                                       tic
                                                        R




                                                        ic
                                                        C

                                                       ic




                                                      an
                                                       ic
                                                      al




                                                     sP
                                                     ha
                                                   TU




                                                     og
                                                     U

                                                     tr




                                                    us
                                                    m
                                                    ic




                                                 um




           Interface Classes
                                                   D

                                                  ec


                                                  ec




                                                  as
                                                  ol
                                                 he
                                                 pt




                                                 co
                                                A

                                               IN




                                               Bi
                                               El


                                               M




                                               M
                                               H
                                               O

                                               C
                                               N




                                               A




                            Electrical        1     2   3    4       5     6     7     8     9    10
 SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)




                            Mechanical        11   12   13   14     15     16   17    18    19    20
     Interface Attributes




                            Optical           21   22   23   24     25     26   27    28    29    30
                            Chemical          31   32   33   34     35     36   37    38    39    40
                            Biological        41   42   43   44     45     46   47    48    49    50
                            Acoustical        51   52   53   54     55     56   57    58    59    60
                            Human             61   62   63   64     65     66   67    68    69    70

                            Mass Properties   71   72   73   74     75     76   77    78    79    80

Figure 43.1 SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) Interface Interactions Analysis Matrix
510     Chapter 43    System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

Practical Realities
In theory, this approach seems logical; however, is it practical to develop an analysis such as this
within contract or task resource and time constraints? The answer depends on your situation. In
general, most seasoned SEs subconsciously imprint this analytical method into memory based on
personal experience. The challenge is assimilating all relevant interactions from memory without
overlooking any condition.
     If your contract or task is resource and time limited, you might consider using a
template such as this as a quick checklist to identify the most likely or probable interactions. In
sharp contrast, some SYSTEMS may have inherent safety risks with potential consequences for
human health and safety, property, the environment, or survival of the enterprise. You and your
organization must weight the cost to perform and merits of this analytical task versus the legal,
ﬁnancial, and other consequences of IGNORING ALL likely interface interactions in practical
terms.

Guidepost 43.1 Based on the preceding discussion, we have identiﬁed and characterized the
attributes of interface interactions. The question is: WHAT inherent SYSTEM or entity interface
capabilities and levels of performance are required to successfully:
      1. Be compatible or interoperable with the external SYSTEMS or entities.
      2. Avoid threat vulnerabilities related to these interactions?

This brings us to our next topic, understanding system interface design solutions.


43.3 GENERALIZED VERSUS SPECIALIZED
INTERFACE DESIGN SOLUTIONS

Physical interface solutions occur at two levels: 1) as generalized solutions and 2) as specialized
solutions. Generalized solutions represent a “ﬁrst-pass” physical implementation that appears “on
the surface” to be adequate for most applications. There may be special circumstances that require
further interface design reﬁnements or robustness; we refer to these specialized solutions. Let’s
explore each of these further.

Generalized Interface Solutions
Generalized interface solutions represent the analytical world whereby that analyst identiﬁes a
logical entity relationship, association, or potential relationship between two entities such as a
MISSION SYSTEM and its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 43.2
Analytically, a car has a potential logical entity relationship with other vehicles, trees, and people in its OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT. The recognition of this association is an acknowledgement that:
1. A physical relationship exists between the entities.
2. Further interface analysis must determine the level of signiﬁcance and outcomes of the interactions to the
   MISSION SYSTEM and, if necessary, on the interfacing entity—its vulnerability and survivability.
                                                                  43.5 Interface Design Methodology       511

Specialized Interface Solutions
Once a determination is made that a logical entity relationship exists between entities, the associ-
ations are analyzed to determine their effects on the interface and subsequently the MISSION
SYSTEM. Let’s return to the preceding car example.


 EXAMPLE 43.3
Engineers determined many years ago that vehicles require front and rear bumpers. After many years of acci-
dents and federal mandates, automobile manufacturers upgraded bumper designs to include shock absorbers
that reduce the effects of impact with other vehicles and objects. Although the new bumpers solved one
problem, vehicle occupants continued to have the risk of injuries due to head-on crashes. Subsequently, seat
belts were added to vehicles. Although seat belts reduced injuries and saved lives, vehicle occupants contin-
ued to suffer life-threatening injuries. So, car designs incorporated air bag systems into the driver’s side of
the vehicle. Later air bags were added to protect the front seat passenger. Today additional specialized solu-
tions are being added to incorporate side impact air bags. New evidence indicates emergency medical serv-
ices (EMS) personnel have the potential risk of injury from air bag deployment while attending to accident
victims trapped in the wreck. So, specialized solutions to operational needs continue to evolve.

This example illustrates HOW a generalized solution representing a logical entity relationship
evolves into specialized solutions via physical design implementations.

Guidepost 43.2 Based on an understanding of generalized and specialized interfaces, we shift
our attention to HOW an interface is implemented.


43.4 APPLYING THE SYSTEM CAPABILITY
CONSTRUCT TO INTERFACES

As a prerequisite to our discussion here, revisit the key points noted in Chapter 22 The Anatomy
of System Capability. Figure 22.1 serves as a guide for our discussion.
     The System Capability Construct provides a framework to describe HOW a system capability
such as an interface is:
     1. Initiated.
     2. Performs its mission—resulting in a product, service, or action.
     3. Conﬁgures itself for repetitive cycle or dormancy until initiated again.
In performing these actions, an interface capability assesses health and readiness status, makes a
determination of degraded performance or failure conditions, reports those conditions, and attempts
to recover from those conditions.


43.5 INTERFACE DESIGN METHODOLOGY

Key elements of interface design practices can be summarized as a ﬁve-step methodology that ﬁts
most applications. The steps are:
Step 1: Identify the SOI–OPERATING ENVIRONMENT relationships.
Step 2: Develop the SYSTEM or item architecture.
Step 3: Characterize the logical entity relationships of the architecture.
512     Chapter 43   System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

Step 4: Characterize the operational interface use cases.
Step 5: Characterize the physical interface characteristics.
Let’s address each of the steps of the methodology.

Step 1: Identify the SOI–OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT Relationships
The initial step of the methodology is to identify those entities within the User’s OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT that represent the interfaces relevant to the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI).

Step 2: Develop the SYSTEM or Item Architecture
Construct the SYSTEM or entity architecture to depict its logical (associative) and/or physical rela-
tionships with external systems.

Step 3: Characterize the Logical Entity
Relationships of the Architecture
Based on the SYSTEM or entity architecture or validated User needs analysis, characterize the
logical entity relationships between internal and external entities—such as HUMAN-MADE
SYSTEMS and the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. In general, this step formally describes the
interface.

Step 4: Characterize the Operational
Interface Use Cases
For each SYSTEM level or entity interface, identify the key operational characteristics of the
interface.
      1. WHO are the interface stakeholders?
      2. WHAT is to be exchanged across the interface—content, forces, and directional ﬂow?
      3. WHEN and HOW frequently is the interface to be employed—continuous or intermittent
         connectivity?
      4. WHERE is the interface to be employed?
      5. HOW will the interface be controlled, security and privacy methods?
      6. Under WHAT conditions is the interface to be employed?

Step 5: Characterize the Physical Interface Characteristics
Using the operational interface attributes as the basis, identify the key operational and physical
characteristics of the interface. For data communications interfaces, interface attributes include
connectors, pin-outs, wiring diagrams, grounding and shielding, protocol, timing and synchroniza-
tion, data formats, handshakes, addressing, encryption, and standards as noted in Table 43.1.

Step 6: Develop and Document the Interface Design Solution
As the operational, logical, and physical attributes of the interface are identiﬁed and
characterized, capture the results in an Interface Control Document (ICD) or Interface Design
Description (IDD). Document the design rationale, trade-offs, and so forth.
                                      43.6 Specifying and Bounding System Interface Requirements             513

Table 43.1 Interface attributes and descriptions

ID         Attribute                                 Attribute Description

43.1    Physical          Characterize the interface in terms of its electrical, mechanical, optical, chemical,
        Interface Type    or environmental attributes.
43.2    Operational       Identify the interface modes and states of operation such as STANDBY, POWER
        States and        OFF, stowed, and disconnected.
        Modes
43.3    Directionality    Determine the directionality of the interface for various modes of operation.
                          Some interfaces are unidirectional, bi-directional, etc.
43.4    Interface         Investigate any protocol requirements to implement a speciﬁc protocol for
        Protocol          sending and receiving messages such as Identiﬁcation Friend or Foe (IFF) and
                          standards.
43.5    Frequency of      Determine the frequency of usage such as statistical distributions of usage during
        Usage             hours of operation, peak periods; asynchronous and synchronous
                          communications, etc.
43.6    Reserve           Depending on the frequency of usage, some interfaces may require memory
        Capacity          storage to accommodate message buffering prior to transmission or after receipt
                          of messages. Electrical power and mechanical systems require similar analogies
                          to serve as design safety margins to sustain performance.
43.7    Strength          Some data system interfaces separated by long distances impose minimum
                          electrical, mechanical, or optical strength requirements such as amplitude,
                          power, and pressure that require drivers to sustain signal strength.
43.8    Specialty         Depending on technical risk, investigate interface specialty-engineering
        Requirements      requirements that include reliability, availability, maintainability, vulnerability,
                          survivability, etc.
43.9    Technology        For some systems, characterize the interface technology such as laser, sensor,
                          data communications, chemical, and radiation.
43.10   Training          Due to the nature of some interfaces, identify special training for operators and
                          maintainers.
43.11   Cost              Assess WHAT level of capability you can provide within budgetary cost and
                          schedule constraints.
43.12   Risk              Identify the level of risk associated with operating the interface including
                          probability of occurrence and consequences of failure.




43.6 SPECIFYING AND BOUNDING SYSTEM
INTERFACE REQUIREMENTS

Before we address specifying and bounding interface requirements, let’s establish WHERE and
HOW interface requirements are documented. Interface requirements are typically speciﬁed in the
System Interfaces section of a System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or item development spec-
iﬁcation; typically, Section 3.X. In some cases, software interface requirements may be speciﬁed
in an interface requirements speciﬁcation (IRS).
514     Chapter 43   System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

The Interface Speciﬁcation
What is an IRS? DoD Data Item Description (DID) DI-IPSC-81434 states “The Interface
Requirements Speciﬁcation (IRS) speciﬁes the requirements imposed on one or more systems, sub-
systems, Hardware Conﬁguration Items (HWCIs), Computer Software Conﬁguration Items (CSCIs),
manual operations, or other system components to achieve one or more interfaces among these
entities. An IRS can cover any number of interfaces. . . . The IRS can be used to supplement the
System/Subsystem Speciﬁcation (SSS) . . . and Software Requirements Speciﬁcation (SRS) . . . as the
basis for design and qualiﬁcation testing of systems and CSCIs.” [Source: DoD Data Item Descrip-
tion (DID) DI-IPSC-81434, p. 1]
     People ask: If the interface requirements are stated in the SPS or item development speciﬁca-
tion, WHY do you need a separate interface speciﬁcation? The answer has two contexts:
      1. Interfaces external to the SYSTEM.
      2. Interfaces internal to a SYSTEM.
    Ideally, interface requirements for a SYSTEM should be documented in a single requirements
speciﬁcation, preferably the SPS, or a lower level item development speciﬁcation (IDS) for a con-
ﬁguration item (CI). The answer to the question depends on:
      1. WHAT your contract requires.
      2. Other factors related to protecting System Developer sensitive data such as contract spec-
         iﬁcations, intellectual property, proprietary data, and security.

Contract Requirements for an Interface Speciﬁcation
ALWAYS investigate and READ the Request for Proposal (RFP) and its Contract Data Require-
ments List (CDRL) regarding interface speciﬁcation requirements, if any. If there are no IRS CDRL
items, incorporate interface requirements into the SPS or item development speciﬁcation, depend-
ing on application. This avoids:
      1. The necessity and expense of maintaining and verifying two separate documents—SPS/IDS
         and an interface speciﬁcation—with common boilerplate.
      2. Coordinating separate document reviews and approvals.
From a system perspective, you want to VERIFY the system as an entity using one speciﬁcation
with:
      • One set of acceptance test procedures (ATPs).
      • One Requirements Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM).
      • One set of ATP data.
Simultaneously verifying requirements stated in TWO separate speciﬁcations compounds the tasks,
paperwork, and coordination. You may respond that you could have two speciﬁcations and a single
set of ATPs and ATP results. This is true, but you still have to account for HOW you can TRACK
these separate/combined results. This leads to WHY not specify all SYSTEM or entity interface
requirements in one document unless there is a compelling need to isolate the requirements in a
separate document. Keep it simple!

Is an IRS Necessary for Internal Development? No. In fact a common problem of many
programs is having ill-informed decision makers declaring in their proposal they will develop “an
IRS for EVERY external and internal interface.” This is naive, expensive, and unnecessary.
                                                          43.7 Interface Ownership and Control   515

     There are, however, reasons—such as volume of requirements, data security classiﬁcation, and
procurement reasons—for a separate IRS. By default, deﬁne the interface requirements in the SPS
or item development speciﬁcation. Then, if there are compelling reasons to isolate the total set of
interface requirements, then and only then consider creating a separate IRS.

Is an IRS Necessary for External Development? An IRS can be helpful in contracting rela-
tionships with User organizations and subcontractors. In this case the IRS expresses a willingness
to abide by a set of ground rule requirements that represent a consensus of the interfacing stake-
holders. Ultimately, the IRS requirements evolve into interface solutions documented in hardware
ICDs and/or software IDDs.

Standard IRS Templates. The DoD employs data item descriptions (DIDs) to communicate
deliverable data requirements. DID DI-IPSC-81434 addresses hardware conﬁguration items
(HWCIs) and computer software conﬁguration items (CSCIs) for software intensive systems.

Guidepost 43.3 Given an understanding of HOW we specify and bound interface requirements,
we shift our focus to Interface Ownership and Control.

43.7 INTERFACE OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL

Unlike system elements or entities that are assigned to individuals or development teams—such as
Integrated Product Teams (IPTs)—HOW do you partition or share ownership of the interface?
There are a couple of ways to assign ownership:
    1. Ad hoc approach.
    2. Structured analysis approach.

Ad Hoc Approach to Interface Ownership
Technical directors and project engineers often approach interface ownership by tasking the two
interfacing parties to “work it out on their own.” Depending on the situation and personalities, this
approach works in some cases; in other cases, it is very ineffective.
     Several potential PROBLEMS can arise with this approach.
    1. Conﬂicts occur when the interfacing parties are unable or unwilling to agree on HOW to
       implement the interface.
    2. One personality dominates the other, thereby creating a technical, cost, or schedule sub-
       optimization that favors of the dominating party.
If this chaos or dominance continues, the dominating party may suboptimize the SYSTEM. There
is, however, a better approach to interface ownership and control that resolves the problems created
by the ad hoc ownership approach.

Structured Interface Ownership and Control
To avoid the problems of the ad hoc approach, assign interface ownership and control to the indi-
vidual or development team accountable for the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or item
development speciﬁcation and the associated architecture. The interfacing parties are elements
WITHIN the architecture.
    Some systems have external interfaces that require both technical and programmatic
solutions between organizations. This brings us to our next topic, Interface Control Working Groups
(ICWGs).
516     Chapter 43   System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

Interface Control Working Groups (ICWGs)
Once the stakeholders agree on the requirements and implementation of an interface, HOW do they
exercise control over changes to an interface? Some organizations establish an Interface Control
Working Group (ICWG) that functions as a Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB) or makes recom-
mendations to a CCB. Generally, ICWGs are typically established for external system interfaces
that involve the User community and external systems. Depending on the size of the contract, the
ICWG and CCB may consist of the same stakeholders. In other cases the ICWG may consist of
technical representatives from User and/or contractor organizations.
     As an organizational element, the ICWG deﬁnes the operational, behavioral/logical, and phys-
ical characteristics of the interface and documents them in a hardware ICD or a software IDD.
Interface stakeholders review the ICD or IDD and make recommendations to submit to the next
higher level team as the interface owner for approval and release.
     When approved, the ICWG chairperson requests the program’s Conﬁguration Manager to base-
line interface documentation such as an IRS and formally release it for usage. After baselining, if
subsequent changes are required, the ICWG reviews the changes and recommends approval to the
program’s Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB).

43.8 INTERFACE DESIGN DOCUMENTATION

Interface designs are documented via a number of methods such as system block diagrams (SBDs);
entity relationship diagrams (ERDs); schematic, wiring, and timing diagrams; tables; and descrip-
tions. For large systems, this may consist of hundreds of pages of documents that must be indi-
vidually controlled. HOW can this be accomplished reasonably?
     SEs use several types of documents to capture and control interface technical descriptions.
These documents include:
      1. Interface Control Documents (ICDs) for HARDWARE interfaces.
      2. Interface Design Descriptions (IDDs) for SOFTWARE interfaces.
For small programs the System/Segment Design Description (SSDD) or Software Design Descrip-
tion (SDD) may sufﬁce to document interface deﬁnitions rather than having separate ICDs/IDDs.
These documents serve as a single location for ﬁnding interface design details. Use the appropri-
ate document that enables you to reduce cost and help the developers by MINIMIZING the total
number of documents requiring conﬁguration control.

Interface Design Descriptions (IDDs)
For software applications document interfaces in an Interface Design Description (IDD). This
approach is often used for software CSCIs where there is a need to isolate CSCI speciﬁc interface
design descriptions as a separate document.

Interface Control Documents (ICDs)
The most common approach for documenting interfaces is via an Interface Control Document
(ICD). As a general rule, an ICD documents hardware interfaces. An ICD:
      1. Ranges in length from a single- or multi-page document, such as a control drawing or a
         computer listing, to a volume of details.
      2. Serves as a detailed design solution response to SPS, item development speciﬁcation, or
         IRS requirements.
                                                                                  43.8 Interface Design Documentation              517

      3. Documents the electrical, mechanical, or optical characteristics of the interface.
      4. Includes operational descriptions, schematic wiring diagrams, assembly drawings, and con-
         nector detail drawing including pin outs.
      5. Employs standard graphical symbols that may be dictated by contract or established as
         industry standards.
When all interface stakeholders agree with the contents of the ICDs, the documents are approved,
baselined, placed under conﬁguration control, and released for formal decision making. ICDs are
controlled by a Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB) or delegated to an ICWG.


Interface Control Document (ICD) Outline
ICDs often developed in free form unless the contract or organization speciﬁes a speciﬁc format.
There are numerous ways to structure an ICD, depending on the application. Perhaps the most
important aspects of the outline can be derived from the traditional speciﬁcation outline such as:
      • Section 1.0 Introduction
      • Section 2.0 Referenced Documents
      • Section 3.0 Requirements
Beyond this basic structure, attention should be focused on Section 3.0 Requirements, which
addresses the physical characteristics of interfaces such as mechanical, electrical, and optical.

How Many ICDs/IDDs?
One of the early challenges in identifying interfaces is determining how many ICDs/IDDs are
required. For each item, regardless of level of abstraction, consider the following options illustrated
in Figure 43.2:



                        Option A                                                            Option B
             One ICD Documents All internal                                      Individual ICDs Document EACH
               SUBSYSTEM A Interfaces                                                SUBSYSTEM A Interface


                       PRODUCT A                                                           PRODUCT A
                      Development Team                                                   Development Team
                     Ownership & Control                                                Ownership & Control
External                                             External
                                                                External                                                External
 System                   A1 –A3                      System                                A1 – A3
                 A1                     A3                       System                A1                 A3             System
   X                                                    Y
                                                                   X                                                       Y
           A1 – A2                         A2 – A3                            A1 – A2                         A2 – A3
                            A2                                                                 A2




                            Product A                                      Interface          Interface           Interface
                              ICD                                           A1 – A2            A2 – A3             A1 – A3
                                                                             ICD                ICD                 ICD




Figure 43.2 SYSTEM/PRODUCT Level Interface Deﬁnition Options
518     Chapter 43   System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

      • Option A Do we create a single ICD that deﬁnes all of PRODUCT A interfaces?
      • Option B Do we create individual ICDs for each PRODUCT A internal interface—such as
        A1–A2 ICD, A2–A3 ICD, or A1–A3 ICD?
There are several ways to answer these questions.
     First, each document you create increases costs to maintain. As a general rule, AVOID creat-
ing separate ICDs/IDDs unless:
      • The amount of information becomes unwieldy—because of large page counts.
      • There is a need to isolate details due to intellectual property, proprietary data, and security
        reasons—to limit authorized access to a speciﬁc interface based on a NEED TO KNOW
        justiﬁcation.
     At the PRODUCT level and below, start with a single ICD for all interfaces internal to the
item. You may ask: Why not external interfaces? There are two reasons: First, interfaces external
to an item are owned and controlled by the next higher-level team as part of their architecture for
which the item of interest is an element. The SEIT owns and controls PRODUCT A’s external inter-
faces. Second, publishing an item’s interfaces in a single document is convenient for the reader,
assuming that the document is not large.

Why Stand-alone ICDs and IDDs?
The preceding ICD discussion opens up a new question: WHY do you need separate ICDs and
IDDs for each interface?
     First, there are no rules that say you cannot have a single interface document that covers BOTH
hardware ICD and software IDD details. Potential readers can rationalize the need to have all details
about a single interface in one document without having to research or retrieve several documents.
     In general, you would expect the COST of producing and maintaining one document should
be less than maintaining two documents two documents. However, distributing changes to all stake-
holder approvers, regardless of whether they are affected by the changes, can be unwieldy and
costly.
     What do the ICD/IDD users say?
      • Software engineers and programmers are not interested in reading through pages of electri-
        cal schematics, wiring diagrams, and mechanical drawings.
      • Hardware engineers are not interested in reading through tabular listings of software data.
So, in answer to the question:
      1. Identify all of an item’s internal interfaces.
      2. Collaborate with the stakeholders, preferably as an Integrated Product Team (IPT).
      3. Address the utility of standalone versus integrated ICDs and IDDs.
      4. If a decision is made that the item requires hardware and software interfaces, decide if all
         hardware or software interfaces should be documented in a one or several ICDs/IDDs.

Guidepost 43.4 Our focus up to this point has been on individual interfaces. This leaves the
potential for every interface to be unique which increases cost and risk. We now shift our focus to
minimizing these two factors via Interface Standardization.
                                              43.10 Interface Deﬁnition and Control Challenges   519

43.9 INTERFACE STANDARDIZATION

Interface design, as is the case with any form of SYSTEM design, focuses on meeting the speci-
ﬁed requirements while minimizing cost, schedule, technical, technology, and support risks. Every
time you embark on designing a new interface solution, you must be prepared to mitigate the risks
of an unproven interface.
      One way of reducing the impacts of these risks is to employ design solutions that are already
proven. Additionally, any technology solution you choose may be subject to becoming obsolete in
a short period of time. In sharp contrast, consumer products in the marketplace, especially com-
puters, demand that SYSTEMs be designed to accept technology upgrades to maintain system capa-
bilities and performance without requiring completely new systems.
      One of the ways industry addresses this marketplace need is with standard interfaces that
promote line replaceable unit (LRU) modularity, interchangeability, ﬂexibility, and maintainabil-
ity. What does this mean?
      A computer contains printed circuit boards (LRUs) that interface via connectors with a stan-
dard bus structure implemented on a motherboard (LRU). As new processor technologies or other
capabilities are introduced, the User replaces a PC board (LRU) with a newer one with identical
or greater capability. Thus, interface standards provide an opportunity to leverage new technolo-
gies and capabilities while keeping costs and risk low.

Guidepost 43.5 Based on the preceding discussions, we are ready to investigate some of the
challenges and issues in analyzing, designing, and controlling interfaces.


43.10 INTERFACE DEFINITION AND CONTROL CHALLENGES

Interface deﬁnition, design, development, operations, and support activities often face challenges
that are common across many systems. Let’s identify and discuss some of these key challenges.
Challenge 1:    Lack of external interface commitments
Challenge 2:    Lack of interface ownership and control
Challenge 3:    Identiﬁcation and vulnerability of threat interfaces
Challenge 4:    Human and environmental safety and health risks
Challenge 5:    Lack of compatibility and interoperability
Challenge 6:    Lack of interface availability
Challenge 7:    Lack of interface reliability
Challenge 8:    Lack of interface maintainability
Challenge 9:    Interface vulnerability to external threats
Challenge 10:    Mitigating interface integrity compromises and failures
Challenge 11:   External electrical power—availability, quality, and backup
Challenge 12:   Analog and digital signal grounding and shielding
Challenge 13:   Interface electromagnetic emissions

Challenge 1: Lack of External Interface Commitments
Contracts are awarded every day whereby the Acquirer states in the System Performance Speciﬁ-
cation (SPS) “the system shall provide the capability to interface with External System XYZ.” On
520     Chapter 43   System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

investigation, the Acquirer may not have agreement or commitment from the owner(s) of external
system XYZ to allow the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) to connect. This is normally the
Acquirer’s responsibility and should have been worked out prior to release of the formal solicita-
tion. Ironically, the Acquirer levies responsibility for “working the commitment” on the System
Developer, who signed up to the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract.
     In some cases this approach may be is preferable, especially if the System Developers has:
      1. The expertise, capabilities, and resources.
      2. Established relationships with the interfacing parties.
Therefore, it may be acceptable to contract with the System Developer to perform this task. The
critical issue occurs when external system XYZ’s owner organization is also part of the Acquirer’s
organization. Thoroughly investigate WHAT agreements and commitments have been made by the
Acquirer or User with external system owners to integrate the system at delivery BEFORE the con-
tract is signed.

Challenge 2: Interface Ownership and Control
Each system interface must be assigned an owner(s)—be it an individual, organization, or Inter-
face Control Working Group (ICWG). Those accountable MUST control interface deﬁnition,
design; development; system integration, test, and evaluation (SITE); system operation and main-
tenance; or disposal. As the accountable owner, the individual or organization is responsible for
reviewing and approving changes to the interface design baseline as well as provide oversight of
SYSTEM operations, maintenance, and training.

Challenge 3: Identiﬁcation and
Vulnerability of Threat Interfaces
System interface design is based on a pre-conceived set of known interfaces. The reality is some
operational system interfaces—such as military systems or networks—are vulnerable to external
threats and attacks. These systems must contend with the unknowns and the unknown—unknowns.
Acquirers and System Developers must work with the Users and their supporting organizations to
thoroughly:
      1. Understand and anticipate a system’s threats.
      2. Deﬁne HOW the SYSTEM interfaces will cope with those threats.

Challenge 4: Human and Environmental
Safety and Health Risks
Any type of operational system may pose potential threats to the safety, health, and welfare of
humans, property or the environment. When designing system interfaces, thoroughly analyze poten-
tial scenarios—such as exhaust emissions, toxic chemicals, and leaking ﬂuids—that may lead to
health and safety risks and require remediation to an acceptable level.

Challenge 5: Lack of Compatibility and Interoperability
Assuming each interface is known to exist and has an accountable owner, the SYSTEM or entity
interface must be compatible and interoperable with its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT system
elements operationally, behaviorally, and physically.
                                               43.10 Interface Deﬁnition and Control Challenges   521

Challenge 6: Lack of Interface Availability
Interface availability is a critical issue in two key contexts: internally and externally. Internally
each interface must be available—the state of readiness—when activated to perform its intended
mission. If external systems or their interfaces fail, you must consider HOW your SYSTEM will
respond or adapt to the failure and derive MISSION RESOURCES Element data from contingency
sources.

Referral For more information about availability, refer to Chapter 50 on Reliability, Availabil-
ity, and Maintainability Practices.

Challenge 7: Lack of Interface Reliability
If an interface capability is available when required, the question is: Can the interface reliably
perform its intended mission to the level of performance required by the SYSTEM or entity(s) spec-
iﬁcation? Each interface must be designed with a level of reliability that will ensure accomplish-
ment of mission tasks and sustainment of that capability throughout the mission. Supporting topics
include interface fault tolerance and redundancy.

Referral For more information about reliability, refer to Chapter 50.

Challenge 8: Lack of Interface Maintainability
To minimize downtime between SYSTEM missions you must ensure that the interfaces are main-
tainable with a speciﬁed level of skills and tools commensurate with the mission phase of opera-
tion—pre-mission, mission, and post-mission.

Referral For more information about maintainability, refer to Chapter 50.

Challenge 9: Interface Vulnerability to External Threats
After a SYSTEM is deployed, the owner(s) must continuously monitor the performance of the
mechanisms and processes used to operate the interface. Additionally, the owners must also assess
the susceptibility and vulnerability of the interface to evolving or potential threats in the SYSTEM’s
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Where appropriate, specialized solutions may be implemented.

Challenge 10: Mitigating Interface Integrity
Compromises and Failures
The integrity of an interface is dependent on HOW WELL its design mitigates compromises and
failures via specialized interfaces. Interface security mechanisms include examples such as: lock-
able access plates, safety chains, retractable wheels, bulkheads, ﬁlters, shields, deﬂectors, cable
hooks on aircraft, safety nets, safety rails, drogue chutes, parachutes, pressure relief valves, emer-
gency cutoff valves, and emergency power down.

Challenge 11: External Electrical Power—Availability,
Quality, and Backup
Engineers often focus on the “fun stuff” of internal design of their SYSTEM of INTEREST—the
SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, and so forth. They procrastinate on researching external
interfaces such as electrical power sources, their attributes, and quality. In general, they assume
522     Chapter 43   System Interface Analysis, Design, and Control

that 110 vac or +28 vdc electrical power will “always be available and all we have to do is plug
our device in.” Given these examples of power types, engineers often overlook the subtleties such
as 50 Hz versus 60 Hz versus 400 Hz as well as tolerances placed on the magnitudes and frequen-
cies. Power factors are also a consideration. Finally, a key question is: Will the power source be
continuous or have periodic operational hours, blackouts, etc., during peak hours of operation?
     DO NOT ASSUME that the external system will ALWAYS be available WHEN you need it
until you have thoroughly investigated and analyzed the interface. Additionally, establish a docu-
mented agreement that represents a commitment by the power source’s owner to allocate power
budget resources and allow your system to be integrated with the power source(s). The same is true
for power quality and ﬁltration.
     Finally, assess the need for:
      1. Backup power to avoid data loss during a mission.
      2. Alert notiﬁcation that electrical power has been lost to initiate power down actions to
         minimize data loss or damage to equipment.

Challenge 12: Analog and Digital Signal
Grounding and Shielding
Analog and digital grounding and shielding interfaces have similarities to the electrical power issue
noted above—such as procrastination in performing the analysis, depth of analysis, and resource
commitments. Typically, only a single power ground is available from the external source. This is
particularly problematic when your SYSTEM must collect measurement data or transmit data
relative to power ground that is corrupted with switching noise or ground loops. Thoroughly
investigate:
      1. WHAT types of external grounding systems are available.
      2. HOW the external system implements power and signal ground.
      3. WHAT other systems experienced and discovered when interfacing to this source.

Challenge 13: Interface Electromagnetic Emissions
Electronic power and signal interfaces often emit electromagnetic signals that may couple to
other data sensitive devices or are tracked by external surveillance systems. Most engineers tend
to think of signal shielding and grounding from a cabling perspective. However, signal shielding
and grounding also applies to signal sources contained within mechanical enclosures as well as
facilities.

43.11 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system interface analysis, design, and control practices.

Principle 43.1 Speciﬁcations for and interfaces between systems and items are owned and con-
trolled by the organization accountable for the architecture that depicts the items.

Principle 43.2 Document the operational, physical, and data requirements of every interface
within an entity’s speciﬁcation; create a separate software IRS only if there are compelling reasons.

Principle 43.3 ICDs document hardware interfaces; IDDs document software interfaces.
                                                                                                References     523

43.12 SUMMARY

During our discussion of system interface analysis, design, and control we:
     1. Described HOW interfaces are identiﬁed and documented in an IRS, ICD, and IDD.
     2. Established a methodology for identifying and deﬁning system interfaces.
     3. Discussed HOW ICWGs control system interfaces.
     4. Provided common examples of interface standards.
     5. Identiﬁed common challenges and issues in interface deﬁnition and control.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this section’s topical dis-
   cussions. Using the system architecture previously developed in Part I, assume you are required to prepare
   a Technical Management Plan (TMP) that describes how you intend to manage interfaces:
   (a) Prepare a description of guidance you want to convey in the TMP that describes HOW interfaces will
       be identiﬁed, owned, and controlled.
   (b) Identify how interfaces are to be documented in terms of IRSs, ICDs, and IDDs. Describe what will
       be documented in each document.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media.
   (a) What minimum requirements does the media impose on interface identiﬁcation, ownership, and control.
   (b) Are programs required to use a standard IRS, ICD, or IDD outline?
   (c) What is the structure of the organization’s IRS, ICD, or IDD?
   (d) Who controls the IRS, ICD, or IDD outlines on each contract program?
2. Contact a small, a medium, and a large program in your organization.
   (a) What IRS, ICD, or IDD requirements did their Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) impose on
       the program?
   (b) Did the contract specify an outline format?
   (c) If not, what type of outline was used on each type of document?
   (d) How is interface ownership and control established?
   (e) What new lessons learned did program personnel discover that they would avoid on the next program?


REFERENCES

DI-IPSC-81434A, 1999. Interface Requirements Speciﬁca-      MIL-STD-480B (cancelled). 1988. Military Standard
  tion (IRS). Data Item Description (DID). Washington,        Conﬁguration Control: Engineering Changes, Deviations,
  DC: Department of Defense (DoD).                            and Waivers. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
DI-IPSC-81436. Interface Design Description (IDD), Data       (DoD).
  Item Description (DID). Washington, DC: Department of     ASD-100 Architecture and System Engineering. 2003.
  Defense (DoD).                                              National Air Space System—Systems Engineering
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of         Manual, Federal Aviation Administration. Washington,
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-     DC: FAA.
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY.
Chapter              44

      Human–System Integration

44.1 INTRODUCTION

Human-made systems, products, and services inevitably require some form of human interaction
and control throughout all phases of operation. As technologies advance and deployment, opera-
tions, and support costs increase, we continually strive to automate systems to minimize the number
of human interactions to improve productivity, efﬁciency, effectiveness, and reduce costs.
     For most organizations, the focus of contracts is typically on producing EQUIPMENT Element
systems and products. Given that focus, the PERSONNEL Element, which deploys, operates, and
supports the EQUIPMENT Element, is often given token “lip service” when requirements are allo-
cated from the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). Yet, the EQUIPMENT Element, as a non-
living object, is totally dependent on the PERSONNEL Element to: 1) prepare the system for a
mission, 2) conduct the mission, and 3) perform postmission actions. When the PERSONNEL
Element is addressed, there is often an imbalance between PERSONNEL performance and EQUIP-
MENT performance.
     This chapter explores a system’s PERSONNEL–EQUIPMENT interactions that inﬂuence
development of a system, product, or service. As an overview, our discussions begin with the System
Operations Model introduced in Chapter 18. The model’s operations and tasks provide a frame-
work for addressing a simple question: WHICH tasks are best performed by the EQUIPMENT,
PERSONNEL, or combinations of the two? Since PERSONNEL requirements are allocated to oper-
ators and maintainers on a TASK basis, we introduce attributes of tasks that must be investigated
and speciﬁed. Typically, this requires analyses and trade studies of Human-In-the-Loop (HITL)
interactions to understand human performance relative to overall system or product performance.

Notice The information provided herein is intended to heighten a basic SE AWARENESS of
factors that inﬂuence human–system interface design. ALWAYS employ the services of a competent,
highly qualiﬁed Human Factors Engineer to perform human–system interface design.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is anthropometry?
      2. What are haptics?
      3. What are ergonomics?
      4. What are the classes of human–system interfaces?
      5. What types of input/output (I/O) devices are available for human–system interfaces?
      6. What are the key attributes of human tasks?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

524
                                                                             44.1 Introduction    525

   7. What is Human Factors Engineering (HFE)?
   8. What are the seven elements of Human–System Integration (HSI)?
   9. What are areas of concern related to each HSI element?
  10. What are the ﬁve types of human factors?
  11. What are the common types of human characteristics associated with human factors?
  12. What are the key analytical techniques for analyzing human–system interfaces?
  13. What are the key areas of interest related to HFE and their areas of concern?


Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Anthropometry “The scientiﬁc measurement and collection of data about human physical
    characteristics and the application (engineering anthropometry) of these data to the design
    and evaluation of systems, equipment, and facilities.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908B, Deﬁni-
    tions, para. 3.0, p. 6)
  • Anthropometrics “Quantitative descriptions and measurements of the physical body vari-
    ations in people. These are useful in human factors design.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A,
    Appendix G: Glossary, p. G-2)
  • Ergonomics The multi-disciplinary science concerned with the study of work and how to
    apply knowledge of human capabilities, performance, and limitations to workplace design
    via human-system interfaces and interactions.
  • Haptic “Refers to all the physical sensors that provide a sense of touch at the skin level and
    force feedback information from muscles and joints.” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling
    and Simulation [M&S] Glossary, Part II, Glossary-A, Item 241, p. 117)
  • Haptics “The design of clothing or exoskeletons that not only sense motions of body parts
    (e.g., ﬁngers) but also provide tactile and force feedback for haptic perception of a virtual
    world.” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simulation [M&S] Glossary, Part II,
    Glossary-A, Item 242, p. 117)
  • Human Factors “A body of scientiﬁc facts about human characteristics. The term covers
    all biomedical and psychosocial considerations; it includes, but is not limited to, principles
    and applications in the areas of human engineering, personnel selection, training, life support,
    job performance aids, and human performance evaluation.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908B,
    Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 17)
  • Human Performance “A measure of human functions and action in a speciﬁed environ-
    ment, reﬂecting the ability of actual users and maintainers to meet the system’s performance
    standards, including reliability and maintainability, under the conditions in which the system
    will be employed.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908B, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 18)
  • Man-Man Interface (MMI) “The actions, reactions, and interactions between humans and
    other system components. This also applies to a multistation, multiperson conﬁguration or
    system. Term also deﬁnes the properties of the hardware, software or equipment which
    constitute conditions for interactions.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908B, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0,
    p. 21)
  • Safety Critical “A term applied to any condition, event, operation, process, or item whose
    proper recognition, control, performance, or tolerance is essential to safe system operation
    and support (e.g., safety critical function, safety critical path, or safety critical component).”
    (Source: MIL-STD-882D, para. A.3.2.10, p. 9)
526     Chapter 44      Human–System Integration

      • Task Analysis “A systematic method used to develop a time-oriented description of
        personnel-equipment/software interactions brought about by an operator, controller or main-
        tainer in accomplishing a unit of work with a system or item of equipment. It shows the
        sequential and simultaneous manual and intellectual activities of personnel operating, main-
        taining or controlling equipment, in addition to sequential operation of the equipment. It is
        a part of system engineering analysis where system engineering is required.” (Source: MIL-
        HDBK-1908B, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, pp. 31–32)
      • User-Computer Interface (UCI) “The modes by which the human user and the computer
        communicate information and by which control is commanded, including areas such as:
        information presentation, displays, displayed information, formats and data elements;
        command modes and languages; input devices and techniques; dialog, interaction and trans-
        action modes; timing and pacing of operations; feedback, error diagnosis, prompting,
        queuing and job performance aiding; and decision aiding.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908B,
        Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 34)

44.2 APPROACH TO HSI

Our approach to this section is to provide an awareness of the types of technical decisions SEs
need to understand concerning the development of systems that require human-in-the-loop (HITL)
interations with a system. Since Human Factors Engineering (HFE) is a specialty engineering dis-
cipline, we approach HSI from an SE perspective as illustrated in Figure 44.1. Speciﬁcally, our
topics of discussion include:
      • Human interface classes
      • Human factors
      • Human System Integration (HSI) Elements
      • HSI issue areas
      • Task attributes

 Human I/F Classes
   • Functional                          HIGHERORDER
                                        HIGHER  ORDERSYSTEMS
                                                      SYSTEMS
   • Information
   • Environmental
   • Operational
   • Organizational                          MISSION SYSTEM
   • Cooperation                                                                                        SUPPORT
                                                                                                         SUPPORT
   • Cognitive                                            Equipment Element                            SYSTEM(S)
   • Physical                  Personnel                                                                SYSTEM(S)
                                Element
  Human Factors                                       Mission Resources Element
   • Anthropometric
       • Sensory                                       Procedural Data Element
      • Cognitive                                                                                  OPERATING
                                                                                                    OPERATING
   • Phsychological                                                                              ENVIRONMENT
    • Physiological                                                                               ENVIRONMENT
                                                      System Responses Element

  Human System
 Integration (HSI)
     Elements
• Human Factors Engr.              Task Attributes                      HSI Issue Areas
     • Manpower
      • Personnel               • Mission                              • Allocation of Function
                                              • Task
       • Training               • Function                       • Anthropometrics & Biomechanics
                                              • Subtask
        • Safety                                                   • Communications & Teamwork
                                • Job         • Task Element
   • Health Hazards             • Duty                           • Computer Human Interface (CHI)
• Human Survivability                                          • Displays and Controls Documentation


Figure 44.1 SE Human Factors Considerations
                                                             44.3 Human–System Interfaces   527

44.3 HUMAN–SYSTEM INTERFACES

Chapters 18 through 20 System Operations Concepts introduced the System Operations Model. The
model provides an initial framework for deﬁning HOW a system’s pre-mission, mission, and post-
mission phases of operation might be constructed. The framework consists of serial and concur-
rent operations and tasks to be performed to accomplish OBJECTIVES established for each phase
of operation.
     The System Operations Model framework presents a challenge: WHICH individual or combi-
nations of System Elements—such as EQUIPMENT or PERSONNEL—should be allocated require-
ments for performing the OPERATIONS and TASKS? On the surface, this sounds simple. However,
further investigation REVEALS new questions that must be answered ﬁrst:
    1. WHAT capabilities and levels of performance can the EQUIPMENT Element provide with
       current technologies and resource constraints such as cost and schedule?
    2. WHAT skills and levels of performance do members of the PERSONNEL Element currently
       possess or can be trained to perform?
    3. WHAT level of risk are we willing to accept in the PERSONNEL and EQUIPMENT
       elements.
We can ultimately condense these questions into: WHAT types of operations and tasks can the
EQUIPMENT Element and PERSONNEL Element or combinations of the two perform best? To
answer these questions, we need to identify the key strengths of PERSONNEL and EQUIPMENT
performance.

Key Strengths of Human Performance
Humans excel in a number of skills and mental strengths when contrasted with EQUIPMENT. In
general, human performance exceeds EQUIPMENT performance in the following areas:
    1. Value-based judgments and decisions
    2. Priority selections
    3. Resource allocations—over time
    4. Impromptu tasks
    5. Creative, nonrepetitive tasks
    6. Sensitivity to painful conditions
    7. Human communications
    8. Smell and touch
    9. Adaptive behavior

Author’s Note 44.1 Numbered items in the list above and below are for reference purposes
and SHOULD NOT be interpreted as rank ordered list.

Key Strengths of EQUIPMENT Performance
In contrast, EQUIPMENT, when designed correctly from a User’s perspective, excels in other areas
when compared with humans. In general, EQUIPMENT performance exceeds human performance
in the following areas:
    1. Processing, storing, and retrieving vast amounts of data.
    2. Computing complex algorithms and trends in a short period of time.
528     Chapter 44   Human–System Integration

      3. Transmitting and receiving large amounts of error-free data under time constraints.
      4. Artiﬁcially controlling human performance under prescribed safety conditions—aircraft
         performance.
      5. Sensing and analyzing microscopic scale variations in electrical, mechanical, optical, envi-
         ronmental, and chemical conditions.
      6. High-speed, noncreative, repetitive tasks—such as mass production.
      7. Controlling high-risk operations that pose safety and health threats to humans and the envi-
         ronment—such as steel mill, handling hazardous and toxic materials.
      8. Leveraging human physical capabilities.
      9. Measuring parameters—such as time, mass, and material composition.

Guidepost 44.1 Given this comparison of strengths, how do SEs determine the appropriate
allocation and mix of performance-based operations and tasks to the EQUIPMENT and PER-
SONNEL elements? First, let’s identify the types of human–system interfaces that provide the basis
for decision making.

Human Interface Classes
The FAA’s National Airspace System-SE Manual Table 4.8–9 identiﬁes eight classes of human
interfaces:
      1. Functional interfaces
      2. Information interfaces
      3. Environmental interfaces
      4. Operational interfaces
      5. Organizational interfaces
      6. Cooperation interfaces
      7. Cognitive interfaces
      8. Physical interfaces
Table 44.1 provides a description of each of these classes, performance dimension, and perform-
ance objectives.

Guidepost 44.2 Given these classes of interfaces, SEs need to understand HOW these inter-
faces affect various human performance characteristics. So, we need to identify human factors that
are affected by human–system interactions.

Human Factors
HSI requires consideration of several human characteristics that inﬂuence SYSTEM and EQUIP-
MENT element design. Human Factors Engineering (HFE) identiﬁes ﬁve key factors concerning
human characteristics that have an impact on PERSONNEL–EQUIPMENT interactions that lead
to system design considerations:
      1. Anthropometric factors
      2. Sensory factors
      3. Cognitive factors
                                                                          44.3 Human–System Interfaces             529

Table 44.1 FAA perspective on classes of human interfaces

ID           Human Interface Class/Scope              Performance Dimension             Performance Objective

44.1    Functional Interfaces                           Task performance            Ability to perform tasks
        For operations and maintenance—                                             within time and accuracy
        role of the human versus automation;                                        constraints
        functions and tasks; manning levels;
        skills and training
44.2    Information Interfaces                          Information handling/       Ability to identify, obtain,
        Information media, electronic or                processing                  integrate, understand,
        hardcopy; information characteristics,          performance                 interpret, apply, and
        and the information itself                                                  disseminate information
44.3    Environmental Interfaces                        Performance under           Ability to perform under
        Physical, psychological, and tactical           environmental stress        adverse environmental stress,
        environments                                                                including heat and cold,
                                                                                    vibration, clothing,
                                                                                    illumination, reduced
                                                                                    visibility, weather,
                                                                                    constrained time, and
                                                                                    psychological stress
44.4    Operational Interfaces                          Sustained                   Ability to maintain
        Procedures, job aids, embedded or               performance                 performance over time
        organic training, and on-line help
44.5    Organizational Interfaces                       Job performance             Ability to perform jobs, tasks,
        Job design, policies, lines of                                              and functions within the
        authority, management structure, and                                        management and
        organizational infrastructure                                               organizational structure
44.6    Cooperation Interfaces                          Team performance            Ability to collectively achieve
        Communications, interpersonal                                               mission objectives
        relations, team performance
44.7    Cognitive Interfaces                            Cognitive                   Ability to perform cognitive
        Cognitive aspects of human computer             performance                 operations (e.g., problem-
        interfaces (HCI), situational awareness,                                    solving, decision making,
        decision making, information                                                information integration,
        integration, short-term memory                                              situational awareness)
44.8    Physical Interfaces                             Operations and              Ability to perform operations
        Physical aspects of the system with             maintenance                 and maintenance at
        which the human interacts (e.g., HCI,           performance                 workstations and work sites,
        controls and displays, workstations,                                        and in facilities using
        and facilities)                                                             controls, displays,
                                                                                    equipment, and tools

Source: National Airspace System-System Engineering Manual, Section 4.8.3.3, Table 4.8–9.
530     Chapter 44   Human–System Integration

      4. Psychological factors
      5. Physiological factors.
To better understand the scope each of these factors, Table 44.2 lists general human characteristics
related to each of these factors.

PERSONNEL–EQUIPMENT Trade-Offs
When speciﬁcation requirements are written, avoid specifying operational tasks to be performed
by PERSONNEL unless there are compelling reasons supported by analysis or trade studies. As
the SE Process Model executes through multiple levels of system design, trade-offs are made with
Decision Support Practices (Chapters 50–52). Decision support is tasked to determine the best mix
of PERSONNEL versus EQUIPMENT tasks. This may require analyses, prototypes, and simula-
tions to ensure that overall SYSTEM performance is optimal.

Author’s Note 44.2 Since SYSTEM operations involve human operator and external interac-
tions that are variable and have a degree of uncertainty, we use the term optimal versus optimum.
Given these uncertainties, seldom will overall SYSTEM performance be optimum.




                  Table 44.2 Common human characteristics associated with human
                  factors

                  Human Factors                             Human Characteristics

                  Anthropometric factors               • Human physical dimensions
                                                       • Body posture
                                                       • Repetitive motion
                                                       • Physical interface

                  Sensory factors                      • Hearing
                                                       • Vision
                                                       • Touch
                                                       • Balance

                  Cognitive factors                    • Mental ability
                                                       • Skills
                                                       • Decision making
                                                       • Training requirements

                  Psychological factors                • Human needs
                                                       • Attitudes
                                                       • Expectations
                                                       • Motivations

                  Physiological factors                • Human reactions to environments
                                                       • Strength (lifts, grip, carrying, etc.)
                                                       • Endurance

                  Source: DoD Human Factors Engineering Critical Process Assessment Tool
                  (CPAT), Table 1, p. 7.
                                                               44.3 Human–System Interfaces     531

PERSONNEL–EQUIPMENT Interactions
Once the initial allocations are made, the next question is HOW will the PERSONNEL and EQUIP-
MENT Elements interact with each other to accomplish interface objectives. We refer to these PER-
SONNEL interactions as input/output (I/O) operations that include:
    1. Audio-visual stimuli and cues.
    2. Tactile cues—such as touch and vibratory cues.
    3. Physical products and services—such as hardcopies and data ﬁles.
As this information is collected and processed, the EQUIPMENT Element produces various pre-
programmed cues that, at a minimum, include:
    1. Prompts to the operator(s) to react to a question or make a decision.
    2. General health status.
    3. Problem reporting.
    4. Progress reporting in performing a task.
Since audio, visual, and vibratory cues are an integral part of human–system interfaces; let’s scope
what we mean by each term.

Auditory Cues. Audio cues consist of any type of warnings, cautions, and alerts that notify the
operator of speciﬁc EQUIPMENT health and status conditions. Various tonal frequencies as well
as sequences and patterns of tones are employed to symbolize SYSTEM conditions. Auditory cues
are often employed to alert system operators, especially when they are not attentive or observing
the visual cues.

Visual Cues. Visual cues consist of any optical warnings, cautions, or normal indications or mes-
sages to inform operators and maintainers of the current SYSTEM conditions, status, or health.

Vibratory Cues. Where auditory or visual cues are not desirable or preferable, vibratory cues
may be employed to alert SYSTEM operators. Vibratory cues consist of devices that employ
electromechanical mechanisms that vibrate on command. Examples include silenced cell phones
and pagers.

Guidepost 44.3 Given an understanding of types of human–system interaction cues, HOW are
these cues communicated? This brings us to our next topic, system command and control (C2) devices.

SYSTEM Command and Control (C2) Devices
PERSONNEL require mechanisms to command and control (C2) SYSTEM operations and per-
formance. We refer to these mechanisms as I/O devices. Let’s identify some of the various types
of I/O devices that serve as candidate solutions for human–system interations.

Data Entry Devices. Data entry devices consist of electromechanical-optical mechanisms, such
as keyboards or touch panels that enable SYSTEM operators and maintainers to enter alphanumeric
information.

Pointing Control Devices. Pointing control devices consist of mechanisms, such as a computer-
based trackball, eyeball trackers, or mouse to enable SYSTEM operators and maintainers to point,
manipulate, or maneuver data such as “drag and drop.”
532    Chapter 44    Human–System Integration

Mechanical Control Devices. Mechanical control I/O devices include mechanical tools that
enable operators to calibrate, align, control, or adjust the SYSTEM conﬁguration, operation, and
performance.

Electronic Control Devices. Electronic control I/O devices consist of electronic or electro-
mechanical mechanisms, such as remote controls, toggle or rotary switches, dials, and touch screen
displays, conﬁgured to communicate operator controlled pointing position or displacement to spe-
ciﬁc data items.

Translational Displacement Control Devices. Translational displacement control devices
such as joysticks and track balls employ electronics that transform or translate mechanical move-
ments—by angular displacement, stress, or compression—into electronic signals that are used to
control systems.

Sensory I/O Devices. Sensory I/O devices consist of mechanisms that sense the presence,
degree, proximity, and strength of human interaction.

Audio I/O Devices. Audio input devices consist of electro-mechanical mechanisms that trans-
late sound waves into inputs that are compatible with and recognized by the system—such as speech
recognition. Audio output devices consist of electromechanical mechanisms—such as speakers and
headphones—that communicate tones or messages to the system operator(s).

Generalized and Specialized I/O Solutions
In Chapter 12, System Interfaces, we introduced the concept of generalized and specialized inter-
faces. We apply the same approach to human–system interfaces.
     PERSONNEL–EQUIPMENT interactions begin with a simple acknowledgement that a logical
entity relationship or association exists between two interacting systems, a generalized solution.
As the System Developer analyzes the interface and its requirements, candidate solutions are inves-
tigated—as specialized solutions. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 44.1
A System Developer has a contract to design a system that requires an operator to enter data. Thus, we have
a logical association between the PERSONNEL and EQUIPMENT Elements—a generalized solution. As a
generalized solution we have not speciﬁed HOW the operator inputs data into the system. The development
team responsible for providing the interface explores several viable candidate solutions that include standard
keyboards, touch screen displays, and so forth. Subsequently, the team selects a standard keyboard for the
application—a specialized solution. However, further analysis reveals that the keyboard may be susceptible
to dirt, dust, rain, and snow. So, the team decides to go with a ruggedized keyboard—which is, another level
of specialized solution—capable of surviving in the system’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

Guidepost 44.4 At this juncture we have introduced some of the fundamentals of PERSON-
NEL–EQUIPMENT interfaces. We now shift our focus to designing system interfaces that integrate
PERSONNEL–EQUIPMENT interactions. This brings us to our next topic, Human System Inte-
gration (HSI).
                                                          44.5 Human Factors Engineering (HFE)         533

44.4 HUMAN SYSTEM INTEGRATION (HSI) ELEMENTS

Human Systems Integration (HSI) in system design requires consideration of several elements.
Since human factors are critical operational and technical issues, especially in aerospace and
defense systems design, a signiﬁcant amount of the knowledge we have today originates from those
industries.
    MIL-HDBK-46855A (para. 5.1.2.1 HSI Elements) identiﬁes seven HSI elements that consist
of:
    1. Human factors engineering (HFE)
    2. Manpower
    3. Personnel
    4. Training
    5. Safety
    6. Health hazards
    7. Human survivability
Each of these HSI elements includes various areas of concern that provide a basis for further inves-
tigation. Table 44.3 provides a listing of example areas of concern that require SE attention.


44.5 HUMAN FACTORS ENGINEERING (HFE)

Human–system interactions encompass more than simply checking to see if the EQUIPMENT and
PERSONNEL Elements are assigned the RIGHT mix of tasks. There are other dimensions of the
interaction that require consideration by a specialty discipline referred to as Human Factors Engi-
neering (HFE).
     When human interactions are a key element of system operations, technical decisions have to
be made regarding the man–machine interface (MMI) between the PERSONNEL and EQUIP-
MENT System Elements. Depending on the system applications, these decisions often involve
a single philosophy. Reiterating previous themes: for a given set of operating conditions and
constraints:



Table 44.3 HSI element areas of concern

HSI element                                        Example Areas of Concern

Human factors           1. Unnecessarily stringent selection criteria for physical and mental capabilities.
engineering (HFE)       2. Compatibility of design with anthropometric and biomedical criteria
                        3. Workload situational awareness, and human performance reliability
                        4. Human–system interface
                        5. Implications of mission and system performance requirements on human
                           operator, maintainer, supporter.
                        6. Effects of design on skill, knowledge, and aptitudes requirements
                        7. Design driven human performance, reliability, effectiveness, efﬁciency, and
                           safety performance requirements
                        8. Simplicity of operation, maintenance, and support
                        9. Costs of design-driven human error, inefﬁciency, or ineffectiveness
                                                                                                (continued)
534      Chapter 44   Human–System Integration

Table 44.3 continued

HSI element                                            Example Areas of Concern

Manpower                   1. Manpower requirements
                           2. Deployment considerations
                           3. Team and organizational structure
                           4. Operating strength
                           5. Manning concepts
                           6. Manpower policies
Personnel                  1. Personnel selection and classiﬁcation
                           2. Demographics
                           3. Accession rates
                           4. Attrition rates
                           5. Career progression and retention rates
                           6. Promotion ﬂow
                           7. Personnel training and pipeline
                           8. Qualiﬁed personnel where and when needed
                           9. Projected user population/recruiting
                          10. Cognitive, physical, and educational proﬁles
Training                   1. Training concepts and strategy
                           2. Training tasks and training development methods
                           3. Media, equipment, and facilities
                           4. Simulation
                           5. Operational tempo
                           6. Training system suitability, effectiveness, efﬁciency, and costs
                           7. Concurrency of system with trainers
Safety                     1. Safety of design and procedures under deployed conditions
                           2. Human error
                           3. Total system reliability and fault reduction
                           4. Total system risk reduction
Health hazards             1. Health hazards induced by systems, environment, or task requirements
                           2. Areas of special interest include (but not limited to):
                              a. Acoustics
                              b. Biological and chemical substances
                              c. Radiation
                              d. Oxygen deﬁciency and air pressure
                              e. Temperature extremes
                              f. Shock and vibration
                              g. Laser protection
Human survivability        1. Threat environment
                           2. Identiﬁcation friend or foe
                           3. Potential damage to crew compartment and personnel
                           4. Camouﬂage/concealment
                           5. Protective equipment
                           6. Medical injury
                           7. Fatigue and stress

Source: MIL-HDBK-46855A, Table 1: HSI Elements and the Areas of Concern for Each, p. 20.
                                                        44.5 Human Factors Engineering (HFE)      535

    1. Compared to EQUIPMENT, what tasks can the PERSONNEL element perform best?
    2. Compared to PERSONNEL, what tasks can the EQUIPMENT element—such as machines—
       perform best?
    3. What controls should be allocated for humans to perform versus EQUIPMENT—for exam-
       ples, automated versus manual controls?
    4. What work task ergonomic factors should be considered in human-system interface
       designs.
    5. What are the performance effects of human-system interactions and outputs—such as
       PRODUCTS, BY-PRODUCTS, and SERVICES—on the environment, safety, and health of
       SUPPORT SYSTEMs and the general public?
Answers to these questions require specialty skills referred to as Human Factors Engineering (HFE).
DOD 5000.2-R (Section C5.2.3.5.9.1) describes HFE as “established to develop effective
human–machine interfaces, and minimize or eliminate system characteristics that require extensive
cognitive, physical, or sensory skills; require excessive training or workload for intensive tasks; or
result in frequent or critical errors or safety/health hazards.”
    This leads to the question: WHAT do HFEs investigate? The answer resides in understanding
our next topic, HFE analyses.

HFE Analyses
HFE performs various analyses such as manpower, personnel, training, and safety/health hazards
to ensure that System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements are met. Human Factors (HF)
engineers employ various tools and methods to perform operational sequence evaluations, timeline
and task analyses, and error analyses.
     Since these decisions have an impact on the SPS and item development speciﬁcation require-
ments, HFE should be an integral part of system and speciﬁcation development activities begin-
ning during the proposal phase. Failure to do so may have a major impact on contract technical,
cost, and schedule delivery performance as well as severe consequences if catastrophic failures
occur after deployment of the system, product, or service.
     The DoD Human Factors Engineering Critical Process Assessment Tool (CPAT) (Section 1.1.3)
identiﬁes three analytical HFE techniques for application to human–system interface design deci-
sion making:
    • Operational Sequence Evaluations “[D]escribe the ﬂow of information and processes
      from mission initiation through mission completion. The results of these evaluations are then
      used to determine how decision–action sequences should be supported by the human–system
      interfaces.”
    • Task Analysis “[T]he study of task and activity ﬂows and human characteristics that
      may be anticipated in a particular task. Task analysis is used to detect design risks associ-
      ated with human capabilities, such as skill levels and skill types. Task analysis also provides
      data for man–machine trade-off studies. The results of a task analysis allow the system
      designer to make informed decisions about the optimal mix of automation and manual
      tasking.”
    • Error Analysis “[I]s used to identify possible system failure modes. Error analysis is often
      conducted as part of human–machine trade-off studies to reveal and reduce (or eliminate)
      human error during operation and maintenance of the system. The error analysis results even-
      tually are integrated into reliability failure analyses to determine the system level effects of
      any failures.”
536     Chapter 44   Human–System Integration

Tests and Demonstrations “[A]re often necessary to identify mission critical operations and main-
tenance tasks, validate the results of the human factors related analyses, and verify that human
factors design requirements have been met. These tests and demonstrations are used to identify
mission critical operations and maintenance tasks. Therefore, they should be completed at the ear-
liest time possible in the design development process.”

Subjects of Concern to HFE
From a system design perspective, the scope Human Factors Engineering (HFE) applies knowl-
edge of human characteristics and methods to ensure human performance is accorded proper con-
sideration while achieving overall system performance. To do this, MIL-HDBK-46855A (Table II,
p. 26) identiﬁes nine system design subjects of concern to HFE:
      1. Human perceptual/performance characteristics
      2. Display and control design
      3. Design of equipment, vehicles, and other systems
      4. Workplace, crew station, and facilities design
      5. Automation and human–machine integration
      6. Environmental conditions
      7. Work design
      8. Health and safety
      9. System evaluation
Each area of interest consists of a set of concerns that require particular attention by HFEs. Table
44.4 provides a summary listing.


44.6 HSI ISSUE AREAS

As evidenced by the preceding discussions, when human–system interfaces are designed, there are
a number of design considerations that, if not properly addressed, can become issues areas. The
FAA’s National Airspace System-System Engineering Manual, for example, identiﬁes 23 issue areas
and associated concerns. Table 44.5 provides a listing of these areas and provides a brief descrip-
tion of design considerations for each issue area.

HFE Prototypes and Demonstrations
One of the best approaches to support HFE design decision-making is to simply prototype design
areas that may have a moderate to high level of risk. Spiral development provides a good strategy
for reﬁning human–system interfaces with Users via rapid prototyping to drive out key require-
ments. Rapid prototyping includes cardboard model mockups, sample displays, and so forth.
     What does prototyping accomplish? The DoD Human Factors Engineering CPAT (Section
1.1.3) offers several reasons. “Operator/maintainer interfaces should be prototyped to:
      1. Develop or improve display/software and hardware interfaces.
      2. Achieve a design that results in the required effectiveness of human performance during system
         operation and maintenance.
      3. Develop a design that makes economical demands upon personnel resources, skills,
         training and costs.”
                                                                          44.6 HSI Issue Areas     537

Table 44.4 MIL-HDBK-46855 perspective on HFE subjects of concern

Item      Area of Interest                              HFE Subjects of Concern

44.1       Human                1. Anatomy and physiology
           Perceptual/          2. Anthropometry and biomechanics
           Performance          3. Sensory processes in vision, hearing, and other senses
           Characteristics      4. Spatial awareness and perceptual organization
                                5. Attention, workload, and situational awareness
                                6. Learning and memory
                                7. Decision making and problem solving
                                8. Perceptual motor skills and motion analysis
                                9. Complex control processes
                               10. Performance speed and reliability
                               11. Language
                               12. Stress, fatigue, and other psychological and physiological states
                               13. Individual differences
44.2       Display and          1. Input devices and controls
           Control Design       2. Grouping and arrangement controls
                                3. Process control and system operation
                                4. Control/display integration
                                5. Visual displays
                                6. Audio, tactile, motion, and mixed-modality displays
                                7. Information presentation and communication
                                8. Human–computer interfaces
44.3       Design of            1. Portable systems and equipment
           Equipment,           2. Remote handling equipment
           Vehicles, and        3. Command and control systems
           Other Systems        4. Equipment labeling
                                5. Ground vehicles
                                6. Marine craft
                                7. Aircraft and aerospace vehicles
                                8. Manpower and crew size requirements
                                9. Maintainability
                               10. Reliability
                               11. Usability
44.4       Workplace,           1. Console and workstation dimensions and layout
           Crew Station,        2. General workplace and building design
           and Facilities       3. Design of non-work (service) facilities
           Design               4. Design of multi-building environments
                                5. Design of self-contained working/living environments
44.5       Automation           1. Allocation of functions between human and machine
           and Human-           2. Automation of human tasks
           Machine              3. Aiding of operators, maintainers, and teams
           Integration          4. Artiﬁcial intelligence
                                5. Virtual environments
                                6. Robotics
44.6       Environmental        1. Illumination
           Conditions           2. Noise
                                3. Vibration
                                4. Acceleration/deceleration

                                                                                            (continued)
538     Chapter 44   Human–System Integration

Table 44.4 continued

Item         Area of Interest                                  HFE Subjects of Concern

                                      5. Whole-body velocity (motion)
                                      6. Temperature extremes and humidity
                                      7. Micro-gravity
                                      8. Underwater conditions
                                      9. Restrictive environments
                                     10. Time-zone shifts
44.7         Work Design              1. Task description, task analysis, and task allocation
                                      2. Job skills, structure, and organization
                                      3. Crew coordination and crew resource management
                                      4. Work duration, shift work, and sustained and continuous operations
                                      5. Job attitudes, job satisfaction, and morale
                                      6. Personnel selection and evaluation
                                      7. Training, instructional manuals, and job support
44.8         Health and               1. Health hazard assessment
             Safety                   2. Risk perception and risk management
                                      3. Biological, chemical, radiation, and other hazards
                                      4. Occupational safety and health
                                      5. Alarms, warnings, and alerts
                                      6. Preventive education and training
                                      7. Protective clothing and personal equipment
                                      8. Life support, ejection, escape, survival equipment
44.9         System                   1. Modeling and simulation
             Evaluation               2. Mock-ups, prototypes, and models
                                      3. Mannequins and ﬁtting trials
                                      4. Information ﬂow and processing
                                      5. Systems analysis
                                      6. Reliability, failure, and error analysis
                                      7. Operational effectiveness training
                                      8. Usability testing

Source: MIL-HDBK-46855A, Table II, Subjects of Concern to HE, pp. 26–27.


Guidepost 44.5 At this juncture we have introduced primary information used to design the
EQUIPMENT Element hardware and software items. We now shift our emphasis to the PERSON-
NEL Element. Obviously, we cannot engineer a system’s human operator. However, we can iden-
tify speciﬁc mission tasks assigned to the system operators and maintainers and train them to
perform those tasks in a safe, orderly, and proﬁcient manner.

44.7 HUMAN–SYSTEM TASKING

Interactions between humans and systems involve three types of System Element requirements allo-
cations: EQUIPMENT Element, PERSONNEL Element, and PROCEDURAL DATA Element.
       • EQUIPMENT Element requirements specify the capability to:
         1. Display or output data to system operators and external interfaces.
         2. Accept input data from system operators to control system behavior and sustain
            performance.
                                                                    44.7 Human–System Tasking         539

Table 44.5 FAA perspective on HSI issue areas

Item       Issue Area                                        Description

44.1    Allocation of      System design reﬂecting assignment of those roles/functions/tasks for which
        Function           the human performs better, or assignment to the equipment that it performs
                           better while maintaining the human’s awareness of the operational situation.
44.2    Anthropometrics    System design accommodation of personnel (e.g., from the 1st through the
        and                99th percentile levels of human physical characteristics) represented in the
        Biomechanics       user population.
44.3    Communications     System design considerations to enhance required user communication and
        and Teamwork       teamwork.
44.4    Computer–          Standardization of CHI to access and use common functions employing
        Human              similar and effective user dialogues, interfaces, and procedures.
        Interface (CHI)
44.5    Displays and       Design and arrangement of displays and controls to be consistent with the
        Controls           operator’s and maintainer’s natural sequence of operational actions and
                           provide easily understandable supporting information.
44.6    Documentation      Preparation of user documentation and technical manuals in a suitable
                           format of information presentation, at the appropriate reading level, easily
                           accessible, and with the required degree of technical sophistication and
                           clarity.
44.7    Environment        Accommodation of environmental factors (including extremes) to which
                           equipment is to be subjected and the effects of environmental factors on
                           human–system performance.
44.8    Functional         Use of a human-centered design process to achieve usability objectives and
        Design and         compatibility of equipment design with operation and maintenance concepts
        Operational        and legacy systems.
        Suitability
44.9    Human Error        Examination of unsafe acts, contextual conditions, and supervisory and
                           organization inﬂuences as causal factors contributing to degradation in
                           human performance, and consideration of error tolerance, resistance, and
                           recovery in system operation.
44.10   Information        Enhancement of operator and maintainer performance through use of
        Presentation       effective and consistent labels, symbols, colors, terms, acronyms,
                           abbreviations, formats, and data ﬁelds.
44.11   Information        Availability of information needed by the operator and maintainer for a
        Requirements       speciﬁc task when it is needed and in the appropriate sequence.
44.12   Input/Output       Design of input and output devices and methods that support performing a
        Devices            task quickly and accurately, especially critical tasks.
44.13   Knowledge,         Measurement of the knowledge, skills, and abilities required to perform
        Skills and         job-related tasks. Necessary to determine appropriate selection requirements
        Abilities (KSA)    for operators.
44.14   Procedures         Design of operational and maintenance procedures for simplicity and
                           consistency with the desired human–system interface functions.
44.15   Safety and         Reduction/prevention of operator and maintainer exposure to safety and
        Health             health hazards.

                                                                                               (continued)
540      Chapter 44    Human–System Integration

Table 44.5 continued

Item         Issue Area                                             Description

44.16     Situation             Consideration of the ability to detect, understand, and project the current and
          Awareness             future operational situations.
44.17     Skills and Tools      Considerations to minimize the need for unique operator or maintainer skills,
                                abilities, or characteristics.
44.18     Stafﬁng               Accommodation of constraints and opportunities on stafﬁng levels and
                                organizational structures.
44.19     Subjective            The operator’s or maintainer’s perceived effort involved in managing the
          Workload              operational situation.
44.20     Task Load             Objective determination of the numbers and types of tasks that an operator
                                performs.
44.21     Training              Consideration of the acquisition and decay of operator and maintainer skills
                                in the system design and capability to train users easily, and design of the
                                training regimen to result in effective training.
44.22     Visual/Auditory       Design of visual and auditory alerts (including error messages) to invoke the
          Alerts                necessary operator and maintainer response to adverse and emergency
                                situations.
44.23     Workspace             Adequacy of workspace for personnel and their tools and equipment, and
                                sufﬁcient space for movements and actions they perform during operational
                                and maintenance tasks under normal, adverse, and emergency conditions.

Source: FAA’s National Airspace System System Engineering Manual, Section 4.8.3.3, Table 4.8–10.




       • PERSONNEL Element requirements specify tasks that deploy, operate, and support the
         system to:
         1. Monitor system information and outputs.
         2. Interpret system operations and health conditions.
         3. Control system behavior and performance.
         4. Perform corrective action to mitigate risk to the operators, EQUIPMENT, public, and the
             environment.
       • PROCEDURAL DATA Element requirements instruct the operators or maintainers in HOW
         to:
         1. Safely and effectively deploy, operate, and maintain the system.
         2. Proceed in normal and emergency operations.
         3. Perform corrective actions or remediate the effects of system failures should an emer-
             gency occur.
         4. Understand system capability and performance limitations.
Since system operator and maintainer requirements are task-based actions, let’s deﬁne the attrib-
utes of a task.

Deﬁning Task Attributes
As you analyze most tasks, you will discover that they share a common set of attributes. These
attributes enable human factors specialists to understand the mission and scenario conditions that
bound the human–system interactions. MIL-STD-1908B identiﬁes six attributes of a task:
                                                                               44.8 Guiding Principles       541

Table 44.6 MIL-STD-1908B deﬁnitions of task attributes

Item     Task Attribute                                    Deﬁnition

44.1     Mission          What the system is supposed to accomplish (e.g., mission).
44.2     Scenario/        Categories of factors or constraints under which the system will be expected to
         Conditions       operate and be maintained (e.g., day/night, all weather, all terrain operation).
44.3     Function         A broad category of activity performed by a system (e.g., transportation).
44.4     Job              The combination of all human performance required for operation and
                          maintenance of one personnel position in a system (e.g., driver).
44.5     Duty             A set of operationally related tasks within a given job (e.g., driving, system
                          servicing, communicating, target detection, self-protection, and operator
                          maintenance).
44.6     Task             A composite of related activities (perceptions, decisions, and responses) performed
                          for an immediate purpose, written in operator/maintainer language (e.g., change a
                          tire).
44.7     Subtask          An activity (perceptions, decisions and responses) that fulﬁlls a portion of the
                          immediate purpose within the task (e.g., remove lug nuts).
44.8     Task Element     The smallest logically and reasonably deﬁnable unit of behavior required in
                          completing a task or subtask, e.g., apply counterclockwise torque to the lug nuts
                          with a lug wrench.

Source: MIL-HDBK-1908B, Task Analysis Deﬁnition para. 3.0, p. 32.


       1. Mission
       2. Function
       3. Job
       4. Duty
       5. Task
       6. Subtask
Table 44.6 deﬁnes each of these attributes.


44.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern human–system interfaces practices.

Principle 44.1 Optimal HSI design requires balancing requirements allocation in two areas:
       1. WHAT the PERSONNEL Element does best.
       2. WHAT the EQUIPMENT Element does best.

Principle 44.2 When designing HSIs, structure layouts and display information based on use
case prioritized operator/practitioner needs, skill levels, and frequency of usage priorities.

Principle 44.3 AVOID operator decision-making data overloads: keep interface information
simple and intuitive.
542     Chapter 44   Human–System Integration

Principle 44.4 When presenting information, AVOID presentation of trivial data unless the oper-
ator(s) has CONSCIOUSLY requested it, assuming existence of the information is known.

Principle 44.5 When training PERSONNEL to operate a SYSTEM, employ the EDEV
approach:
      1. Explanation.
      2. Demonstration.
      3. Experimentation.
      4. Veriﬁcation.

Principle 44.6 Interface simplicity rules!

44.9 SUMMARY

As an overview discussion of human–system interfaces, we investigated the key SE considerations for allo-
cating EQUIPMENT and PERSONNEL requirements based on the premise of WHAT the system can perform
best versus WHAT humans perform best—the Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) system.
     Our initial discussions focused on understanding human–system interactions. We discussed types of
human–system interfaces—audio, visual, and vibratory—and provided examples of command and control (C2)
I/O devices used in Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) systems.
     Based on an understanding of human–system interactions, we shifted our focus to the design aspect of
Human System Integration (HSI). We identiﬁed key elements of HSI and their respective areas of concern
that require Human Factors Engineering (HFE). We illustrated how HFE categorizes human characteristics
into human factors that impact human–system performance.
      We concluded our discussion PERSONNEL tasks and identiﬁed their attributes.

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) What types of I/O devices are employed as human–system interfaces?
   (b) Identify examples of the types of factors listed below from Table 44.2 that should be considered in the
       system’s design:
       1. Anthropometric design factors
       2. Sensory design factors
       3. Cognitive design factors
       4. Psychological design factors
       5. Physiological design factors
   (c) Identify examples of human-system tasks that represent decisions the System Developer may have
       made regarding EQUIPMENT element versus PERSONNEL Element decision-making allocations.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for guidance and direction in implementing the
   human–system interface practices from an SE perspective.
                                                                                        Additional Reading         543

   (a) What requirements are levied on SE responsibilities for HF/HFE?
   (b) What overall process is required and how do SEs contribute?
   (c) What SE work products and quality records are required?
   (d) What veriﬁcation and validation activities are required?
2. Contact two contract programs within your organization.
   (a) What human factors requirements were levied on the system design?
   (b) Who are the Users/Operators of the system?
   (c) What critical human–system interface decisions were made?
   (d) What PERSONNEL Element requirements were levied on the system operators?
   (e) What task analysis was performed and linked to speciﬁcation requirements and system capabilities?


REFERENCES

DoD 5000.2-R. 2002. Mandatory Procedures for Masor         MIL-HDBK-470A. 1997. Designing and Developing Main-
  Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPS) and Major             tainable Products and Systems. Washington, DC: Depart-
  Automation Information (MAIS) Acquisition Programs,        ment of Defense (DoD).
  Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).             MIL-HDBK-1908B. 1999. DoD Deﬁnitions of Human
DoD 1998 Human Factors Engineering Critical Process          Factors Terms. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  Assessment Tool (CPAT), Military Speciﬁcations and         (DoD).
  Standards Reform Program (MSSRP), Washington, DC:        MIL-STD-882D. 2000. DoD Standard Practice for System
  Department of Defense.                                     Safety. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
DoD 5000.59-M. 1998. DoD Modeling and Simulation           Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASD-100 Architec-
  (M&S) Glossary. Washington, DC: Department of              ture and System Engineering. 2003. National Air Space
  Defense (DoD).                                             System—Systems Engineering Manual. Washington, DC:
MIL-HDBK-46855A. 1999. Human Engineering Process             FAA.
  and Program. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  (DoD).

ADDITIONAL READING

ANSI/HFS 100. 1988, Human Factors and Ergonomics           Noyes, Janet M, and Bransby, Matthew. 2002. People
  Society, Santa Monica, CA. American National Standard      in Control: Human Factors in Control Room Design, Vol.
  for Human Factors Engineering of Visual Display Termi-     60. IEE Control Engineering series. Institute of Electrical
  nal Workstations.                                          and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) New York, NY.
MIL-HDBK-759C. 1998. DoD Handbook for Human Engi-          SALVENDY, GAVRIEL. 2005. Handbook of Human Factors
  neering Design Guidelines. Washington, DC: Department      and Ergonomics, New York: Wiley.
  of Defense.                                              Sanders, Mark S. and McCormick, Ernest J. 1993.
MIL-STD-1472F. 1999. DoD Design Criteria Standard:           Human Factors in Engineering and Design. New York:
  Human Engineering. Washington, DC: Department of           McGraw-Hill.
  Defense.                                                 Tilley, Alvin R. 2001. The Measure of Man and Woman:
Jacko, Julie A., and Sears, Andrew, eds. 2003. The           Human Factors in Design. New York: Wiley.
  Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals,       Wickens, Christopher; LEE, JOHN; LIU, YILI; GORDON-
  Evolving Technologies, and Emerging Applications.          BECKER, SALLIE. 2003. An Introduction to Human Factors
  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.                   Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mullet, Kevin, and Sano, Darrell. 1994. Designing          Woodson, Wesley E., Tillman, Barry, and Tillman,
  Visual Interfaces, Communication Oriented Techniques       Peggy. 1992. Human Factors Design Handbook. New
  1st ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.               York: McGraw-Hill.
Chapter              45

      Engineering Standards, Frames of
      Reference, and Conventions

45.1 INTRODUCTION

As the system architecture evolves, interactions between the system and its OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT and internal elements such as SUBSYSTEMS must be compatible and interoperable.
This requires that both sides of the interface adhere to standards. For some systems, the interface
may require new development; in other cases, legacy interfaces may already exist, thereby estab-
lishing the baseline for compliance for new development.
     Whichever is the case, SEs that engineer these interactions for new system, products, or serv-
ices must be synchronized in thought, process, and methods, and share a common system design
perspective for accomplishing the interface. The mechanism for ensuring a common perspective
resides in the establishment of engineering standards, frames of reference, and conventions.
     Many systems have been developed that failed system integration or their missions due to
simple, human errors in communicating and interpreting the mechanical, electrical, chemical,
optical, software, and information that apply to both sides of the interface.
     This chapter addresses the need for SEs to establish engineering standards, frames of refer-
ence, and conventions “up front” as one of the cornerstones of system design. Our discussion
explores each of these topical areas and provides examples to illustrate the importance of syn-
chronizing design mindsets to a common, shared viewpoint for designing compatible and inter-
operable interfaces.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is an engineering standard?
      2. What is a convention?
      3. Why do we need engineering standards?
      4. What are the key subject matter categories of engineering standards?
      5. What are some types of standards?
      6. What are some types of conventions?
      7. What are some common standards and conventions issues?
      8. Who establishes engineering standards?
      9. What are local standards and conventions?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

544
                                                                     45.2 Engineering Standards    545

    10. What are some examples of local standards and conventions?
    11. How is the degree of compliance with engineering standards veriﬁed?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Compliance The act of adhering to the letter of a requirement without exception.
    • Conformance The act of adapting or customizing organizational work products, processes,
      and methods to meet the spirit and intent of a required action or objective.
    • Convention A method established by external or internal standards for conveying how engi-
      neers are to interpret system or entity conﬁgurations, orientations, directions, or actions.
    • Coordinate System A two- or three-dimensional axis frame of reference used to establish
      system conﬁguration and orientation conventions, support physical analysis, and facilitate
      mathematical computations.
    • Dimension A physical property inherent to an object that is independent of the system of
      measure used to quantify its magnitude.
    • Open Standards “Widely accepted and supported standards set by recognized standards
      organizations or the market place. These standards support interoperability, portability, and
      scalability and are equally available to the general public at no cost or with a moderate license
      fee.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC—Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and of
      Terms)
    • Standard “A document that establishes engineering and technical requirements for products,
      processes, procedures, practices, and methods that have been decreed by authority or adopted
      by consensus.” (Source: ANSI/EIA 632-1999, Processes for Engineering a System, p. 67)
    • Technical Standard “A common and repeated use of rules, conditions, guidelines or
      characteristics for products or related processes and production methods. It includes the
      deﬁnition of terms, classiﬁcation of components, delineation of procedures, speciﬁcation of
      dimensions, materials, performance, designs, or operations. It includes measurement of
      quality and quantity as well as a description of ﬁt and measurements.” (Source: NASA SOW
      NPG 5600.2B)


45.2 ENGINEERING STANDARDS

Engineering standards provide a mechanism for organizations and industries to:
    1. Establish consensus performance requirements for development of systems, products, and
       services.
    2. Audit compliance of those deliverable work products.
    3. Provide a framework for targeting improvements related to performance and safety.
Standards evolve from lessons learned, best practices, and methods within an organization and
across industry domains. They:
    1. Ensure product compatibility and interoperability and avoid the consequences of lessons
       learned.
    2. Ensure consistency, uniformity, precision, and accuracy in materials, processes, and weights
       and measures.
    3. Promote modularity, interchangeability, compatibility, and interoperability.
546     Chapter 45   Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions

      4. Ensure safety to the general public and environment.
      5. Promote ethical business relationships.
Where a standard is employed as the basis for evaluating work related performance, the term PER-
FORMANCE STANDARD is employed.

Standard Normative and Informative Clauses
In general, standards express performance requirements via clauses. Standards clauses generally
fall into two types of clauses: normative clauses and informative clauses.
      • Normative clauses or requirements express mandatory criteria for compliance with the stan-
        dard and include the word “shall” to indicate required performance.
      • Informative clauses express information for voluntary compliance or to provide
        guidance/clariﬁcation for implementing the normative requirements.
Local organization engineering standards should clearly delineate normative and informative
clauses.

Engineering Standards Authorities
National and international organizations establish standards. To posture themselves for this posi-
tion, they must be recognized and respected within a given industry or business domain as the
authoritative proponent or issuer of standard practices. Consult your contract, industry, and engi-
neering discipline for speciﬁc standards that may be applicable to your business and contract.

Dimensional Properties and Systems of Units
Standards express two types of information that serve as the frame of reference for measurements:
dimensional properties and systems of units.
      • Dimensional properties represent inherent physical properties of an object such as mass,
        length, width, weight.
      • Systems of units are standards of measure that form the basis for measuring the magnitudes
        of an object’s dimensional properties.

Guidepost 45.1 At this point we have established WHAT a standard is and WHAT it expresses.
Now let’s shift our attention to understanding WHAT types of information they communicate.

Standards Subject Matter
Standards are employed to express performance requirements for a variety of applications such
as documentation, processes, methods, materials, interfaces, frames of reference, weights and
measures, domain transformations, demonstrations, and conventions. Of these items, engineering
weights and measures, conventions, and frames of reference require speciﬁc emphasis, especially
in creating consistency across a contract program.

45.3 ENGINEERING STANDARDS FOR
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES

Perhaps the most fundamental concept of engineering is establishing a system of weights and meas-
ures. Technical expressions that describe the form, ﬁt, and function of a system, product, or service
are totally dependent on usage of standard units for weights and measures.
                                               45.3 Engineering Standards for Weights and Measures   547

     One of the most fundamental examples of establishing weights and measures is simply select-
ing and applying a system of units. There are two primary standard systems of units in use today:
    1. International System of Units (SI).
    2. British Engineering System (BES).
Let’s contrast each of these systems.

International System of Units (SI)
The International System of Units (SI) was approved by the 11th General Conference on Weights
and Measures (CGPM) in 1960. The CGPM adopted the SI designation from the French Le Système
International d’Unites. The SI, which is sometimes referred to as the metric or mks for meter–
kilogram–second system, is based on seven base units that are determined to be independent. Table
45.1 provides a listing of these base units.

British Engineering System (BES)
The British Engineering System (BES) consists of ﬁve base units listed in Table 45.2.

Scientiﬁc Notation
In addition to deﬁning the system of units for measurement, we need to express the magnitudes
associated with those units in a manner that is easy to read. We do this with scientiﬁc notation as
illustrated in Table 45.3.

Data Accuracy and Precision
When data are measured or computed, it is critical for a program to establish a policy for data accu-
racy and precision. In addition to establishing mathematical models, transformations, and conver-

                Table 45.1 Base units of the International System of Units (SI)

                Base Quantity                                  Name                       Symbol

                Length                                       meter                         m
                Mass                                         kilogram                      kg
                Time                                         second                        s
                Electric current                             ampere                        A
                Thermodynamic pressure                       kelvin                        K
                Amount of substance                          mole                          mol
                Luminous intensity                           candela                       cd

                Source: Taylor, The International System of Units. Table 1, p. 9, 2001.



                Table 45.2 Base units of the British Engineering System (BES)

                Base Quantity                               Name                          Symbol

                Length                               foot                                   ft
                Force                                pound                                  lb
                Time                                 second                                 s
                Temperature                          degree fahrenheit                      °F
                Luminous intensity                   candle
548     Chapter 45   Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions

                 Table 45.3 Scientiﬁc notation symbology

                 Power                          Preﬁx                         Notation

                 10-9                           nano                               n
                 10-6                           micro                              m
                 10-3                           milli                              m
                 10-2                           centi                              c
                 10-1                           deci                               d
                 103                            kilo                               k
                 106                            mega                               M
                 109                            giga                               G
                 1012                           tetra                              T




sions, the integrity of the chain of computations is totally dependent on the accuracy of the data
that feed each one.
     You should recall our earlier discussions of the “supply chain” (Figure 13.3). Humans, as devel-
opers of systems, have two roles as a MISSION SYSTEM and a SUPPORT SYSTEM. As a
MISSION SYSTEM, we perform a SUPPORT SYSTEM role to the next person or organization
performing their MISSION SYSTEM role.
     To illustrate the importance of data precision, consider a simple deﬁnition of the mathemati-
cal symbol, pi. Are two digits of precision—namely 3.14—necessary and sufﬁcient criteria for
downstream computations? Four digits? Eight digits? You have to decide and establish the stan-
dard for the program.

Closing Point
As the technical lead for a program, SEs need to establish a program consensus regarding a stan-
dard system of units for expressing physical quantities. This requires three actions:
      1. Establish unit conversion tables via project memorandums or reference to a standard.
      2. Thoroughly scrutinize interface compatibilities and interoperability throughout the System
         Development Phase, especially at reviews.
      3. DEMAND professional discipline and compliance.


45.4 COORDINATE SYSTEMS

The engineering of systems and products often require that an observer’s frame of reference be
established for characterizing the engineering mechanics and dynamics of the system as a body rel-
ative to other systems. Basic concepts for observer frames of reference have their origins in physics.
So, what is a frame of reference?
     A frame of reference is expressed as a three-dimensional axis system with the origin located
at a designated point on or within a MISSION SYSTEM. The orientation or perspective of the 3-
axis coordinate system depends on an observer’s eye point location when viewing the MISSION
SYSTEM. This brings up two key questions:
      1. How are integrated EQUIPMENT Element component displacements and relationships
         characterized in terms of a 3-axis frame of reference?
      2. How do we express movements relative to the observer’s X-, Y-, or Z-axes?
                                                                       45.4 Coordinate Systems     549

The answer to the ﬁrst question resides in establishing a coordinate reference system. The second
question requires establishing a convention for application to the coordinate system. First, let’s con-
sider what is meant by convention.

Frame of Reference Conventions
A convention is a designation of orientation used to describe actions observed relative to the
observer’s frame of reference. The point of origin for the frame of reference resides at the observer’s
eye point.
    Conventions enable SEs to express relationships relative to the observer using the observer’s
frame of reference such as:
    1. Spatial position of an object relative to an observer’s eye point positioned at the origin of
       a 3-axis frame of reference.
    2. Direction of movement relative to observer’s eye point.
    3. Translational movements relative to each axis of the observer’s frame of reference.

The Right-Hand Rule Convention
The Right-Hand Rule states that if you conﬁgure your right hand so that the thumb points UPWARD
to represent the direction of an axis and the ﬁngers are coiled about the axis, the direction of the
ﬁngers about the axis symbolizes a CLOCKWISE rotation in the direction of the thumb that is
POSITIVE. A COUNTERCLOCKWISE direction is considered NEGATIVE.

The Right-Handed Cartesian Coordinate System
Building on the Right-Hand Rule, we can create two-dimensional and three-dimensional Cartesian
coordinate systems to support system design needs. The challenge comes in establishing a con-
vention that enables us to:
    1. Communicate the conﬁguration of the axes to each other relative to the observer’s frame
       of reference.
    2. Express relative motion about the principal axes of the frame of reference.

Establishing an Observer’s Frame of Reference Coordinate System. The preceding dis-
cussions established the need to deﬁne a coordinate system as an observer’s frame of reference to
facilitate communications, characterize free-body movements, orientation, calibration, and align-
ment. Figure 45.1 provides an illustration. This system enables us to establish an observer’s eye
point viewing position at the origin of a 3-axis coordinate system.
    1. The X-axis represents the observer’s direction of observation relative to the eye point.
    2. The Z-axis points UPWARD from the observer’s eye point as the origin.
    3. The Y-axis extends to the LEFT of the observer’s eye point and is orthogonal to the X- and
       Z-axes.
Table 45.4 provides examples of conventions employed to characterize these actions.
    This description simply establishes HOW the observer expresses observations about objects
within the viewing space relative to the frame of reference. The question is: HOW does the observer
express motion about those axes? This brings us to our next topic, establishing YAW, PITCH, and
ROLL conventions.
550      Chapter 45    Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions

                                      +Z




               Observer’s
                Eyepoint




 Forward
               +X                                            +Y
Direction of
Observation
Figure 45.1 Right-Handed Cartesian Coordinate System as an Observer’s Frame of Reference


Table 45.4 Examples of conventions applied to a 3-axis observer’s frame of reference

Item                        Observation                                  Directional Conventions

45.1      Object spatial position relative the observer’s   Left, right, up, down
          frame of reference
45.2      Direction of movement relative to observer’s      Forward, backward, left, right, upward, and
          frame of reference                                downward
45.3      Translational movements about the observer’s      Rotations about an axis employing the Right-Hand
          3-axis frame of reference                         Rule—e.g., yaw, pitch, and roll




YAW, PITCH, and ROLL Conventions. We can express translational motion about a 3-axis
system by using the illustrations shown in Figure 45.2. Since the axes are different, we need to
establish terms that enable us to differentiate motion. These terms are PITCH, YAW, and ROLL.
For applications in which a frame of reference is allowed to rotate freely in any direction, we refer
to it as a free body axis system. Table 45.5 lists descriptions of PITCH, YAW, and ROLL conven-
tions applied a free body axis system.

Guidepost 45.2 Our discussions up to this point provide generic descriptions of coordinate
systems. Now let’s explore some actual systems that implement these coordinate systems.

World Coordinate System (WCS)
Systems, such as land surveying, aircraft, and military troops, track their geospatial positions based
on displacement of the origin of the MISSION SYSTEM relative to an Earth-based coordinate
system. To do this, they establish a 3-axis frame of reference using the Earth’s center as the origin.
We refer to this system as the World Coordinate System (WCS) as illustrated in Figure 45.3.
Whereas navigators employed magnetic compasses and sextants to determine geographic position
with some level of accuracy, we navigate using the Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites
located in Earth orbit.
     For the WCS:
                                                                                    45.4 Coordinate Systems      551

                                                                                         Z
                     Z                                 ROLL
                                                Angle Convention
                           Plane of        (Y rotates about X toward Z)
                           Rotation




                                               Y                                                            Y
                                                                                                  PITCH
                                           Z                                                  Axis of Rotation

                                                YAW
        X                                      Axis of
     ROLL                                      Rotation              X        Plane of
Axis of Rotation                                                              Rotation

                                                                    Y                  PITCH
                                                                                 Angle Convention
                         Plane of                                           (Z rotates about Y toward X)
                         Rotation                           YAW
                                                     Angle Convention
                              X
                                                (X rotates about Z toward Y)
Figure 45.2 6 Degree of Freedom (DOF) Roll, Pitch, & Yaw Conventions



Table 45.5 ROLL, PITCH, and YAW conventions for a right-handed, body-axis, cartesian coordinate
system relative to the origin

Parameter                Convention                                 Action Observeda

ROLL               Positive (+) ROLL           Clockwise angular rotation about the longitudinal X-axis (i.e.,
                                                along the direction of forward travel) in which the Y-axis rotates
                                                toward the Z-axis
                   Negative (-) ROLL           Counterclockwise angular rotation about the X-axis (Z into Y)
PITCH              Positive (+) PITCH          Clockwise angular rotation about the Y-axis in which the Z-axis
                                                rotates toward the X-axis
                   Negative (-) PITCH          Counterclockwise angular rotation about the Y-axis (X into Z)
YAW                Positive (+) YAW            Clockwise angular rotation about the Z-axis in which the X-axis
                                                rotates toward the Y-axis
                   Negative (-) YAW            Counterclockwise angular rotation about the Z-axis (Y into X)
a
 As viewed by an observer with their eye point located at the origin of a right-handed coordinate system.




     1. The Z-axis extends from the center of the Earth (origin) through the North Pole.
     2. The X-axis extends from the Earth’s center (origin) through the Prime Meridian at the
        equator.
     3. Finally, the Y-axis extends from the origin through 90 degrees East at the equator.
Engineering computations and simulations employ models that require certain assumptions about
the Earth’s characteristics such as Earth Centered, Earth Fixed (ECEF); Earth Centered Rotating
(ECR); and Earth Centered Inertial (ECI) models.
552    Chapter 45    Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions

                                 North Pole
                         Axis of
                                    +Z
                      Rotation           +



Prime Meridian
                                                         90 Degrees
 (Greenwich)
                                                            East




                                 Equator

        +X                                                    +Y
Figure 45.3 World Coordinate System (WCS) Application of the Right Hand Rule Rotation Convention




                    Z1
                           z2


                                              y2
              x2

                                                     Y1


                                              Rotation
         X1

Figure 45.4 Frame of Reference Based Coordinate System



     The WCS enables us to reference a speciﬁc point on the surface of the Earth. But, HOW do
air-based systems such as aircraft and spacecraft relate to the WCS? Obviously, these systems
employ on-board GPS technology. However, the systems are free bodies that are in motion rela-
tive to another body, the Earth, which is also in motion. HOW do we express their heading and
rotational velocities and accelerations relative to their frame of reference?

Free Body Dynamics Relative to a Fixed Body
Complex systems often require dynamic characterizations of a free body relative to another body
that is assumed to be ﬁxed as illustrated in Figure 45.4. Where this is the case, select the coordi-
nate system(s) to be applied to each body axis system. For this illustration, we establish an X1, Y1,
Z1 coordinate system to represent the Earth’s frame of reference and an X2, Y2, Z2 coordinate system
to represent the orientation of a free body in space relative to the Earth.
                                                                          45.4 Coordinate Systems   553

      Conventional                                            Rotated
Right-Handed Coordinate                               Right-Handed Coordinate
       (Z-Axis Up)                                         (Z-Axis Down)
            Z

                                                                                            X



                                          Y
                                                       Y
                                                                     Z
                                                         Gravitational Loading Effects
 X                                                      Result in POSITIVE Quantities

 Gravitational Loading Effects
Result in NEGATIVE Quantities
Figure 45.5 Engineering Statics and Mechanics Conventions




Six Degree of Freedom (6 DOF) Models. A free body in space has a relative position within
the base frame of reference. Within that space its travels in any direction can be translated into
motion relative to the X-, Y-, or Z-axes. It can also freely rotate about the axes of its own frame of
reference. As such, we label this type of system as having six degrees of freedom (6 DOF).

State Vectors. The 6 DOF discussion also provides the basis for the concept of state vectors.
State vectors enable us to express the relative heading, velocities, and accelerations about the axes
of a free body in space.

Applications of Coordinate Systems and Conventions to
Engineering Mechanics
The preceding discussions illustrate the basic concept of standard right-handed Cartesian coordi-
nate system as illustrated at the left side of Figure 45.5. For many applications this convention is
acceptable. However, from an engineering mechanics perspective, the establishment of the posi-
tive Z-axis pointing upward means that analysis of gravity-based loading effects result in negative
Z components.
     For systems with this challenge, we can facilitate computation by rotating the 3-axis system
so that the positive Z-axis points downward toward the center of the Earth. To illustrate this appli-
cation, consider NASA’s Space Shuttle example shown at the right side of Figure 45.6. Here the
X-axis represents the forward direction of travel; the Y-axis extends from the center of gravity (CG)
through the right wing.
     Now consider the added complexity in which the Shuttle maneuvers in orbit to ﬂy UPSIDE
DOWN and BACKWARD during most of its mission to.
     1. Minimize the thermal and radiation effects of the sun by turning the vehicle’s belly toward
        the Sun and using the heat tiles as a solar shield.
554     Chapter 45     Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions



                       Right-Hand Rule                                     C.G.

                      Rotation Convention
                                                                                                           +X
                               +Z                                                                   Positive
                       YAW                                                                           Roll
                      Rotation            +
                     Convention                                                   Positive
                                                                                   Ya w
                                                            Positive
                                                             Pitch        +Z
                                                                                        Space Shuttle
     ROLL
    Rotation                                                    +Y                       Application
   Convention
                 +
                                                        +


      +X                                                          +Y
 Forward                                               PITCH
Direction of                                           Rotation
Observation                                           Convention
Figure 45.6 Space Shuttle Coordinate System Application
Source: http://liftoff.msfc.nasa.gov/academy/rocket_sci/shuttle/coord/orb_body.html



      2. Minimize the impact areas of orbital debris and meteorites that may cross its path that could
         damage tiles on the vehicle’s nose or leading edges of the wings.
      3. Shield Cargo Bay equipment from impacts that could damage dangerous or fragile
         instruments.
      4. Minimize the energy required to deploy payloads.
      5. Slow the vehicle for reentry by ﬁring small nozzles, which are located on the rear of the
         vehicle, in the direction of forward travel.

Guidepost 45.3 The preceding discussions relate to a free body operating as a MISSION
SYSTEM relative to another free body. Now let’s shift our attention to focus on the MISSION
SYSTEM as an integrated set of components that must interface as an integrated framework. This
leads to the next question: How do we reference a system consisting of multiple components that
are integrated to form the free body system?

Dimensional Reference Coordinate Systems
One of the challenges in the engineering of systems is expressing the relative position and orien-
tation of physically integrated components within the system. The objective is to ensure they inter-
operate in form, ﬁt, and function and individually do not interfere with each other unintentionally,
or have a negative impact on the performance of the system, its operators, and its facilities or
mission objectives.
     This challenge requires positioning integrated components in a virtual frame of reference or
structure and attaching them at integration points (IPs) or nodes to ensure interoperability. Then,
identifying additional attachment points such as lift points that enable external systems to lift or
move the integrated system. This requires establishing a dimensional coordinate system.
     NASA’s Space Shuttle coordinate system shown in Figure 45.7 provides an excellent example
of a dimensional coordinate system. Here, the Orbiter Vehicle (OV), External Tank (ET), and Solid
                                                                              45.4 Coordinate Systems   555




                                                                              Frame of Reference
                                                          Subscripts
                                                          T = External Tank
                                                          B = Solid Rocket Booster
                                                          0 = Orbiter
                                                          S = Shuttle System
                                                          FRL = Fuselage Reference Line


 Figure 45.7 Space Shuttle Coordinate System and Dimensions
 Source: Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident Figure 1:
 Shuttle Coordinate Systems and Dimensions (http://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/v3o378a.htm)


Rocket Boosters (SRBs) each have their own respective frame of reference coordinate systems.
These systems are then referenced relative to an integrated vehicle coordinate system with the origin
designated as X–, Y–, Z–. This ﬁgure illustrates two key decision areas for SEs regarding dimen-
sional reference coordinate systems.
     First, note in this ﬁgure HOW the principal X-axis extends through the rear of the vehicle.
Any point along this axis is considered positive by convention. Systems such as aircraft establish
dimensional benchmarks or “stations” along the fuselage as a means of referencing component
locations. Using a positive X-axis convention extending through the rear of the aircraft eliminates
the need for negative values for dimensions or “stations.”
     Second, note the location of the origin in front of the ET nose. Aircraft designers select these
virtual origins for a variety of engineering based rationale. One rationale, for example, includes
accommodating free space forward of the nose for additional components that may be added later.
In this case, a component attached to the nose would remain within the positive X-axis space. Other
placement considerations include movements about the center of gravity (CG) and center of
rotation.
     Third, compare and contrast the coordinate system in Figure 45.6 with the one in Figure 45.7.
This illustrates that a given system design may employ common frames of reference but different
orientations, each intended to support speciﬁc needs. Figure 45.6 facilitates engineering mechan-
ics computations for system modeling; Figure 45.7 facilitates dimensional space coordinate refer-
ence systems for product engineers and designers.

Angular Displacement Reference Systems
Some systems employ common components in left-hand and right-hand orientations that require
the need for a convention. Referring to Figure 45.7, how can the SRBs be uniquely identiﬁed? NASA
designates each one as illustrated in Figure 45.8.
556     Chapter 45          Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions




                    0°/360°                           180°
         045°              315°               225°             135°

      090°                     270°      270°                     090°

                            225°              315°
             135°                                              045°
                     180°                            0°/360°
      Left                         External                           Right
      SRB                           Tank                              SRB


      (1) View is Forward (Direction of Flight) or
          “Up” When Vehicle is on Launch Pad

      (2) Angles Increase Counterclockwise

Figure 45.8 Angular Coordinate System for Solid Rocket Boosters/Motors
Source: Report of the PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident Figure 26: Challenger
Report http://history.nasa.gov/rogersrep/vlp69.htm



     In this ﬁgure the observer’s eye point origin is positioned to the rear of the Shuttle vehicle
looking forward along the X-axis in the vehicle’s forward direction of travel. Relative to the
observer’s frame of reference, the SRB on the left is designated as LEFT and the other as RIGHT.
     Now observe that the LEFT and RIGHT SRBs each employ an angular displacement system to
reference speciﬁc locations about their principal axis. Note the location of the respective 0°/360° ref-
erence marks when the SRBs are attached and integrated on opposite sides. Conﬁguration orienta-
tion diagrams such as this are developed by SEs in collaboration with subject matter experts (SMEs)
and are critical to design decision making.


45.5 OTHER EXAMPLES OF ORIENTATION CONVENTIONS

Brieﬂy, other examples of engineering conventions include the following:
      • When viewing some integrated circuit (IC) devices with the notch at the top and pins on the
        left and right sides, Pin 1 is located in the upper left corner; the remaining pins are num-
        bered counterclockwise from Pin 1 with the last ID assigned to the pin in the upper right
        corner. If a notch is not present, Pin 1 is noted by a small dot printed on the device or
        impressed into the body of the chip next to the Pin 1 location.
                                                                                45.6 Standard Atmospheres      557

     • Doors are designated as left-hand or right-hand as viewed by an observer. When an observer
       approaches a door, right-handed doors have the knob on the RIGHT side, open toward the
       observer, and swing to their LEFT; left-handed doors have the knob on the LEFT side, open
       toward the observer, and swing to their RIGHT. Special considerations may have to be given
       to “inswing” or “outswing”.
     • Mission Event Timelines (METs) include events that must be referenced to a common point of
       reference in time. Thus designations such as T0, T1, T2, etc., or t0, t1, t2, etc., are established.
The bottom line is: SEs must analyze their systems to identify areas that may require conventions
for identiﬁcation and interfacing components to avoid confusion and safety issues.

45.6 STANDARD ATMOSPHERES

Systems and products interact with other external systems in their OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
under a variety of NATURAL and INDUCED ENVIRONMENT conditions. As part of the problem
space and solution space deﬁnitions, SEs and others have to make ASSUMPTIONS that charac-
terize and bound OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
     Adding to the complexity of these assumptions is the fact that NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
conditions vary throughout the day, month, year, and world. So, how to we standardize to support
informed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT decision making? The answer resides in creating the Stan-
dard Atmosphere.
     Scientists express the Standard Atmosphere via models that describe the interrelationships
among air temperature, density, and pressure as a function of time of day, month, and geographi-
cal region location. Figure 45.9 serves as an example.
                                   Temperature
                                    Temperature

                                                  Pressure
                                                   Pressure




Figure 45.9 Graphical plot of Standard Atmosphere—Altitude, Pressure, and Temperature
Source: Climate Research Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego,
CA based on Smithsonian Meteorological Tables, 6E, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, 1966
558    Chapter 45   Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions

   Standard atmosphere models and tables for geographical locations are available from govern-
ment organizations such as the US National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).

45.7 APPLYING ENGINEERING STANDARDS
AND CONVENTIONS TO PROGRAMS

As a lead on a contract development effort program, SEs must ensure that all applicable standards
and conventions used on the program are well documented and explicitly communicated and well
understood by all program personnel. So, how are these documented?
     Standards and conventions are documented via speciﬁcations, plans, design documents, Inter-
face Requirements Speciﬁcations (IRS), Interface Control Documents (ICD), and so forth. To under-
stand some of the types of information that have to be communicated across these interfaces to
achieve interoperability, consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 45.1
• Weights and measures
• Coordinate system frame of reference
• Computational precision and accuracy
• Base number systems
• Units of conversion
• Calibration standards
• Engineering standards sources
• Documentation guidelines, standards, and conventions
• Data communications standards

Finally, establish an ofﬁcial list of program acronyms and deﬁnitions of key terms. Some people
refer to this as “languaging” the program. Although this simple task seems trivial, it will save many
hours of personnel thrashing about, each with different views of the terms. People need to share a
common mindset of terminology.

45.8 ENGINEERING STANDARDS AND
CONVENTIONS LESSONS LEARNED

Engineering standards and conventions involve a number of application and implementation lessons
learned. Let’s explore some of the more common lessons learned.

Lesson Learned 1: Tailoring Organizational Standards
Organizational standards are established to accommodate a wide variety of system applications.
Since every system is different, the standards must include tailoring instructions guidance for apply-
ing the standard to a program.

Lesson Learned 2: Organizational Standards
as Contract Requirements
When organizational standards are unavailable to Offerors for a formal Request for Proposal (RFP)
solicitation or contract, the Acquirer must ensure that each Offeror is provided a copy or access to
a copy during normal business hours.
                                   45.8 Engineering Standards and Conventions Lessons Learned     559

Lesson Learned 3: Program Standards
and Conventions Document
A common problem related to standards implementation is failure to deﬁne the standards to be used
in developing system or item interfaces, coordinate transformations, and software coding. There-
fore, SEs should establish, baseline, and release an Engineering Standards and Conventions doc-
ument for application on each program.

Lesson Learned 4: Conﬂicts between Standards
Occasionally, conﬂicts occur within and between engineering standards. Standards organizations
work to ensure that conﬂicts are avoided. If, as an Acquirer, you mandate that a system, product,
or service meet speciﬁc standards, make sure speciﬁcation requirements do not conﬂict.

Lesson Learned 5: Scope of Requirements
From an SE perspective, standards are often written for broader application to a variety of busi-
ness domains. As an SE, your role is collaborate with subject matter experts (SMEs) to ensure that
the explicit provisions of the standard that are applicable to a contract or system development effort
are identiﬁed by paragraph number. This avoids confusion and unnecessary veriﬁcation expenses
ferreting out WHAT IS and IS NOT applicable.

Lesson Learned 6: Application of Standards Use
When proposing or developing new systems, Acquirer SEs should ensure that all standards refer-
enced in procurement packages or speciﬁcations are the most current, approved, released version
of the document. Likewise, System Developer SEs, via contract protocols, should request the
Acquirer to CLARIFY broad references such as “ANSI-STD-XXXX shall apply” via speciﬁc
requirements such as “ANSI-STD-XXXX- (version) para. x.x.x shall apply.”

Lesson Learned 7: Assumptions About Conventions
One of the challenges SEs face is making assumptions about performance boundary conditions and
conventions. Inevitably, people assume everyone understands to use the XYZ convention. ALWAYS
document the conventions in project memorandums to be used; leave nothing to chance! Every
technical review should include a technical description of conventions such as a graphic, where
applicable, that ensures consistency and completeness of SE design activities.

Lesson Learned 8: Coordinate System Transformations
Our discussions included a focus on designating a coordinate system for a free body such as an air
vehicle. Aircraft, especially military aircraft, serve as a platform for other payload systems such as
sensors and missile systems. Just because the aircraft might use a right-handed Cartesian coordi-
nate system with the Z-axis pointing downward does not mean interfacing components will also.
     If a payload is developed for a speciﬁc aircraft, it makes sense to establish compatible co-
ordinate systems. However, what happens if a decision is made to add a payload to an air vehicle
that uses a different coordinate system. You have a challenge.
     Where the coordinate systems of interfacing systems are different, developers perform coor-
dinate transformations from one system to another. This requires additional processing resources
and consumes valuable time: you may not have a choice. In any case, ALWAYS create a simple
diagram that illustrates the coordinate systems used and standardize across the program WHAT
methods will be employed to perform the coordinate transformations. Establish which interfacing
system is required to perform the coordinate transformation in the respective speciﬁcation.
560     Chapter 45   Engineering Standards, Frames of Reference, and Conventions

Lesson Learned 9: Standard Terminology
Successful system design and development requires that everyone on the program have a common
vision and mindset and communicate in a language that is consistent and mutually understood by
everyone. This requires establishing terminology and acronyms for universal application through-
out all documentation.
     Suggestions to establish standard terminologies are usually met with disparaging remarks about
how terms are intuitively obvious are to smart people. Then, when the program encounters major
team-based work scope issues or interpretations caused by failures in application of terminology,
everyone suddenly has one of those “why didn’t we think of this sooner” responses. How do you
avoid this?
     The System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT) must:
      1. Establish and be the “keeper” of standard terms, deﬁnitions, and acronyms.
      2. Make the list readily accessible via on-line network drives or Web sites.
      3. Communicate updates to everyone on the program.
      4. Ensure compliance across all documentation.

45.9 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern engineering standards and conventions practices.

Principle 45.1 Engineering standards and conventions are crucial for decision making, com-
munications, and documentation. Neglect them and they will become high risk; nurture them and
they will guide your path toward success.

Principle 45.2 Each interface should be speciﬁed in one and only one ofﬁcial document that is
baselined and controlled by the interface owner.


45.10 SUMMARY

Our discussions of engineering standards, frames of reference, and conventions highlighted the need to estab-
lish corporate, national, and international standards for guiding the system development effort. We introduced
the meanings of normative and informative clauses and how they were to be implemented.
      We also highlighted the need to establish interface standards and conventions such as inertial frames of
reference, English (BES) versus metrics (SI) systems, and coding guidelines to guide development work.
      You may say, “Look, we do not develop free body air vehicles. Why should we bother with considera-
tions with coordinate systems?” The examples discussed above were used to illustrate some of the complex-
ities of coordinate systems. Similar concepts are employed for designing and using numerical control
machines, aligning sensors and optical devices, land surveying, and so forth.
      • Each program must establish and communicate a set of conventions for application to system conﬁg-
        uration and interface applications, engineering design processes and methods, and work products.
      • Each program must conduct periodic assessments of engineering standards compliance and review
        engineering standards and conventions compliance as a key element of all technical reviews.
                                                                                           Additional Reading        561

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter question identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this section’s topical dis-
   cussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) What frame of reference would you apply to the MISSION SYSTEM?
   (b) What conventions are applicable to this system?
   (c) What are some examples of standards that are applicable to the development of this system or product?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Investigate several contract programs within your organization.
   (a) Identify the engineering standards and conventions required by contract and others used voluntarily.
   (b) Identify what types of physical measurement systems are used.
   (c) If the system or product employs navigational systems or dimensional frame of reference, deﬁne the
       system that is used.
   (d) Report your ﬁndings and observations.
2. Research the library or Internet for examples of other frame of reference systems that are used and iden-
   tify the MISSION SYSTEM where used.
3. For Item 2 above, identify historical instances where the lack of engineering standards and conventions or
   the misapplication contributed to system or product failures.


REFERENCES

ANSI/EIA 632-1999. 1999. Processes for Engineering a             Statements. NASA, Ofﬁce of Procurement. Washington,
  System. Electronic Industries Alliance (EIA). Arlington,       DC.
  VA.                                                          Taylor, Barry N., ed. 2001. The International System of
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.                 Units (SI). National Institute of Standards and Technol-
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms,              ogy (NIST) Special Publication 330. Washington, DC.
  10th ed. Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir,   TAYLOR, BARRY N., ed. 1995. Guide for the Use of the Inter-
  VA.                                                            national System of Units, National Institute of Standards
NPG 5600.2B NASA Procedures and Guidelines. 1997.                and Technology (NIST) special publication 811, Wash-
  Statement of Work (SOW): Guidance for Writing Work             ington, DC.


ADDITIONAL READING

American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards.        IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)                of Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of
  standards.                                                     Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), New York,
DoD 5000.59-M. 1998. DoD Modeling and Simulation                 NY.
  (M&S) Glossary. Washington, DC: Department of                National Space Transportation System (NSTS) 1988 News
  Defense (DoD).                                                 Reference Manual. Kennedy Space Center (KSC), FL.
G-003A-1996. 1996. AIAA Guide to Reference and Standard        National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
  Atmosphere Models. American Institute of Aeronautics           National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),
  and Astronautics (AIAA). Reston, VA.                           and the US Air Force. 1976. U.S. Standard Atmosphere.
IEEE Std 610.3-1989. 1989. IEEE Standard Glossary of             Washington, DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce.
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-      1987. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. Boca Raton, FL:
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), New York, NY.          CRC Press. 85th edition, 2004, David R. Lide (editor).
Chapter              46

      System Design and
      Development Documentation

46.1 INTRODUCTION

When a program is proposed and implemented, there are several key questions SEs need to be able
to answer.
      1. What is the minimum level of documentation required to design and develop a system?
      2. What documentation is required to be delivered and when?
      3. What other nondeliverable documentation do we need to produce?
      4. What level of formality and detail are required?
      5. WHAT design data are required to perform the job, WHO owns it, WHAT are the risks in
         obtaining it, and if we get it, is it accurate, valid, and under CM control?
These questions have answers that range from simple to very challenging, especially for docu-
mentation owned by other organizations.
     This section explores the types of documentation produced for most system design and devel-
opment programs. Our discussions introduce key contracting terms such as CDRLs, DAL, and DCL
and describe each one and its relationship to the overall system development contract. We identify
four types of document classiﬁcations such as plans, speciﬁcations, design, and test documentation
and provide a graphical schedule of their release points.
     The discussions provide commonly used rules for developing SE and development documen-
tation. We emphasize the importance and criticality of assessing documentation for export control
of sensitive data and technology. Our ﬁnal discussion topic identiﬁes several types of documenta-
tion issues SEs need to be prepared to address.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What is a Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL)?
       2. What is the nominal sequencing and release of SE documentation?
       3. What is a Subcontract Data Requirements List (SDRL)?
       4. What is a Data Item Description (DID)?
       5. What is a Data Accession List (DAL)?
       6. What is a Data Criteria List (DCL)?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

562
                                                                              46.1 Introduction   563

   7. What are product data?
   8. What are product description data?
   9. What are product design data?
  10. What are product support data?
  11. What is the difference between approved data and released data?
  12. What mechanisms are used to ofﬁcially release SE documentation?
  13. How should data exchanges between organizations be performed?
  14. Why is it important to be sensitive to Export Control?


Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Authorized Access A formal approval issued by an Acquirer or program organization sig-
    nifying that an internal or external individual or organization with a NEED TO KNOW is
    authorized for limited access rights to speciﬁc types of data for a constrained period of time
    subject to handling and control procedures established by the contract or program.
  • Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) An attachment to a contract that identiﬁes a
    list of documents to be delivered under the Terms and Conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract.
    Each CDRL item should reference delivery instructions including: 1) when the documents
    are to be delivered; 2) outline, format, and media to be used; 3) to whom and in what quan-
    tities; 4) level of maturity such as outline, draft, and ﬁnal; 5) requirements for corrective
    action; and 6) approvals.
  • Data Accession List (DAL) “An index of data that may be available for request.” (Source:
    DID DI-MGMT-81453, para. 3.1)
  • Design Criteria List (DCL) A listing of design data that characterize the capabilities and
    performance of an external system or entity that serves as an interfacing element or model
    for emulation or simulation.
  • Engineering Release Record “A record used to release conﬁguration documentation.”
    (Source: MIL-STD-973 [Canceled] Conﬁguration Management, para. 3.38)
  • Released Data “(1) Data that has been released after review and internal approvals. (2) Data
    that has been provided to others outside the originating group or team for use (as opposed
    to for comment).” (Source: ANSI/EIA 649-1998, para. 3.0, p. 6)
  • Subcontract Data Requirements List (SDRL) A listing of data deliverables required by a
    subcontract. See CDRL above.
  • Technical Data “Technical data is recorded information (regardless of the form or method
    of recording) of a scientiﬁc or technical nature (including computer software documentation)
    relating to supplies procured by an agency. Technical data does not include computer soft-
    ware or ﬁnancial, administrative, cost or pricing, or management data or other information
    incidental to contract administration. . . .” (Source: Former MIL-STD-973 [Canceled], Con-
    ﬁguration Management, para. 3.87)
  • Technical Data Package “A technical description that is adequate to support acquisition of
    an item, including engineering, production, and logistic support. The technical description
    deﬁnes the design conﬁguration and procedures required to ensure adequacy of item perform-
    ance. It consists of all applicable technical data, such as engineering drawings, associated lists,
    product and process speciﬁcations and standards, performance requirements, quality assurance
    provisions, and packaging details.” (Source: MIL-HBDK-59B [Canceled], p. 57)
564     Chapter 46   System Design and Development Documentation

      • Working Data “Data that have not been reviewed or released; any data that are currently
        controlled solely by the originator including new versions of data that were released, sub-
        mitted, or approved.” (Source: ANSI/EIA-649-1998, para. 3.0 Deﬁnitions, p. 7)

Quality System and Engineering Data Records
System development, as an incremental decision-making process, requires that technical speciﬁca-
tions, plans, design documentation, test procedures, and test results be documented for deliverables
and decision making, and be archived for historical purposes. The integrity of the documentation
data require veriﬁcation and validation reviews to ensure accuracy, preciseness, consistency, and
completeness.
     For ISO 9001-based Quality Systems, each step of the documentation process produces data
records that serve as objective evidence to demonstrate that you accomplished WHAT you planned
to do. When you plan your technical program, plan for, create, and capture data records.
     Based on this introduction, let’s begin with a high-level perspective on documentation pro-
duced by a program.

46.2 SYSTEM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT DATA

System data consists of ﬁve basic types:
      1. Contract deliverable data.
      2. Subcontract, vendor, supplier required data.
      3. Operation and support data.
      4. Working data.
      5. Local command media required data.
      6. Personal engineering data records.
Let’s explore each of these further.

Contract Deliverable Data
The Acquirer of a SYSTEM levies documentation requirements on a System Developer via Terms
and Conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract. Organizations issue contracts containing a Contract Data
Requirements List (CDRL) which identify speciﬁc documents to be delivered throughout the
contract.

CDRL Items. CDRL item numbers specify deliver instructions on a CDRL item form. Each CDRL
Item form identiﬁes the CDRL item number, documentation formats, and conditions for submittal,
submittal dates, and distribution lists.

Data Item Descriptions (DIDs). Most contracts require CDRLs to be delivered in a speciﬁc
format. The DoD, for example, employs Data Item Descriptions (DIDs) that provide preparation
instructions regarding the deliverable document’s outline and contents.

Subcontractor, Vendor, and Supplier Data
Acquirers (role) levy data requirements on contractors via the contract. These data apply to:
      1. Conﬁguration items (CIs) and items such as commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) items and
         nondevelopmental items (NDIs) procured under subcontract.
                                                    46.2 System Design and Development Data      565

    2. Certiﬁcates of Compliance (C of C) for purchased items.
    3. Design and management reporting data to support SE design activities.
Subcontracts include a Subcontract Data Requirements List (SDRL) that identiﬁes the set of data
deliverables. In some cases, the System Developer may ﬂow down CDRL requirements via the
SDRL to subcontractors or extract speciﬁc CDRL requirements and incorporate into SDRLS to
provide inputs to support System Developer CDRL documents.
     Vendor and supplier deliverables and data are often procured as part of a purchase order, for
example. The order may require the vendor to supply a Certiﬁcate of Compliance (C of C) certi-
fying that the delivered item meets or exceeds the vendor or supplier’s product speciﬁcation
requirements.

Operations and Support (O&S) Data
Operations and support data consist of the data required to operate and maintain the system,
product, or service. Examples include technical manuals and Standard Operating Practices and
Procedures (SOPPs). O&S data for a system may be delivered as part of the System Developer’s
contract, support contract, or developed internally by the User.

Working Data
Working data represent data such as analyses, trade studies, modeling and simulation results, test
data, technical decisions and rationale generated during the course of designing and developing the
system. Unless these data are explicitly identiﬁed as CDRL items under the Ts&Cs of the contract,
they are for internal usage by the System Developer’s personnel.
     Occasionally the Acquirer may request the opportunity to view these data on the System Devel-
oper’s premises with the understanding they are not deliverables. This is accommodated via the
Data Accession List (DAL) discussed later.

Local Command Media Data Requirements
Another type of system development data are work products required by local command media—
the policies, processes, and procedures. Data required by local command media may include plans,
brieﬁngs, drawings, wiring lists, analyses, reports, models, and simulations. Unless speciﬁed by the
CDRL or SDRL, these data are considered to be non-deliverables.
     You may ask: If a document is not required by contract, WHY consume resources producing
it? In general, the answer is organizations that possess levels of capability in SE know and under-
stand that speciﬁc data—such as plans, speciﬁcations, and test procedures—are crucial for success,
regardless of CDRL or SDRL data requirements. CDRL and SDRL data requirements may be inad-
vertently overlooked during the formal solicitation process or, as is often the case, the Acquirer
decides not to procure the data. If you determine that speciﬁc data items are missing during the
formal Request for Proposal (RFP) solicitation process, confer with the proposal leader regarding
how to address the missing items.

Personal Engineering Data Records
The ﬁnal type of SE data includes personal data records as part of their normal tasking. Personal
data records should be maintained in an engineering notebook or computer-based analogy. Personal
data include plans, schedules, analyses, sketches, reports, meeting minutes, action items, tests con-
ducted, and test results. These data types are summarized in technical reports and progress and
status reports.
566     Chapter 46   System Design and Development Documentation

46.3 DESIGN CRITERIA LIST (DCL) AND
DATA ACCESSION LIST (DAL)

Contracts and subcontracts often require two types of documentation as part of the CDRL or SDRL
deliveries:
      1. Data Accession List (DAL)
      2. Design Criteria List (DCL)
Let’s describe each of these documents.

Data Accession List (DAL)
The development of most systems and products involves two types of documentation: deliverable
data and nondeliverable data. An Acquirer (role) speciﬁes and negotiates the documentation to be
delivered as part of the contract delivery work products. During the course of the contract, the
System Developer or subcontractor may produce additional documentation that is not part of the
contract but may be needed later by the Acquirer or User.
     Where this is the case, Acquirer (role) contracts often require the System Developer (role) to
prepare and maintain a Data Accession List (DAL) that lists all documentation produced under the
contract for deliverables and nondeliverables. This enables the Acquirer to determine if additional
data are available for procurement to support system maintenance. If so, the Acquirer may negoti-
ate with the contractor or subcontractor and modify the original contract to procure that data.
     Each contract or subcontract should include a requirement for a System Developer to provide
a Data Accession List (DAL) as a CDRL/SDRL item to identify all CDRL and nondeliverable
documentation produced under the contract for review and an opportunity to procure the data at a
later date.

Design Criteria List (DCL)
Systems, products, and services are often required to be integrated into HIGHER ORDER systems.
For physical systems, interoperable interfaces or models are CRUCIAL. For simulations and emula-
tions, each model must provide the precise form, ﬁt, and function of the simulated or emulated device.
      In each of these cases, the physical system, model, simulation, or emulation must comply with
speciﬁc design criteria. Source data authentication, veriﬁcation, and validation are critical to ensure
the integrity of the SE decision-making efforts.
      How do you identify the design data that will be required to support the SE design effort? The
process of procuring this data begins with a Design Criteria List (DCL). The DCL is developed
and evolves to identify speciﬁc design documents required to support the system development
effort. Generally, SEs and Integrated Product Teams (IPTs) are responsible for submitting a detailed
list of items and attributes—such as title, document ID—to the Data Manager for acquisition. On
receipt, the Data Manager:
      1. Forwards the documents to Conﬁguration Management for processing and archival storage.
      2. NOTIFIES the design data requestors regarding RECEIPT of the documents.
Each contract or subcontract should require publication of a Design Criteria List (DCL) by the
System Developer identifying speciﬁc documentation sources.

Guidepost 46.1 This concludes our overview on types of contract and subcontract SE data.
Let’s shift our focus to SE and Development Documentation Sequencing.
                                                                         46.4 SE and Development Documentation Sequencing                                 567

46.4 SE AND DEVELOPMENT
DOCUMENTATION SEQUENCING

One of the challenges for SEs is determining WHEN various documents should be prepared,
reviewed, approved, baselined, and released. Although every contract and program requirements
vary by Acquirer, there are some general schedules that can be used to prepare SE and develop-
ment documentation. In general, we can categorize most SE documentation into four classes:
        • Planning documentation
        • Speciﬁcation documentation
        • System design documentation
        • Test documentation

Planning Documentation
Figure 46.1 illustrates a basic schedule as general guidance for preparing and releasing various
types of technical plans. These documents include:
        1. Key technical management plans (TMPs) such as hardware development plans, software
           development plans, conﬁguration and data management plans, and risk management plans.
        2. Supporting technical plans such as system safety plans, manufacturing plans, and system
           support plans.
        3. Test plans such as system integration, test, and veriﬁcation plans and hardware and soft-
           ware test plans.




                                                                                                                        FCA/
 RFP              Contract                    HSR                                                                       PCA    Install & C.O.
Release            Award       SRR        SDR /SSR PDR             CDR                                     TRRs      SVT    SVR        VAL Accept
                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                         Component Procurement          System Integration,     Deployment
      System                        SE Design Segment
                                                                         & Development Segment         Test, & Eval. Segment     Segment
 Procurement Phase
                                                                          System Development Phase
            System Requirements              Allocated                                                                               Product
                  Baseline                   Baseline                                                                                Baseline
                             Reviewed,
                 Negotiated
                            Approved, &
  RFP        Submitted       Baselined           Revisions, Deviations, & Waivers via Formal Contract Modifications


                                      KeyTechnical
                                     Key            ManagementPlans
                                          TechnicalManagement  Plans(System,
                                                                     (System,HDP,
                                                                              HDP,SDP,  CM&&DM,
                                                                                   SDP,CM    DM,etetal)
                                                                                                     al)

                                      Reviewed,
                                     Approved, &
 RFP         Submitted                Baselined                        Revisions via formal Change Management Procedures

          Optional                          Supporting Technical Plans (System Safety, Manufacturing, Support, et al plans)
                                             Supporting Technical Plans (System Safety, Manufacturing, Support, et al plans)
                                             Reviewed,
                                            Approved, &
                                             Baselined                 Revisions via formal Change Management Procedures


                                                                             TestPlans
                                                                            Test        (SITV,Hardware,
                                                                                  Plans(SITV,            Software,etc.)
                                                                                               Hardware,Software,  etc.)
        Where:   CA      Contract Award                      HDP       Hardware Development Plan        SDP    Software Development Plan
                 CDR     Critical Design Review              HSR       Hardware Specification Review    SDR    System Design Review
                 C.O.    Checkout                            Install   Installation                     SITV   System Integration, Test, & Verification
                 CMP     Configuration Management Plan       PCA       Physical Configuration Audit     SSR    Software Specification Review
                 CMP     Data Management Plan                PDR       Preliminary Design Review        SVT    System Verification Test
                 FCA     Functional Configuration Audit      RFP       Request for Proposal             TRR    Test Readiness Review                  1
Figure 46.1 Planning Documentation Development
568       Chapter 46           System Design and Development Documentation

                                                                                                                           FCA/
 RFP              Contract                   HSR                                                                           PCA    Install & C.O.
Release            Award        SRR      SDR /SSR PDR                 CDR                                     TRRs      SVT    SVR        VAL Accept
                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                             Component Procurement         System Integration,     Deployment
      System                        SE Design Segment
                                                                             & Development Segment        Test, & Eval. Segment     Segment
 Procurement Phase
                                                                              System Development Phase
            System Requirements               Allocated                                                                               Product
                  Baseline                    Baseline                                                                                Baseline
                            Reviewed,
                Negotiated
                           Approved, &
  RFP        Submitted      Baselined            Revisions, Deviations, & Waivers via Formal Contract Modifications


                                                           SystemPerformance
                                                          System              Specification(SPS)
                                                                  PerformanceSpecification  (SPS)

                                       Reviewed,
                                      Approved, &
 RFP         Submitted                 Baselined                          Revisions via formal Change Management Procedures

          Optional                                                  PRODUCT/SUBSYSTEM
                                                                     PRODUCT/SUBSYSTEMSpecifications
                                                                                       Specifications

                                              Reviewed,
                                             Approved, &
                                              Baselined                   Revisions via formal Change Management Procedures

                                                                          HWCI/CSCI Requirements Specifications (HRS/SRS)
                                                                           HWCI/CSCI Requirements Specifications (HRS/SRS)
        Where:   CA      Contract Award                         Install    Installation                    SSR   Software Specification Review
                 CDR     Critical Design Review                 PCA        Physical Configuration Audit    SVT   System Verification Test
                 C.O.    Checkout                               PDR        Preliminary Design Review       TRR   Test Readiness Review
                 FCA     Functional Configuration Audit         RFP        Request for Proposal
                 HSR     Hardware Specification Review          SDR        System Design Review

Figure 46.2 Speciﬁcation Documentation Development




Speciﬁcation Documentation
Figure 46.2 illustrates a basic schedule as general guidance for preparing and releasing various
types of speciﬁcations. These documents include:
        1. System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
        2. PRODUCT/SUBSYSTEM Development Speciﬁcations
        3. HWCI/CSCI Requirements Speciﬁcations (HRS/SRS)

System Design Documentation
Figure 46.3 illustrates a basic schedule as general guidance for preparing and releasing various
types of technical documentation. These documents include:
        1. Concept of Operations (ConOps)
        2. System/Segment Design Description (SSDD)
        3. Interface Control Documents (ICDs) and drawings for hardware items
        4. Interface Design Description (IDD) for software items
        5. Software Design Description (SDD)
        6. Database Design Description (DBDD)

Test Documentation
Figure 46.4 illustrates a basic schedule as general guidance for preparing and releasing test docu-
mentation. These documents include various levels of test procedures and test quality records.
                                                                                                   46.5 Documentation Levels of Formality                    569

                                                                                                                                 FCA/
  RFP            Contract                    HSR                                                                                 PCA    Install & C.O.
 Release          Award       SRR        SDR /SSR PDR                 CDR                                           TRRs      SVT    SVR        VAL Accept
                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                            Component Procurement                System Integration,     Deployment
      System                      SE Design Segment
                                                                            & Development Segment               Test, & Eval. Segment     Segment
 Procurement Phase
                                                                             System Development Phase
           System Requirements              Allocated                                                                                       Product
                 Baseline                   Baseline                                                                                        Baseline
                                     Reviewed,
                    Draft Submitted Approved, &
                   Initiated         Baselined                                         Revisions via Formal Change Management Procedures

     Preliminary                                                           ConceptofofOperations
                                                                          Concept      Operations(ConOps)
                                                                                                  (ConOps)

                                                                   Reviewed,
                                                      Draft       Approved, &
                                        Initiated   Submitted      Baselined           Revisions via Formal Change Management Procedures

                         Preliminary                                         System/SegmentDesign
                                                                            System/Segment         Description(SSDD)
                                                                                            DesignDescription  (SSDD)

                                                                    Reviewed,
                                                      Draft        Approved, &
                                        Initiated   Submitted       Baselined        Revisions via Formal Change Management Procedures


                                                                                              DesignDescriptions
                                                                                             Design   Descriptions
                                                                                       InterfaceControl
                                                                                  • •Interface           Documents(ICDs)
                                                                                                 ControlDocuments    (ICDs)
                         Preliminary                                                  InterfaceDesign
                                                                                  • •Interface          Descriptions(IDDs)
                                                                                                 DesignDescriptions   (IDDs)
                                                                                      Software Design Descriptions(SDDs)
                                                                                 • •Software   Design  Descriptions  (SDDs)
                                                                               • •Database    Design  Descriptions (DBDDs)
                                                                                    Database Design Descriptions (DBDDs)                               3
Figure 46.3 System Design Documentation Development

                                                                                                                                 FCA/
  RFP            Contract                    HSR                                                                                 PCA    Install & C.O.
 Release          Award       SRR        SDR /SSR PDR                 CDR                                           TRRs      SVT    SVR        VAL Accept
                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                            Component Procurement                System Integration,     Deployment
      System                      SE Design Segment
                                                                            & Development Segment               Test, & Eval. Segment     Segment
 Procurement Phase
                                                                             System Development Phase

                                                                                                                                     Product
                            System
                                                                                                                                     Baseline
                         Requirements
                           Baseline                                                                       Reviewed,
                                                                Draft Reviewed                           Approved, &    Revisions via Formal Change
                                     Allocated              Initiated                                     Baselined       Management Procedures
                                     Baseline

                                                        Prelim.                                             TestProcedures
                                                                                                           Test  Procedures




      Where:    CA     Contract Award                           Install   Installation                           SSR   Software Specification Review
                CDR    Critical Design Review                   PCA       Physical Configuration Audit           SVT   System Verification Test
                C.O.   Checkout                                 PDR       Preliminary Design Review              TRR   Test Readiness Review
                FCA    Functional Configuration Audit           RFP       Request for Proposal
                HSR    Hardware Specification Review            SDR       System Design Review

Figure 46.4 Test Procedures Documentation Development


46.5 DOCUMENTATION LEVELS OF FORMALITY

Most people despise preparing documentation. The general viewpoint is documentation is non-
value-added bureaucracy. Engineers, in particular, rationalize that if they had wanted to specialize
in documentation, they would have pursued it as a course of study in college. This viewpoint is
contradictory to an engineering development environment that is so dependent on documented data
maturity for decision making.
570     Chapter 46   System Design and Development Documentation

      SE development documentation involves two key decisions:
      1. WHAT must be documented?
      2. To WHAT DEGREE do you document the details?
The previous discussions addressed WHAT you should document. Let’s explore the second point
further.

Level of Details
If you ask engineers to prepare a document, they lament about having an impossible task, regard-
less of timeframe to complete. The knowledge and maturity of a professional is reﬂected in the
individual’s ability to sift rapidly through a large amount of data, identify the key points, and artic-
ulate the results in summary form. In general, if a manager allows you one hour, both parties must
recognize that at the end the hour, you get the one-hour version of the report. Eight hours gets the
manager the eight-hour version—an elaboration of details to key points expressed in the one-hour
version.
     When you document plans, speciﬁcations, and reports, there are key points relevant to the
subject that must be reﬂected in the document outline. These points, in turn, require various levels
of details. The key points are:
      1. Engineers need to learn to identify WHAT information (i.e., major points) is required to be
         communicated.
      2. Apply common sense to scale the level of detail to ﬁt the available time and resources.

Key Point If you have addressed the critical points, anything else should be just supporting
detail. The ability to scale these levels of detail and still address the key points depends on per-
sonal knowledge, experience and seasoned maturity.

Guidepost 46.2 The preceding discussions highlight some of the key SE documentation con-
cepts. Our last topic addresses some of the issues related to release of SE documentation to author-
ized recipients and the media used to do so.


46.6 EXPORT CONTROL OF SENSITIVE DATA
AND TECHNOLOGY

Today the Internet provides a mechanism for immediate data communications and access between
organizations in-country as well as internationally. As a result, the Internet offers tremendous oppor-
tunities for contract programs to exploit the technology by establishing Web sites that enable author-
ized organizations and individuals who are geographically dispersed to post and access technical
program information. This environment, when uncontrolled, however, adds new dimensions and
threats to information access.
     People often confuse EXPORT CONTROL information with security classiﬁcation systems.
Although both are certainly interrelated, EXPORT CONTROL information may be sensitive but
unclassiﬁed. Classiﬁed data handling and procedures are yet another issue.

Export Control of Technology
Many people erroneously believe that a technology or information export to a foreign national,
organization, or country occurs when that information is physically transferred outside the country.
                                                            46.7 System Documentation Issues    571

The fact is technology transfer also occurs in-country with foreign nationals, whether direct or via
the Internet. Technology transfer is governed in the United States by EXPORT CONTROL laws
and regulations such as the International Trafﬁc and Arms Regulations (ITAR). So, what does this
mean to SE?
     If you:
    1. Post EXPORT CONTROL technology or information to an uncontrolled Web site.
    2. E-mail the information via the Internet.
    3. Simply give that information to foreign nationals, organizations, or governments without
       being licensed and taking reasonable measures to restrict access to only authorized users,
       you have violated the US ITARS governance.

Warning! ALWAYS consult with your organization’s EXPORT CONTROL Ofﬁcer and secu-
rity, legal, and contracts organizations before initiating an action that may violate EXPORT
CONTROL or security regulations and procedures.
     The US government and other countries have explicit laws and regulations that govern the
EXPORT of technology and data to foreign nationals, organizations, and countries. The laws carry
severe penalties for noncompliance.

46.7 SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION ISSUES

System documentation has a number of issues that SEs must address. Here are several issues that
commonly challenge many programs:
Issue 1:   Data validation and authentication
Issue 2:   Posting acquirer and vendor documentation
Issue 3:   Proprietary data and nondisclosure agreements
Issue 4:   Vendor-owned data
Issue 5:   Electronic signatures

Issue 1: Data Validation and Authentication
Since SE technical decision making is predicated on data integrity, the challenge is determining if
external and internal data are valid and authentic. This includes DCL items for models and simu-
lations, interfaces, and test data. Additionally, production contracts may require using SE docu-
mentation created by the original vendor. So, how do you determine the validity and authenticity
of the data?
     Data validity and authenticity require rigorous investigation, by inspection, sampled testing,
Functional Conﬁguration Audit (FCA), or Physical Conﬁguration Audit (PCA). Data integrity is
particularly troublesome when the original System Developer delivered the Product Baseline and
transferred CM control to the User via the Acquirer. The challenge is: Does the “As Maintained”
system or product reﬂect the “As Designed, Built, Veriﬁed, and Validated” SE conﬁgurations?

Issue 2: Posting Acquirer and Vendor Documentation
Many engineers erroneously believe that they can arbitrarily copy and post Acquirer and vendor
documentation on a program Web site. Although Acquirer solicitation and other data may be posted
for public access, DO NOT copy this material and POST it unless your organization has prior
written authorization from the Acquirer or Vendor. Posting creates conﬁguration management
572     Chapter 46   System Design and Development Documentation

control, proprietary, data concurrency, and copyright issues. If you need to provide program per-
sonnel access to this data, simply provide links from the program Web site to the Acquirer or vendor
Web site, assuming they approve. This avoids ownership, proprietary, concurrency, copyright, and
other issues.

Issue 3: Proprietary Data and Non-Disclosure Agreements
Finally, before any EXCHANGES of data can occur between any organization and the Acquirer,
User, subcontractors, and vendors, execute Proprietary Data Agreements and/or Nondisclosure
Agreements between the parties.

Referral ALWAYS consult with the Program Director and/or Technical Director as well as the
contracts, legal, and EXPORT CONTROL organizations for the proper procedures for:

      1. Communicating and exchanging data with external organizations.
      2. Establishing proprietary data agreements and/or nondisclosure agreements.

Issue 4: Vendor-Owned Data
When Acquirers procure a system, they are often willing to trade off documentation funds for
system capabilities, especially when they have limited budgets. Later, if they decide to procure
system upgrades that are dependent on these data, they shift the burden and risk of obtaining the
data to the System Developer. If the original developer and new System Developer are competi-
tors, this creates a very challenging problem for programs and SEs have to solve it.
     The challenge is one of cost and schedule. Programs inevitably underestimate the amount of
resources required to acquire documentation owned by other organizations. Thoroughly investigate
these issues during the proposal phase and establish data exchange agreements, terms, and condi-
tions prior to Contract Award. As an Acquirer, if you wait until after Contract Award, guess WHO
is in the POWER position to control the negotiation? The supplier is and you can rest assured the
procrastination will cost you signiﬁcantly!

Issue 5: Electronic Signatures
When implementing an integrated data environment IDE, one of the key issues is establishing a
secure method for SE documentation reviewers to electronically approve the documents. This
requires that “electronic signature” standards, methods, and tools be established to ensure that only
authorized approvers can review and release documentation for implementation.


46.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system engineering and development documentation practices.

Principle 46.1 Establish information protection guidelines; train personnel to implement them.

Principle 46.2 Every document cover and interior page must be marked in accordance with
program guidance including authorized recipients.
                                                                                  Additional Reading      573

46.9 SUMMARY

This concludes our overview discussion of System Engineering and Development Documentation Practices.
The checklists we described are examples of types of SE documentation that help Acquirer and System Devel-
oper roles develop their systems, products, and services.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) If you were the Acquirer of the system, what types of CDRL documents would require for the system
       design and development effort and why?
   (b) Rank-order SE design and development documentation in terms of signiﬁcance to the program.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media.
   (a) What types of program documentation do the command media require for programs of all sizes?
   (b) What does the command media say about the level of detail and formality?
   (c) What process is to be used to approve and release the documents?
2. Contact a small, a medium, and a large organization.
   (a) What types of deliverable documentation does each of the contracts require?
   (b) When are these documents to be delivered?
   (c) Are there document outline requirements? If not, what does your organization provide in terms of
       standard outlines?
   (d) Interview program personnel. What deliverable documents were valuable? Which ones were not?
   (e) Create a timeline indicating when the contract requires delivery of the documents? Include major
       technical review events (Contract Award, SRR, SDR, etc.).
   (f) Do any of the contracts have export control requirements?


REFERENCES

ANSI/EIA 646-1998. 1998. EIA Standard: National Con-   MIL-HDBK-59B (canceled). 1994. Continuous Acquisition
  sensus Standard for Conﬁguration Management. Elec-    and Life Cycle Support (CALS) Implementation Guide.
  tronic Industries Alliance. Arlington, VA.            Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
DID DI-MGMT-81453. 1995. Data Accession List           MIL-STD-973 (canceled). 2000. Military Standard: Conﬁg-
  (DAL), Washington, DC: Department of Defense          uration Management. Notice 4. Washington, DC: Depart-
  (DoD).                                                ment of Defense (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

MIL-HDBK-61. 1997. Military Handbook: Conﬁguration     DoD. US Government International Trafﬁc and Arms Reg-
 Management Guidance, Washington, DC: Department of      ulations (ITAR). Washington, DC: Department of Defense
 Defense (DoD).                                          (DoD).
Chapter              47

      Analytical Decision Support

47.1 INTRODUCTION

Earlier we deﬁned “engineering” as the application of mathematical and scientiﬁc principles. We
then expanded the scope of this deﬁnition for SE to include the application of analytical principles.
While you can debate for hours the implicit nature and relationship of “analysis” to applying math-
ematical and scientiﬁc principles, we expanded the scope of the deﬁnition and elevated the analyti-
cal aspects to address the hierarchical organization, decomposition, and bounding practices of SE.
     The realities are that SEs must be capable of analyzing:
      1. The User’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, its constituent opportunity space, problem
         space, and solution space elements, and relevance to speciﬁc SYSTEM missions and
         applications.
      2. A SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI), its capabilities, and performance.
      3. Interactions between the SOI and its prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
     This chapter introduces analytical decision support practices. Our discussions provide insights
into the analytical decision-making environment, factors affecting the decision-making process,
technical reporting of analytical results, and its challenges and issues.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is analytical decision support?
      2. What are the attributes of a technical decision?
      3. What is the SEs role in technical decision making?
      4. What is system performance evaluation and analysis?
      5. What types of engineering analyses are performed?
      6. How are engineering analyses documented?
      7. What format should be used for documenting engineering analyses?
      8. What are SE design and development rules for analytical decision making?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Analysis A structured investigation or examination using a proven methodology.
      • Analysis Paralysis A condition whereby an analyst becomes preoccupied or immersed in the
        details of an analysis while failing to recognize the marginal utility of continual investigation.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

574
                                                        47.3 Attributes of a Technical Decision   575

    • Effectiveness Analysis “An analytical approach used to determine how well a system per-
      forms in its intended utilization environment.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engi-
      neering, p. 448)
    • Sanity Check “An approximate calculation or estimation for comparison with a result
      obtained from a more complete and complex process. The differences in value should be rel-
      atively small; if not, the results of the original process are suspect and further analysis is
      required.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering, p. 453)
    • Suboptimization The preferential emphasis on the performance of a lower level entity at
      the expense of overall system performance.
    • System Optimization The act of adjusting the performance of individual elements of a
      system to peak the maximum performance that can be achieved by the integrated set for a
      given set of boundary conditions and constraints.

47.2 WHAT IS ANALYTICAL DECISION SUPPORT?

Before we begin our discussions of analytical decision support practices, we need to ﬁrst under-
stand the context and anatomy of a technical decision. Decision support is a technical services
response to a contract or task commitment to gather, analyze, clarify, investigate, recommend, and
present fact-based, objective evidence. This enables decision makers to SELECT a proper (best)
course of action from a set of viable alternatives bounded by speciﬁc constraints—cost, schedule,
technical, technology, and support—and acceptable level of risk.

Analytical Decision Support Objective
The primary objective of analytical decision support is to respond to tasking or the need for tech-
nical analysis, demonstration, and data collection recommendations to support informed SE Process
Model decision making.

Expected Outcome of Analytical Decision Support
Decision support work products are identiﬁed by task objectives. Work products and quality records
include analyses, trade study reports (TSRs), and performance data. In support of these work prod-
ucts, decision support develops operational prototypes and proof of concept or technology demon-
strations, models and simulations, and mock-ups to provide data for supporting the analysis.
     From a technical decision making perspective, decisions are substantiated by the facts of the
formal work products such as analyses and TSRs provided to the decision maker. The reality is that
the decision may have subconsciously been made by the decision maker long BEFORE the deliv-
ery of the formal work products for approval. This brings us to our next topic, attributes of tech-
nical decisions.


47.3 ATTRIBUTES OF A TECHNICAL DECISION

Every decision has several attributes you need to understand to be able to properly respond to the
task. The attributes you should understand are:
     1. WHAT is the central issue or problem to be addressed?
     2. WHAT is the scope of the task to be performed?
     3. WHAT are the boundary constraints for the solution set?
576     Chapter 47   Analytical Decision Support

       4. What is the degree of ﬂexibility in the constraints?
       5. Is the timing of the decision crucial?
       6. WHO is the user of the decision?
       7. HOW will the decision be used?
       8. WHAT criteria are to be used in making the decision?
       9. WHAT assumptions must be made to accomplish the decision?
      10. WHAT accuracy and precision is required for the decision?
      11. HOW is the decision is to be documented and delivered?

Scope the Problem to be Solved
Decisions represent approval of solutions intended to lead to actionable tasks that will resolve a
critical operational or technical or issue (COI/CTI). The analyst begins with understanding what:
      1. Problem is to be solved.
      2. Question is to be answered.
      3. Issue is to be resolved.
Therefore, begin with a CLEAR and SUCCINCT problem statement.

Referral For more information about writing problem statements, refer to Chapter 14 on Under-
standing The Problem, Opportunity, and Solution Spaces concept.

If you are tasked to solve a technical problem and are not provided a documented tasking
statement, discuss it with the decision authority. Active listening enables analysts to verify their
understanding of the tasking. Add corrections based on the discussion and return a courtesy
copy to the decision maker. Then, when brieﬁng the status of the task, ALWAYS include a restate-
ment of the task so ALL reviewers have a clear understanding of the analysis you were tasked to
perform.

Decision Boundary Condition Constraints and Flexibility
Technical decisions are bounded by cost, schedule, technology, and support constraints. In turn, the
constraints must be reconciled with an acceptable level of risk. Constraints sometimes are also
ﬂexible. Talk with the decision maker and assess the amount of ﬂexibility in the constraint. Docu-
ment the constraints and acceptable level of risk as part of the task statement.

Criticality of Timing of the Decision
Timing of decisions is CRUCIAL, not only from the perspective of the decision maker but also
that of the SE supporting the decision making. Be sensitive to the decision authority’s schedule and
the prevailing environment when the recommendations are presented. If the schedule is impracti-
cal, discuss it with the decision maker including level of risk.

Understand How the Decision Will Be Used and by Whom
Decisions often require approvals by multiple levels of organizational and customer stakeholder
decision makers. Avoid wasted effort trying to solve the wrong problem. Tactfully validate the deci-
sion problem statement by consensus of the stakeholders.
                                                             47.4 Types of Engineering Analyses     577

Document the Criteria for Decision Making
Once the problem statement is documented and the boundary constraints for the decision are estab-
lished, identify the threshold criteria that will be used to assess the success of the decision results.
Obtain stakeholder concurrence with the decision criteria. Make corrections as necessary to clarify
the criteria to avoid misinterpretation when the decision is presented for approval. If the decision
criteria are not documented “up front,” you may be subjected to the discretion of the decision maker
to determine when the task is complete.

Identify the Accuracy and Precision of the Analysis
Every technical decision involves data that have a level of accuracy and precision. Determine “up
front” what accuracy and precision will be required to support analytical results, and make sure
these are clearly communicated and understood by everyone participating. One of the worst things
analysts can do is discover after the fact that they need four-digit decimal data precision when they
only measured and recorded two-digit data. Some data collection exercises may not be repeatable
or practical. THINK and PLAN ahead: similar rules should be established for rounding data.

Author’s Note 47.1 As a reminder, two-digit precision data that require multiplication DO NOT
yield four-digit precision results; the best you can have is two-digit result due to the source data
precision.

Identify How the Decision Is to Be Delivered
Decisions need a point of closure or delivery. Identify what form and media the decision is to be
delivered: as a document, presentation, or both. In any case, make sure that your response is doc-
umented for the record via a cover letter or e-mail.

47.4 TYPES OF ENGINEERING ANALYSES

Engineering analyses cover a spectrum of disciplinary and specialty skills. The challenge for SEs
is to understand:
    1. WHAT analyses may be required.
    2. At WHAT level of detail.
    3. WHAT tools are best suited for various analytical applications.
    4. WHAT level of formality is required for documenting the results.
    To illustrate a few of the many analyses that might be conducted, here’s a sample list.
    • Mission operations and task analysis
    • Environmental analysis
    • Fault tree analysis (FTA)
    • Finite element analysis (FEA)
    • Mechanical analysis
    • Electromagnetic interference (EMI)/electromagnetic countermeasures (EMC) analysis
    • Optical analysis
    • Reliability, availability, and maintainability (RAM) analysis
    • Stress analysis
578     Chapter 47   Analytical Decision Support

      • Survivability analysis
      • Vulnerability analysis
      • Thermal analysis
      • Timing analysis
      • System latency analysis
      • Life cycle cost analysis

Guidepost 47.1 The application of various types of engineering analyses should focus on pro-
viding objective, fact-based data that support informed technical decision making. These results at
all levels aggregate into overall system performance that forms the basis of our next topic, system
performance evaluation and analysis.


47.5 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS

System performance evaluation and analysis is the investigation, study, and operational analysis of
actual or predicted system performance relative to planned or required performance as documented
in performance or item development speciﬁcations. The analysis process requires the planning, con-
ﬁguration, data collection, and post data analysis to thoroughly understand a system’s performance.

System Performance Analysis Tools and Methods
System performance evaluation and analysis employs a number of decision aid tools and methods
to collect data to support the analysis. These include models, simulations, prototypes, interviews,
surveys, and test markets.

Optimizing System Performance
System components at every level of abstraction inherently have statistical variations in physical
characteristics, reliability, and performance. Systems that involve humans involve statistical vari-
ability in knowledge and skill levels, and thus involve an element of uncertainty. The challenge
question for SEs is: WHAT combination of system conﬁgurations, conditions, human-machine tasks,
and associated levels of performance optimize system performance?
     System optimization is a term relative to the stakeholder. Optimization criteria reﬂect the appro-
priate balance of cost, schedule, technical, technology, and support performance or combination
thereof.

Author’s Note 47.2 We should note here that optimization is for the total system. Avoid a con-
dition referred to as suboptimization unless there is a compelling reason.

Suboptimization
Suboptimization is a condition that exists when one element of a system—the PRODUCT, SUB-
SYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, or PART level—is optimized at the expense of overall
system performance. During System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE), system items at each
level of abstraction may be optimized. Theoretically, if the item is designed correctly, optimal per-
formance occurs at the planned midpoint of any adjustment ranges.
     The underlying design philosophy here is that if the system is properly designed and compo-
nent statistical variations are validated, only minor adjustments may be required for an output to
                                                                  47.6 Engineering Analysis Reports      579

be centered about some hypothetical mean value. If the variations have not been taken into account
or design modiﬁcations have been made, the output may be “off-set” from the mean value but
within its operating range when “optimized.” Thus, at higher levels of integration, this off-nominal
condition may impact overall system performance, especially if further adjustments beyond the
components adjustment range are required.

The Danger of Analysis Paralysis
Analyses serve as a powerful tool for understanding, predicting, and communicating system per-
formance. Analyses, however, cost money and consume valuable resources. The challenge ques-
tion for SEs to consider is, How GOOD is good enough? At what level or point in time does an
analysis meet minimal sufﬁciency criteria to be considered valid for decision making? Since engi-
neers, by nature, tend to immerse themselves in analytics, we sometimes suffer from a condition
referred to as “analysis paralysis.” So, what is analysis paralysis?
     Analysis paralysis is a condition where an analyst becomes preoccupied or immersed in the
details of an analysis while failing to recognize the marginal utility of continual investigation. So,
HOW do SEs deal with this condition?
     First, you need to learn to recognize the signs of this condition in yourself as well as others.
Although the condition varies with everyone, some are more prone than others. Second, aside from
personality characteristics, the condition may be a response mechanism to the work environment,
especially from paranoid, control freak managers who suffer from the condition themselves.


47.6 ENGINEERING ANALYSIS REPORTS

As a discipline requiring integrity in analytical, mathematical, and scientiﬁc data and computations
to support downstream or lower level decision making, engineering documentation is often sloppy
at best or simply nonexistent. One of the hallmarks of a professional discipline is an expectation
to document recommendations supported by factual, objective evidence derived empirically or by
observation.
     Data that contribute to informed SE decisions are characterized by the assumptions, boundary
conditions, and constraints surrounding the data collection. While most engineers competently con-
sider relevant factors affecting a decision, the tendency is to avoid recording the results; they view
paperwork as unnecessary, bureaucratic documentation that does not add value directly to the deliv-
erable product. As a result, a professional, high-value analysis ends in mediocrity due to the analyst
lacking personal initiative to perform the task correctly.
     To better appreciate the professional discipline required to document analyses properly, con-
sider a hypothetical visit to a physician:


 EXAMPLE 47.1
You visit a medical doctor for a condition that requires several treatment appointments at three-month
intervals for a year. The doctor performs a high-value diagnosis and prescribes the treatments but fails to
record the medication and actions performed at each treatment event. At each subsequent treatment you and
the doctor have to reconstruct to the best of everyone’s knowledge the assumptions, dosages, and actions per-
formed. Aside from the medical and legal implications, can you imagine the frustration, foggy memories, and
“guesstimates” associated with these interactions. Engineering, as a professional discipline, is no different.
Subsequent decision making is highly dependent on the documented assumptions and constraints of previous
decisions.
580     Chapter 47     Analytical Decision Support

The difference between mediocrity and high-quality professional results may be only a few minutes
to simply document critical considerations that yielded the analytical result and recommendations
presented. For SEs, this information should be recorded in an engineering laboratory notebook or
on-line in a network-based journal.


47.7 ENGINEERING REPORT FORMAT

Where practical and appropriate, engineering analyses should be documented in formal technical
reports. Contract or organizational command media sometimes specify the format of these reports.
If you are expected to formally report the results of an analysis and do not have speciﬁc format
requirements, consider the example outline below.


 EXAMPLE 47.2
The following is an example of an outline that could be used to document a technical report.
1.0. INTRODUCTION
The introduction establishes the context and basis for the analysis. Opening statements identify the document,
its context and usage in the program, as well as the program this analysis is being performed to support.
      1.1. Purpose
      1.2. Scope
      1.3. Objectives
      1.4. Analyst/Team Members
      1.5. Acronyms and Abbreviations
      1.6. Deﬁnitions of Key Terms

2.0. REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
This section lists the documents referenced in other sections of the document. Note the operative title “Ref-
erenced Documents” as opposed to “Applicable Documents.”

3.0. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Summarize the results of the analysis such as ﬁndings, observations, conclusions, and recommendations: tell
them the bottom line “up front.” Then, if the reader desires to read about the details concerning HOW you
arrived at those results, they can do so in subsequent sections.

4.0. CONDUCT OF THE ANALYSIS
Informed decision making is heavily dependent on objective, fact based data. As such, the conditions under
which the analysis is performed must be established as a means of providing credibility for the results. Sub-
sections include:
      4.1.   Background
      4.2.   Assumptions
      4.3.   Methodology
      4.4.   Data Collection
      4.5.   Analytical Tools and Methods
      4.6.   Versions and Conﬁgurations
      4.7.   Statistical Analysis (if applicable)
      4.8.   Analysis Results
      4.9.   Observations
                                                                      47.8 Analysis Lessons Learned      581

    4.10. Precision and Accuracy
    4.11. Graphical Plots
    4.12. Sources

5.0. FINDINGS, OBSERVATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS
As with any scientiﬁc study, it is important for the analyst to communicate:
• WHAT they found.
• WHAT they observed.
• WHAT conclusions they derived from the ﬁndings and observations. Subsections include:
  5.1. Findings
  5.2. Observations
  5.3. Conclusions

6.0. RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the analyst’s ﬁndings, observations, and conclusions, Section 6.0 provides a set of prioritized rec-
ommendations to decision makers concerning the objectives established by the analysis tasking.

APPENDICES
Appendices provide areas to present supporting documentation collected during the analysis or that illustrates
how the author(s) arrived at their ﬁndings, conclusions, and recommendations.

Decision Documentation Formality
There are numerous ways to address the need to balance document decision making with time,
resource, and formality constraints. Approaches to document critical decisions range from a single
page of informal, handwritten notes to highly formal documents. Establish disciplinary standards
for yourself and your organization related to documenting decisions. Then, scale the documenta-
tion formality according to task constraints. Regardless of the approach used, the documentation
should CAPTURE the key attributes of a decision in sufﬁcient detail to enable “downstream” under-
standing of the factors that resulted in the decision.
     The credibility and integrity of an analysis often depends on who collected and analyzed the
data. Analysis report appendixes provide a means of organizing and preserving any supporting
vendor, test, simulation, or other data used by the analyst(s) to support the results. This is particu-
larly important if, at a later date, conditions that served as the basis for the initial analysis task
change, thereby creating a need to revisit the original analysis. Because of the changing conditions,
some data may have to be regenerated; some may not. For those data that have not changed, the
appendices minimize work on the new task analysis by avoiding the need to recollect or regener-
ate the data.

47.8 ANALYSIS LESSONS LEARNED

Once the performance analysis tasking and boundary conditions are established, the next step is to
conduct the analysis. Let’s explore some lessons learned you should consider in preparing to
conduct the analysis.

Lesson 1: Establish a Decision Development Methodology
Decision paths tend to veer off-course midway through the decision development process. Estab-
lish a decision making methodology “up front” to serve as a roadmap for keeping the effort on
582     Chapter 47   Analytical Decision Support

track. When you establish the methodology “up front,” you have the visibility of clear, unbiased
THINKING unemcumbered by the adventures along the decision path. If you and your team are
convinced you have a good methodology, that plan will serve as a compass heading. This is not to
say that some conditions may warrant a change in methodology. Avoid changes unless there is a
compelling reason to change.

Lesson 2: Acquire Analysis Resources
As with any task, success is partially driven by simply having the RIGHT resources in place when
they are required. This includes:
      1. Subject matter experts (SMEs)
      2. Analytical tools
      3. Access to personnel who may have relevant information concerning the analysis area
      4. Analytical tools
      5. Data that describe operating conditions and observations relevant to the analysis, and so
         forth.

Lesson 3: Document Assumptions and Caveats
Every decision involves some level of assumptions and/or caveats. Document the assumptions in
a clear, concise manner. Make sure that the CAVEATS are documented on the same page as the
decision (footnotes, etc.) or recommendations. If the decision recommendations are copied or
removed from the document, the caveats will ALWAYS be in place. Otherwise, people may inten-
tionally or unintentionally apply the decision or recommendations out of context.

Lesson 4: Date the Decision Documentation
Every page of a decision document should marked indicating the document title, revision level,
date, page number, and classiﬁcation level, if applicable. Using this approach, the reader can always
determine if the version they possess is current. Additionally, if a single page is copied, the source
is readily identiﬁable. Most people fail to perform this simple task. When multiple versions of a
report, especially drafts, are distributed without dates, the de facto version is determined by
WHERE the document is within a stack on someone’s desk.

Lesson 5: State the Facts as Objective Evidence
Technical reports must be based on the latest, factual information from credible and reliable
sources. Conjecture, hearsay, and personal opinions should be avoided. If requested, qualiﬁed opin-
ions can be presented informally with the delivery of the report.

Lesson 6: Cite Only Credible and Reliable Sources
Technical decisions often leverage and expand on existing knowledge and research, published or
verbal. If you use this information to support ﬁndings and conclusions, explicitly cite the source(s)
in explicit detail. Avoid vague references such as “read the [author’s] report” documented in an
obscure publication published 10 years ago that may be inaccessible or only available to the
author(s). If these sources are unavailable, quote passages with permission of the owner.
                                                                        47.9 Guiding Principles   583

Lesson 7: REFERENCE Documents versus
APPLICABLE Documents
Analyses often reference other documents and employ the terms APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS or
REFERENCED DOCUMENTS. People unknowingly interchange the terms. Using conventional
outline structures, Section 2.0 should be titled REFERENCED DOCUMENTS and list all sources
cited in the text. Other source or related reading material relevant to the subject matter is cited in
an ADDITIONAL READING section provided in the appendix.

Lesson 8: Cite Referenced Documents
When citing referenced documents, include the date and version containing data that serve as inputs
to the decision. People often believe that if they reference a document by title they have satisﬁed
analysis criteria. Technical decision making is only as good as the credibility and integrity of its
sources of objective, fact-based information. Source documents may be revised over time. Do your-
self and your team a favor: make sure that you clearly and concisely document the critical attrib-
utes of source documentation.

Lesson 9: Conduct SME Peer Reviews
Technical decisions are sometimes dead on arrival (DOA) due to poor assumptions, ﬂawed deci-
sion criteria, and bad research. Plan for success by conducting an informal peer review by trusted
and qualiﬁed colleagues—the subject matter experts (SMEs)—of the evolving decision document.
Listen to their challenges and concerns. Are they highlighting critical operational and technical
issues (COIs/CTIs) that remain to be resolved, or overlooked variables and solutions that are
obscured by the analysis or research? We refer to this as “posturing for success” before the
presentation.

Lesson 10: Prepare Findings, Conclusions,
and Recommendations
There are a number of reasons as to WHY an analysis is conducted. In one case the technical deci-
sion maker may not possess current technical expertise or the ability to internalize and assimilate
data for a complex problem. So they seek out those who do posses this capability such as consult-
ants or organizations. In general, the analyst wants to know WHAT the subject matter experts
(SMEs) who are closest to the problems, issues, and technology suggest as recommenda-
tions regarding the decision. Therefore, analyses should include ﬁndings, recommendations, and
recommendations.
     Based on the results of the analysis, the decision maker can choose to:
    1. Ponder the ﬁndings and conclusions from their own perspective.
    2. Accept or reject the recommendations as a means of arriving at an informed decision.
In any case, they need to know WHAT the subject matter experts (SMEs) have to offer regarding
the decision.


47.9 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern analytical decision support practices.
584     Chapter 47   Analytical Decision Support

Principle 47.1 Analysis results are only as VALID as their underlying assumptions, models, and
methodology. Validate and preserve their integrity.


47.10 SUMMARY

Our discussion of analysis decision support provided data and recommendations to support the SE Process
Model at all levels of abstraction. As an introductory discussion, analytical decision support employs various
tools addressed in the sections that follow:
      • Statistical inﬂuences on SE decision making
      • System performance analysis, budgets, and safety margins
      • System reliability, availability, and maintainability
      • System modeling and simulation
      • Trade studies: analysis of alternatives


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. If you were the project engineer or Lead SE:
   (a) What types of engineering analyses would you recommend?
   (b) How would you collect data to support those analyses?
   (c) Select one of the analyses. Write a simple analysis task statement based on the attributes of a
       technical decision discussed at the beginning of this section.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for guidance and direction concerning the implementation
   of analytical decision support practices.
   (a) What requirements are levied on programs and SEs concerning the conduct of analyses?
   (b) Does the organization have a standard methodology for conducting an analysis? If so, report your
       ﬁndings.
   (c) Does the organization have a standard format for documenting analyses? If so, report your ﬁndings.
2. Contact small, medium and large contract programs within your organization.
   (a) What analyses were performed on the program?
   (b) How were the analyses documented?
   (c) How was the analysis task communicated? Did the analysis report describe the objectives and scope
       of the analysis?
   (d) What level of formality—engineering notebook, informal report, or formal report—did technical
       decision makers levy on the analysis?
   (e) Were the analyses conducted without constraints or were they conducted to justify a predetermined
       decision?
   (f) What challenges or issues did the analysts encounter during the conduct of the analysis?
   (g) Based on the program’s lessons learned, what recommendations do they offer as guidance for
       conducting analyses on future programs?
                                                                                       Additional Reading      585

3. Select two analysis reports from different contract programs.
   (a) What is your assessment of each report?
   (b) Did the program apply the right level of formality in documenting the analysis?


REFERENCES

IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of       Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-     Systems Engineering Principles and Practice, New York:
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY.       Wiley-InterScience.


ADDITIONAL READING

ASD-100. 2004. National Airspace System System Engineering Manual, ATO Operations Planning. Washington, DC:
 Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Chapter              48

      Statistical Inﬂuences
      on System Design

48.1 INTRODUCTION

For many engineers, system design evolves around abstract phrases such as “bound environmen-
tal data” and “receive data.” The challenge is: HOW do you quantify and bound the conditions for
a speciﬁc parameter? Then, how does an SE determine conditions such as:
      1. Acceptable signal and noise (S/N) ratios?
      2. Computational errors in processing the data?
      3. Time variations required to process system data?
The reality is that the hypothetical boundary condition problems engineers studied in college aren’t
so ideal. Additionally, when a system or product is developed, multiple copies may produce varying
degrees of responses to a set of controlled inputs. So, how do SEs deal with the challenges of these
uncertainties?
     Systems and products have varying degrees of stability, performance, and uncertainty that are
inﬂuenced by their unique form, ﬁt, and function performance characteristics. Depending on the
price the User is willing to pay, we can improve and match material characteristics and processes
used to produce the SE systems and products. If we analyze a system’s or product’s performance
characteristics over a controlled range of inputs and conditions, we can statistically state the vari-
ance in terms of standard deviation.
     This chapter provides an introductory overview of how statistical methods can be applied to
system design to improve capability performance. As a prerequisite to this discussion, you should
have basic familiarity with statistical methods and their applications.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. How do you characterize random variations in system inputs sufﬁciently to bound the range?
      2. How do SEs establish criteria for acceptable system inputs and outputs?
      3. What is a design range?
      4. How are upper and lower tolerance limits established for a design range?
      5. How do SEs establish criteria for CAUTION and WARNING indicators?
      6. What development methods can be employed to improve our understanding of the vari-
         ability of engineering input data?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

586
                                      48.2 Understanding the Variability of the Engineering Data   587

    7. What is circular error probability (CEP)?
    8. What is meant by the degree of correlation?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Circular Error Probability (CEP) The Gaussian probability density function (normal dis-
      tribution) referenced to a central point with concentric rings representing the standard devi-
      ations of data dispersion.
    • Cumulative Error A measure of the total cumulative errors inherent within and created by
      a system or product when processing statistically variant inputs to produce a standard output
      or outcome.
    • Logarithmic Distribution (Lognormal) An asymmetrical, graphical plot of the Poisson
      probability density function depicting the dispersion and frequency of independent data
      occurrences about a mean that is skewed from a median of the data distribution.
    • Normal Distribution A graphical plot of the Gaussian probability density function depict-
      ing the symmetrical dispersion and frequency of independent data occurrences about a central
      mean.
    • Variance (Statistical) “A measure of the degree of spread among a set of values; a measure
      of the tendency of individual values to vary from the mean value. It is computed by subtract-
      ing the mean value from each value, squaring each of these differences, summing these results,
      and dividing this sum by the number of values in order to obtain the arithmetic mean of these
      squares.” (Source: DSMC T&E Mgt. Guide, DoD Glossary of Test Terminology, p. B-21)


48.2 UNDERSTANDING THE VARIABILITY
OF THE ENGINEERING DATA

In an ideal world, engineering data are precisely linear or identically match predictive values with
zero error margins. In the real world, however, variations in mass properties and characteristics;
attenuation, propagation, and transmission delays; and human responses are among the uncertain-
ties that must be accounted for in engineering calculations. In general, the data are dispersed about
the mean of the frequency distribution.

Normal and Logarithmic Probability Density Functions
Statistically, we characterize the range dispersions about a central mean in terms of normal
(Gaussian) and logarithmic (Poisson) frequency distributions as shown in Figure 48.1.
     Normal and logarithmic frequency distributions can be used to mathematically characterize
and bound engineering data related to statistical process control (SPC); queuing or waiting line
theory for customer service and message trafﬁc; production lines; maintenance and repair, pressure
containment; temperature/humidity ranges; and so on.

Applying Statistical Distributions to Systems
In Chapter 3 What Is A System we characterized a system as having desirable and undesirable
inputs and producing desirable outputs. The system can also produce undesirable outputs—be they
electromagnetic, optical, chemical, thermal, or mechanical—that make the system vulnerable to
adversaries or create self-induced feedback that degrades system performance. The challenge for
SEs is bounding:
588     Chapter 48   Statistical Inﬂuences on System Design

                 Mean/Median                                       Median

                                                                        Mean




-•                                       +•       -•                                         +•

          Normal Distribution                                  Logarithmic Distribution
             (Gaussian)                                               (Poisson)
Figure 48.1 Basic Types of Statistical Frequency Distributions




      1. The range of desirable or acceptable inputs and conditions from undesirable or unaccept-
         able inputs.
      2. The range of desirable or acceptable outputs and conditions from undesirable or unac-
         ceptable outputs.
Recall Figure 3.2 of our discussion of system entity concepts where we illustrate the challenge in
SE Design decision making relative to acceptable and unacceptable inputs and outputs.

Design Input/Output Range Acceptability. Statistically we can bound and characterize the
range of acceptable inputs and outputs using the frequency distributions. As a simple example,
Figure 48.2 illustrates an example of a Normal Distribution that we can employ to characterize
input/output variability.
     In this illustration we employ a Normal Distribution with a central mean. Depending on bound-
ing conditions imposed by the system application, SEs determine the acceptable design range that
includes upper and lower limits relative to the mean.

Range of Acceptable System Performance. During normal system operations, system or
product capabilities perform within an acceptable (Normal) Design Range. The challenge for
SEs is determining WHAT the thresholds for alerting system operators and maintainers
WHEN system performance is OFF nominal and begins to pose a risk or threat to the operators,
EQUIPMENT, public, or environment. To better understand this point, let’s examine it using
Figure 48.2.
    In the ﬁgure we have a Normal Distribution about a central mean and characterized by four
types of operating ranges:
      • DESIGN Range The range of engineering parameter values for a speciﬁc capability and con-
        ditions that bound the ACCEPTABLE upper and lower tolerance limits.
      • NORMAL Operating Range The range of acceptable engineering parameter values for a
        speciﬁc capability within the design range that clearly indicates capability performance under
        a given set of conditions is operating as expected and does not pose a risk or threat to the oper-
        ators, EQUIPMENT, general public, or environment.
      • CAUTIONARY Range The range of engineering parameter values for a speciﬁc capabil-
        ity that clearly indicates capability performance under a given set of conditions is beyond or
                                         48.2 Understanding the Variability of the Engineering Data   589

                  Design Lower                                     Design Upper
                   Limit (LL)                                       Limit (UL)
                                          Design Range

                                      Design Nominal (Mean)
                             Lower Toleranc e        Upper Tolerance


Lower Design                                                                          Upper Design
Safety Margin                                                                         Safety Margin
 (Application
 Dependent)
                                 ?                                ?                    (Application
                                                                                       Dependent)




                                            Normal
                                        Operating Range


                                       Cautionary Range

                                         Warning Range
Figure 48.2 Application Dependent Normalized Range of Acceptable Operating Condition Limits


       OUTSIDE the Normal Operating Range and potentially poses a risk or threat to the opera-
       tors, EQUIPMENT, general public, or environment.
     • WARNING Range The range of engineering parameter values for a speciﬁc capability and
       conditions that clearly poses a high level of risk or a threat to the operators, EQUIPMENT,
       public, or environment with catastrophic consequences.
This presents several decision-making challenges for SEs:
     1. What is the acceptable Design Range that includes upper and lower Caution Ranges?
     2. WHAT are the UPPER and LOWER limits and conditions of the acceptable Normal
        Operating Range?
     3. WHAT are the thresholds and conditions for the WARNING Range?
     4. WHAT upper and lower Design Safety Margins and conditions must be established for the
        system relative to the Normal Operating Range, Caution Range, and Warning Range?
These questions, which are application dependent, are typically difﬁcult to answer. Also keep in
mind that this graphic reﬂects a single measure of performance (MOP) for one system entity at a
speciﬁc level of abstraction. The signiﬁcance of this decision is exacerbated by the need to allo-
cate the design range to lower level entities, which also have comparable performance distribu-
tions, ranges, and safety margins. Obviously, this poses a number of risks. For large, complex
systems, HOW do we deal with this challenge?
     There are several approaches for supporting the design thresholds and conditions.
     First, you can model and simulate the system and employ Monte Carlo techniques to assess
the most likely or probable outcomes for a given set of use case scenarios. Second, you can lever-
age modeling and simulation results and develop a prototype of the system for further analysis and
590     Chapter 48   Statistical Inﬂuences on System Design

evaluation. Third, you can employ spiral development to evolve a set of requirements over a set of
sequential prototypes.
    Now let’s shift our focus to understanding how statistical methods apply to system
development.


48.3 STATISTICAL METHOD APPLICATIONS
TO SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT

Statistical methods are employed throughout the System Development Phase by various disciplines.
For SEs, statistical challenges occur in two key areas:
      1. Bounding speciﬁcation requirements.
      2. Verifying speciﬁcation requirements.

Statistical Challenges in Writing Speciﬁcation Requirements
During speciﬁcation requirements development, Acquirer SEs are challenged to specify the accept-
able and unacceptable ranges of inputs and outputs for performance-based speciﬁcations. Consider
the following example:


 EXAMPLE 48.1
Under speciﬁed operating conditions, the Sensor System shall have a probability of detection of 0.XX over a
(magnitude) spectral frequency range.

Once the contract is awarded, System Developer SEs are challenged to determine, allocate, and
ﬂow down system performance budgets and safety margins requirements derived from higher level
requirements such as in the example above. The challenge is analyzing the example above to derive
requirements for PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, and other levels. Consider the follow-
ing example.


 EXAMPLE 48.2
The (name) output shall have a ±3s worst-case error of 0.XX for Input Parameter A distributions between
0.000 vdc to 10.000 vdc.

Statistical Challenges in Verifying Speciﬁcation Requirements
Now let’s suppose that an SE’s mission is to verify the requirement stated in Example 48.2. For
simplicity, let’s assume that the sampled end points of Input data are 0.000 vdc and 10.000 vdc with
a couple of points in between. We collect data measurements as a function of Input Data and plot
them. Panel A of Figure 48.3 might be representative of thess data.
     Applying statistical methods, we determine the trend line and ±3s boundary conditions based
on the requirement. Panels C and D of Figure 48.3 could represent these data. Then we super-
impose the trend line and ±3s boundaries and verify that all system performance data are within
the acceptable range indicating the system passed (Panel D).
                                                             48.5 Cumulative System Performance Effects          591

                                                                            B
 Measured
Performance
    Data



                            A


                             Input Data                              Data Dispersion



                                    +3s                                                       +3s
                                          Data                                                      Data
 Measured                                               Measured
                                          Dispersion                                                Dispersion
Performance                                            Performance
    Data                            -3s                    Data                               -3s




                            C                                                          D


                             Input Data                                                Input Data       3
Figure 48.3 Understanding Engineering Data Dispersion




48.4 UNDERSTANDING TEST DATA DISPERSION

The preceding discussion focuses on design decisions. Let’s explore how system analysts and SEs
statistically deal with test data that may be used as an input into SE design decision making or ver-
ifying that a System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or item development speciﬁcation require-
ments has been achieved.
     Suppose that we conduct a test to measure system or entity performance over a range of input
data as shown in Panel A of Figure 48.3. As illustrated, we have a number of data points that have
a positive slope. This graphic has two important aspects:
     1. Upward sloping trend of data
     2. A dispersion of data along the trend line.
In this example, if we performed a Least Squares mathematical ﬁt of the data, we could establish
the slope and intercepts of the trend line using a simple y = mx + b construct.
     Using the trend line as a central mean for the data set as a function of Input Data (X-axis), we
ﬁnd that the corresponding Y data points are dispersed about the mean as illustrated in Panel C.
Based on the standard deviation of the data set, we could say that there is 0.9973 probability that
a given data point lies within the ±3s about the mean. Thus, Panel D depicts the results of pro-
jecting the ±3s lines along the trend line.


48.5 CUMULATIVE SYSTEM PERFORMANCE EFFECTS

Our discussions to this point focus on statistical distributions relative to a speciﬁc capability param-
eter. The question is: HOW do these errors propagate throughout the system? There are several
factors that contribute to the error propagation:
592       Chapter 48   Statistical Inﬂuences on System Design



       Design
     Upper Limit                                             3
                                    2
 1       Design                         Parameter
        Nominal                          Parameter
                                         Scaling
                                          Scaling

       Design                                                                        10
     Lower Limit                4                                9
                                    Compensation
                                     Compensation
                                    Adjustments
                                     Adjustments                       Scaled
                                           • •Offset
                                                                        Scaled
                                               Offset                Difference
                                                                      Difference
                                        • •Amplitude
                                            Amplitude
                                    • Range Filtering
                                      • Range Filtering


                                    6                        7
              5                         Parameter
                                         Parameter
                                         Scaling
                                          Scaling

                                8
                                    Compensation
                                     Compensation
                                    Adjustments
                                     Adjustments
                                           • •Offset
                                               Offset
                                        • •Amplitude
                                            Amplitude
                                        RangeFiltering
                                    • •Range     Filtering

Figure 48.4 Understanding Cumulative Error Statistics


       1. OPERATING ENVIRONMENT inﬂuences on system component properties.
       2. Timing variations.
       3. Computational precision and accuracy.
       4. Drift or aliasing errors as a function of time.
From a total system perspective, we refer to this concept as cumulative error. Figure 48.4 provides
an example.
     Let’s assume we have a simple system that computes the difference between two parameters
A and B. If we examine the characteristics of parameters A and B, we ﬁnd that each parameter has
different data dispersions about its predicted mean.
     Ultimately, if we intend to compute the difference between parameter A and parameter B, both
parameters have to be scaled relative to some normalized value. Otherwise, we get an “apples and
oranges” comparison. So, we scale each input and make any correctional offset adjustments. This
simply solves the functional aspect of the computation. Now, what about errors originating from
the source values about a nominal mean plus all intervening scaling operations? The answer is:
SEs have to account for the cumulative error distributions related to errors and dispersions. Once
the system is developed, integrated, and tested, SYSTEM Level optimization is used to correct for
any errors and dispersions.


48.6 CIRCULAR ERROR PROBABILITY (CEP)

The preceding discussion focused on analyzing and allocating system performance within the
system. The ultimate test for SE decision making comes from the actual ﬁeld results. The question
is: How do cumulative error probabilities impact overall operational and system effectiveness?
Perhaps the best way to answer this question is a “bull’s-eye target” analogy using Figure 48.5.
                                                                           48.6 Circular Error Probability (CEP)   593


  A
                   System A                                                      B              System B

                                                                    2s
                                      1s
                                                                          3s




                    System A                                                                      System B
  C                 Dispersion                                                   D                Dispersion


                                     -3s -2s -1s            +1s +2s +3s

                                             Drawing Not to Scale




                                                                                                           1
Figure 48.5 Circular Error Probability Example



    Our discussions up to this point have focused on the dispersion of data along linear trend lines
with a central mean. There are system applications whereby data are dispersed about a central point
such as the “bull’s eye” illustrated in Figure 48.5. In these cases the ±1s, ±2s, and ±3s points lie
on concentric circles aligned about a central mean located at the bull’s eye. Applications of this
type are generally target based such as munitions, ﬁrearms, and ﬁnancial plans. Consider the fol-
lowing example:


 EXAMPLE 48.3
Suppose that you conduct an evaluation of two competing riﬂe systems, System A and System B. We will
assume statistical sampling methods are employed to determine a statistically valid sample size. Speciﬁcation
requirements state that 95% of the shots must be contained within circle with a diameter of X inches centered
at the bull’s eye.

Each system is placed in a test ﬁxture and calibrated. When environmental conditions are accept-
able, expert marksmen “live ﬁre” the required number of rounds from each riﬂe. Marksmen
are unaware of the manufacturer of each riﬂe. Miss distance ﬁring results are shown in Panels A
and B.
     Using the theoretical crosshair as the origin, you superimpose the concentric lines about the
bull’s eye representing the ±1s, ±2s, and ±3s points as illustrated in the center of the graphic.
Panels C and D depict the results with miss distance as the deciding factor, System B is superior.
     In this simple, ideal example we focused exclusively on system effectiveness, not cost effec-
tiveness, which includes system effectiveness. The challenge is: things are not always ideal and
riﬂes are not identical in cost. What do you do? The solution lies in the Cost as an Independent
Variable (CAIV) and trade study utility function concepts discussed earlier in Figure 6.1. What is
the utility function of the ﬁeld performance test results relative to cost and other factors?
594     Chapter 48     Statistical Inﬂuences on System Design

     If System A costs one-half as much as System B, does the increased performance of System
B substantiate the cost? You may decide that the ±3s point is the minimum threshold requirement
for system acceptability. Thus, from a CAIV perspective, System A meets the speciﬁcation thresh-
old requirement and costs one-half as much, yielding the best value.
     You can continue this analysis further by evaluating the utility of hitting the target on the ﬁrst
shot for a given set of time constraints, and so forth.

48.7 DATA CORRELATION

Engineering often requires developing mathematical algorithms that model best-ﬁt approximations
to real world data set characterizations. Data are collected to validate that a system produces high-
quality data within predictable values. We refer to the degree of “ﬁt” of the actual data to the stan-
dard or approximation as data correlation.
     Data correlation is a measure of the degree to which actual data regress toward a central mean
of predicted values. When actual values match predicted values, data correlation is 1.0. Thus, as
data set variances diverge away from the mean trend line, the degree of correlation represented by
r, the correlation coefﬁcient, diminishes toward zero. To illustrate the concept of data correlation
and convergence, Figure 48.6 provides examples.

Positive and Negative Correlation
Data correlation is characterized as positive or negative depending on the SLOPE of the line rep-
resenting the mean of the data set over a range of input values. Panel A of Figure 48.6 represents
a positive (slope) correlation; Panel B represents a negative (slope) correlation. This brings us to
our next point, convergence or regression toward the mean.




              A                                          B                                C
      Positive Correlation                Negative Correlation                No Correlation
y                                     y                                y



             Positive Correlation           Negative Correlation            Data Variance Correlation
                    r=+1                           r=–1
                                                                             Converging Toward r=0

                           x                                       x                                     x

              D                                          E
      Positive Correlation                Negative Correlation
         Convergence                         Convergence
y                                     y
                                                                           Where:
                                                                           r = Correlation Coefficient

                   Data variance             Data variance
                convergence toward        convergence toward
                       r=+1                      r=–1

                           x                                       x
Figure 48.6 Understanding Data Correlation
                                                                     Organizational Centric Exercises     595

Regression toward Convergence
Since engineering data are subject to variations in physical characteristics, actual data do not always
perfectly match the predicted values. In an ideal situation we could state that the data correlate
over a bounded range IF all of the values of the data set are perfectly aligned on the mean trend
line as illustrated in Panels A and B of Figure 48.6.
     In reality, data are typically dispersed along the trend line representing the mean values. Thus,
we refer to the convergence or data variance toward the mean as the degree of correlation. As data
sets regress toward a central mean, the data variance or correlation increases toward r = +1 or
-1 as illustrated in Panels D and E. Data variances that decrease toward r = 0 indicate decreasing
convergence or low correlation. Therefore, we characterize the relationship between data parame-
ters as positive or negative data variance convergence or correlation.


48.8 SUMMARY

Our discussions of statistical inﬂuences on system design practices were predicated on a basic understanding
of statistical methods and provided a high-level overview of key statistical concepts that inﬂuence SE design
decisions.
      We highlighted the importance of using statistical methods to deﬁne acceptable or desirable design ranges
for input and output data. We also addressed the importance of establishing boundary conditions for NORMAL
operating ranges, CAUTIONARY ranges, WARNING ranges, as well as establishing safety margins. Using
the basic concepts as a foundation, we addressed the concept of cumulative errors, circular error probabili-
ties (CEP), and data correlation. We also addressed the need to bound acceptable or desirable system outputs
that include products, by-products, and services.
      Statistical data variances have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on SE technical decisions such as system perform-
ance, budgets, and safety margins and operational and system effectiveness. What is important is that SEs:
     1. Learn to recognize and appreciate engineering input/output data variances
     2. Know WHEN and HOW to apply statistical methods to understand SYSTEM interactions with its
        OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system, selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) What inputs of the system can be represented by statistical distributions?
   (b) How would you translate those inputs into a set of input requirements?
   (c) Based on processing of those inputs, do errors accumulate and, if so, what is the impact?
   (d) How would you specify requirements to minimize the impacts of errors?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact a technical program in your organization. Research how the program SEs accommodated statisti-
   cal variability for the following:
   (a) Acceptable data input and output ranges for system processing
   (b) External data and timing variability
596    Chapter 48     Statistical Inﬂuences on System Design

2. For systems that require performance monitoring equipment such as gages, meters, audible warnings,
   and ﬂashing lights, research how SEs determined threshold values for activating the notiﬁcations or
   indications.


REFERENCE

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998. DSMC Test and Evaluation Management Guide, 3rd ed. Defense
  Acquisition Press. Ft. Belvoir, VA.


ADDITIONAL READING

Blanchard, Benjamin S., and J. Fabrycky, Wolter.           National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
  1990. Systems Engineering and Analysis, 2nd ed. Engle-     1994. Systems Engineering “Toolbox” for Design-
  wood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall.                             Oriented Engineers. NASA Reference Publication 1358.
Langford, John W. 1995. Logistics: Principles and Appli-     Washington, DC.
  cations. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Chapter              49

     System Performance Analysis,
     Budgets, and Safety Margins

49.1 INTRODUCTION

System effectiveness manifests itself via the cumulative performance results of the integrated set of
System Elements at a speciﬁc instance in time. That performance ultimately determines mission
and system objectives success—in some cases, survival.
     When SEs allocate system performance, there is a tendency to think of those requirements as
static parameters—for example, “shall be +12.3 ± 0.10 vdc.” Aside from status switch settings or
conﬁguration parameters, seldom are parameters static or steady state.
     From an SE perspective, SEs partition and organize requirements via a hierarchical framework.
Take the example of static weight. We have a budget of 100 pounds to allocate equally to three
components. Static parameters make the SE requirements allocation task a lot easier. This is not
the case for many system requirements. How do we establish values for system inputs that are
subject to variations such as environmental conditions, time of day, time of year, signal properties,
human error and other variables?
     System requirement parameters are often characterized by statistical value distributions—such
as Normal (Gaussian), Binomial, and LogNormal (Poisson)—with frequencies and tendencies about
a mean value. Using our static requirements example above, we can state that the voltage must be
constrained to a range of +12.20vdc (-3s) to +12.40 vdc (+3s) with a mean of +12.30 vdc for a
prescribed set of operating conditions.
     On the surface, this sounds very simple and straightforward. The challenge is: How did SEs
decide:
     1. That the mean value needed to be +12.30 vdc?
     2. That the variations could not exceed 0.10 vdc?
This simple example illustrates one of the most challenging and perplexing aspects of System Engi-
neering—allocating dynamic parameters.
    Many times SEs simply do not have any precedent data. For example, consider human attempts
to build bridges, develop and ﬂy an aircraft, launch rockets and missiles, and land on the Moon
and Mars. Analysis with a lot of trial and error data collection and observation may be all you
have to establish initial estimates of these parameters.
    There are a number of ways one can determine these values. Examples include:



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                 597
598     Chapter 49   System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins

      1. Educated guesses based on seasoned experience.
      2. Theoretical and empirical trial and error analysis.
      3. Modeling and simulation with increasing ﬁdelity.
      4. Prototyping demonstrations.
The challenge is being able to identify a reliable, low-risk, level of conﬁdence method of deter-
mining values for statistically variant parameters.
     This chapter describes how we allocate System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements
to lower levels. We explore how functional and nonfunctional performance are analyzed and allo-
cated. This requires building on previous practices such as statistical inﬂuences on system design
discussed in the preceding chapter. We introduce the concepts of decomposing cycle time based
performances into queue, process, and transport times. Finally, we conclude by illustrating how
performance budgets and safety margins enable us to achieve SPS performance requirements.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is system performance analysis?
      2. What is a cycle time?
      3. What is a queue time?
      4. What is a transport time?
      5. What is a processing time?
      6. What is a performance budget?
      7. How do you establish performance budgets?
      8. What is a safety margin?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • “Design-to” MOP A targeted mean value bounded by minimum and/or maximum thresh-
        old values levied on a system capability performance parameter to constrain decision
        making.
      • Performance Budget Allocation A minimum, maximum, or min-max constraint that repre-
        sents the absolute thresholds that bound a capability or performance characteristic.
      • Processing Time The statistical mean time and tolerance that statistically characterizes the
        time interval between an input stimulus or cue event and the completion of processing of
        the input(s).
      • Queue Time The statistical mean time and tolerance that characterizes the time interval
        between the arrival of an input for processing and the point where processing begins.
      • Safety Margin A portion of an assigned capability or physical characteristic measure of
        performance (MOP) that is restricted from casual usage to cover instances in which the bud-
        geted performance exceeds its allocated MOP.
      • System Latency The time differential between a stimulus or cue events and a system
        response event. Some people refer to this as the responsivity of the system for a speciﬁc
        parameter.
      • Transport Time The statistical mean time and tolerance that characterizes the time inter-
        val between transmission of an output and its receipt at the next processing task.
                                       49.2 Performance “Design-to” Budgets and Safety Margins     599

49.2 PERFORMANCE “DESIGN-TO”
BUDGETS AND SAFETY MARGINS

Every functional capability or physical characteristic of a system or item must be bounded by per-
formance constraints. This is very important in top-down/bottom-up/horizontal design whereby
system functional capabilities are decomposed, allocated, and ﬂowed down into multiple levels of
design detail.

Achieving Measures of Performance (MOPs)
The mechanism for decomposing system performance into subsequent levels of detail is referred
to as performance budgets and margins. In general, performance budgets and margins allow SEs
to impose performance constraints on functional capabilities that include a margin of safety. Philo-
sophically, if overall system performance must be controlled, so should the contributing entities at
multiple levels of abstraction.
     Performance constraints are further partitioned into: 1) “design-to” measures of performance
(MOPs) and 2) performance safety margins.

Design-to MOPs
Design-to MOPs serve as the key mechanism for allocating, ﬂowing down, and communicating
performance constraints to lower levels system items. The actual allocation process is accom-
plished by a number of methods ranging from equitable shares to speciﬁc allocations based on arbi-
trary and discretionary decisions or decisions supported by design support analyses and trade
studies.

Safety Margins
Safety margins accomplish two things. First, they provide a means to accommodate variations in
tolerances, accuracies, and latencies in system responses plus errors in human judgment. Second,
they provide a reserve for decision makers to trade off misappropriated performance inequities as
a means of optimizing overall system performance.
     Performance safety margins serve as contingency reserves to compensate for component vari-
ations or to accommodate worst-case scenarios that:
    1. Could have been underestimated.
    2. Potentially create safety risks and hazards.
    3. Result from human errors in computational precision and accuracy.
    4. Are due to physical variations in materials properties and components
    5. Result from the “unknowns.”
Every engineering discipline employs rules of thumb and guidelines for accommodating safety
margins. Typically, safety margins might vary from 5% to 200% on average, depending on the
application and risk.
     There are limitations to the practicality of safety margins in terms of: 1) cost–beneﬁts, 2) prob-
ability or likelihood of occurrence, 3) alternative actions, and 4) reasonable measures, among other
things. In some cases, the implicit cost of increasing safety margin MOPs above a practical level can
be offset by taking appropriate system or product safety precautions, safeguards, markings, and pro-
cedures that reduce the probability of occurrence.
600     Chapter 49      System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins

Warning! ALWAYS seek guidance from your program and technical management, disciplinary
standards and practices, or local organization engineering command media to establish a consen-
sus about safety margins for your program. When these are established prior to the Contract Award,
document the authoritative basis for the selection and disseminate to all personnel or incorporate
into program command media—as project memoranda or plans.

      Safety margins, as the name implies, involve technical decision making to prevent potential
safety hazards from occurring. Any potential safety hazards carry safety, ﬁnancial, and legal lia-
bilities. Establish safety margins that safeguard the SYSTEM and its operators, general public,
property, and the environment.

Applying Design-to MOPs and Safety Margins
Figure 49.1 illustrates how Design-To MOPs and safety margins are established. In this ﬁgure the
measures of performance (MOPs) for system capabilities and physical characteristics are given
in generic terms or units. Note that the units can represent time, electrical power, mass properties,
and so on.

Author’s Note 49.1 The example in Figure 49.1 shows the basic method of allocating per-
formance budgets and safety margins. In reality, this highly iterative, time-consuming process often
requires analyses, trade studies, modeling, simulation, prototyping, and negotiations to balance
and optimize overall system performance.

Let’s assume the SPS speciﬁes that Capability A have a performance constraint of 100 units. System
designers decide to establish a 10% safety margin at all levels of the design. Therefore, they estab-
lish a Design-To MOP of 90 units and a safety margin of 10 units. The Design-To MOP of 90 units
is allocated as follows: Capability A_1 is allocated an MOP of 40 units, Capability A_2 is allo-
cated an MOP of 30 units, and Capability A_3 is allocated an MOP of 20 units.

  “Design To” Allocation                     Capability A
        100 Units                     “Design
                                       “DesignTo”
                                               To”      Margin
                                                         Margin
                                         90Units
                                        90  Units        10Units
                                                        10  Units
                                                Allocate 90 Units
                 Allocate 40 Units                          Allocate 30 Units                          Allocate 20 Units
      Capability A_1                            Capability A_2                               Capability A_3

  “DesignTo”
 “Design  To”     Margin
                   Margin                  “DesignTo”
                                          “Design  To”       Margin
                                                              Margin                    “Design
                                                                                         “DesignTo”
                                                                                                 To”    Margin
                                                                                                         Margin
    36Units
   36  Units      44Units
                     Units                   27Units
                                            27  Units        33Units
                                                                Units                     17
                                                                                           17Units
                                                                                              Units     33Units
                                                                                                           Units
                                                    27 Units
                         Allocate 15 Units                              Allocate 12 Units
           Capability A_21                                Capability A_22

         “DesignTo”
        “Design  To”     Margin
                          Margin                       “DesignTo”
                                                      “Design  To”       Margin
                                                                         Margin
           13Units
          13  Units      22Units
                            Units                        11Units
                                                        11  Units        11Unit
                                                                            Unit
                                                                    Allocate 11 Units
                           Allocate 5.5 Units                    Allocate 3.5 Units                    Allocate 2.0 Units
                Capability A_221                    Capability A_222                        Capability A_223

           “DesignTo”
          “Design  To” Margin
                         Margin                  “Design  To” Margin
                                                  “DesignTo”    Margin                   “DesignTo”
                                                                                        “Design  To” Margin
                                                                                                       Margin
            55Units
               Units    0.5Units
                       0.5  Units                  33Units
                                                      Units   0.5
                                                               0.5Units
                                                                   Units                  1.5
                                                                                           1.5Units
                                                                                               Units 0.5
                                                                                                      0.5Units
                                                                                                          Units

Figure 49.1 Performance Budget & Design Margin Allocations
                                          49.2 Performance “Design-to” Budgets and Safety Margins         601

     Focusing on Capability A_2, the MOP of 30 units is partitioned into a Design-To MOP of 27
units and a safety margin MOP of 3 units. The resultant Design-To MOP of 27 units is then allo-
cated to Capability A_21 and Capability A_22 in similar manner, and so forth.
     Some SEs argue that once you establish the initial 10 unit safety margin MOP at the Capabil-
ity A level, there is no need to establish design safety margins at lower levels of the capability—
(capability A_3 safety margin, etc.). Observe how the second level has allocated an additional 10
units of margin to the Capability A-1, A-2, and A-3 budgets above and beyond the 10 units at the
Capability A level. They emphasize that as long as all subordinate level capabilities meet their
Design-To MOP performance budgets, the 10 unit MOP safety margin adequately covers situations
where lower level performance exceeds allocated budgets.
     They continue that imposing safety margins at lower levels unnecessarily CONSTRAINS crit-
ical resources and increases system cost due to the need for higher performance equipment. For
some nonsafety critical, non–real-time performance applications, this may be true; every system
and application is unique.
     As an initial starting point, ALWAYS begin with multi-level safety margins. If you encounter
difﬁculties meeting lower level performance allocation constraints, you should weigh options, ben-
eﬁts, costs, and risks. Since system item performance inevitably requires adjustment for optimiza-
tion, ALWAYS establish design safety margins at every level and for every system item to ensure
ﬂexibility in the integrated performance in achieving SPS requirements. Once all levels of design
are deﬁned, rebalance the hierarchical structure of performance budgets and design safety margins
as needed.
     To illustrate how we might implement time-based performance budgets and margins alloca-
tions, let’s explore another example.


 EXAMPLE 49.1
To illustrate this concept, refer to Figure 49.2. The left side of the graphic portrays a hierarchical decompo-
sition of a Capability A. The SPS requires that Capability A complete processing within a speciﬁed period of
time such as 200 milliseconds. System designers designate the initiation of Capability A as Event 1 and its
completion as Event 2. A Mission Event Timeline (MET) depicting the two event constraints is shown in the
top portion of the graphic. System Designers partition the Capability A time interval constraint into a Design-
To MOP and a safety margin MOP. The Design-To MOP constraint is designated as Event 1.4.

Author’s Note 49.2 Initially MET Event 1.4 may not have this label. We have simply applied the
Event 1.4 label to provide a degree of sequential consistency across the MET (1.1, 1.2, 1.3, etc.).
Events 1.2 and 1.3 are actually established by lower level allocations for Capabilities A_1 and A_2.

As shown at the left side, the Capability A requirement is analyzed and decomposed into Capabil-
ity A_1 and Capability A_2 requirements. Thus, the Design-To MOP for Capability A is partitioned
into a Capability A_1 time constraint and a Capability A_2 time constraint as MOPs. Likewise,
Capability A_1 and Capability A_2 are decomposed into lower level requirements, each with its
respective Design-To MOP and safety margin. The process continues to successively lower levels
of system items.

Reconciling Performance Budget Allocations and Safety Margins. As design teams
apply Design-To MOP allocations, what happens if there are critical performance issues with the
initial allocations? Let’s assume that Capability A_22 in Figure 49.2 was initially allocated 12
units. An initial analysis of Capability A_22 indicates that 13 units are required. What should an
SE do?
602    Chapter 49    System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins

                     Event 1                Event 1.1             Event 1.2        Event 1.3      Event 1.4         Event 2

                                                         MissionEvent
                                                         Mission       Timeline(MET)
                                                                 EventTimeline  (MET)
                                                           Capability A Performance Constraint

  CAPAA
 CAP                                               “Design To” (DT) MOP                                Safety Margin
                              Capability A_1
                          Performance Constraint


        CAP A_1
       CAP   A_1           DT MOP        Margin                       Capability A_2
                                                                  Performance Constraint


           CAPA_2
          CAP  A_2                                            “Design To” MOP               Margin

                                                      Capability A_21
                                                      Perf. Constraint


                  CAPA_21
                 CAP  A_21                           DT MOP Margin        Capability A_22        Where:
                                                                           Performance           CAP = Capability
                                                                            Constraint           DT = Design-To
                                                                                                 MET = Mission Event Timeline
                  CAPA_22
                 CAP  A_22                                               DT MOP Margin
                                                                                                 MOP = Measure of Performance


Figure 49.2 Performance Budgets & Safety Margins Application



     Capability A_22 owner confers with the higher level Capability A_2 and peer level Capabil-
ity A_21 owners. During the discussions the Capability A_21 owner indicates that Capability A_21
was allocated 15 units but only requires 14 units, which includes a safety margin. The group reaches
a consensus to reallocate an MOP of 14 units to Capability A_21 and an MOP of 13 units to Capa-
bility A_22.

Final Thoughts about Performance Budgets and Margins. The process of allocating per-
formance budgets and safety margins is a top-down/bottom-up/left-right/right-left negotiation
process. Within human decision-making terms, the intent is to reconcile the inequities as a means
of achieving and optimizing overall system performance. Without negotiation and reconciliation,
you get a condition referred to as suboptimization of a single item, thereby degrading overall system
performance.

Performance Budget and Safety Margin Ownership
A key question is: WHO owns performance budgets and safety margins? In general, the owner of
the speciﬁcation that contains the capabilities and physical characteristics that are allocated as per-
formance budget MOPs and safety margins is the owner.

How are Performance Budgets and Margins Documented?
Performance budgets and safety margins are documented a number of ways, depending on program
size, resources, and tools.
     First, requirements allocations should be documented in a decision database or spreadsheet
controlled by the Lead SE or System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT). Requirements man-
agement tools based on relational databases provide a convenient mechanism to record the alloca-
tions. Second, as performance allocations, they should be formally documented and controlled as
speciﬁc requirements ﬂowed down to lower level speciﬁcations.
                                                             49.3 Analyzing System Performance      603

    A relational database requirements management tools allow you to:
    1. Document the allocation.
    2. Flow the allocation down to lower level speciﬁcations with traceability linkages back to the
       higher level parent performance constraint.


49.3 ANALYZING SYSTEM PERFORMANCE

The preceding discussion introduced the basic concepts of performance budgets and design safety
margins. Implementations of these Design-To MOPs are discussed in engineering textbooks such
as electronics engineering and mechanical engineering. However, from an SE perspective, inte-
grated electrical, mechanical, or optical systems have performance variations interfacing with
similar EQUIPMENT and PERSONNEL within larger structural systems. The interactions among
these systems and levels of abstractions require in-depth analysis to determine acceptable limits
for performance variability. At all levels of abstraction, capabilities are typically event and/or task
driven—that is, an external or time-based stimulus or cue activates or initiates a capability to action.

Understanding System Performance and Tasking
Overall, system performance represents the integrated performance of the System Elements—such
as EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, and MISSION RESOURCES—that provide system capabilities,
operations, and processes. As integrated elements, if the performance of any of these mission crit-
ical items—(PRODUCTS, SUBSYSTEMS, etc.) is degraded, so is the overall system perform-
ance, depending on the robustness of the system design. Robust designs often employ redundant
hardware and/or software design implementations to minimize the effects of system performance
degradation on achieving the mission and its objectives.

Referral For more information about redundant systems, refer to Chapter 50 on Reliability, Avail-
ability, and Maintainability (RAM) Practices and also Chapter 36 on System Architecture Devel-
opment Practices.

     From a systems perspective, SYSTEM capabilities, operations, and executable processes are
response mechanisms to “tasking” assigned and initiated by peer or HIGHER ORDER Systems
with authority. Thus, SYSTEM “tasking” requires the integrated set of sequential and concurrent
capabilities to accomplish a desired performance-based outcome or result.
     To illustrate the TASKING of capabilities, consider the simple graphic shown in Figure 49.3.
Note the chain of sequential tasks, Tasks A through n. Each task has a ﬁnite duration bounded by
a set of Mission Event Timeline (MET) performance parameters. The time period marked by the
start of one task until the start of another is referred to as the throughput or cycle time. The cycle
time parameter brings up an interesting point, especially in establishing a convention for decision
making.

Establishing Cycle Time Conventions
When you establish cycle times, you need to deﬁne a convention that will be used consistently
throughout your analyses. There are a couple of approaches as shown in Figure 49.4 Convention
A deﬁnes cycle time as beginning with the START of Task A and the START of Task B. In con-
trast, Convention B deﬁnes cycle time as starting at the END of Task A and completing at the start
of Task B. You can use either method. For discussion purposes, we will use Convention A.
604      Chapter 49     System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins




          -3s     +3s               -3s       +3s                  -3s       +3s               -3s     +3s




        TaskAA
       Task                       TaskBB
                                 Task                                                       Task“n”
                                                                                           Task  “n”

                                                                                              Task “n”
         Task A Throughput        Task B Throughput                                          Throughput

   1                         2                             3                           4                     5

                                  System Throughput, Turnaround, or Cycle Time




                                                                                                       -3s       +3s


Figure 49.3 Mission Event Timeline (MET) Analysis



   Convention A                                                Task
                                                                Task

                                                                Task Cycle Time

                                                       1                           2




  Convention B                                                 Task
                                                                Task

                                               Task Cycle Time

                                          1                              2
Figure 49.4 Task Cycle Time Convention



Referral For more information about conventions, refer to Chapter 45 on Engineering Standards,
Frames of Reference, and Conventions Practices.


49.4 OPERATIONAL TASKING OF A SYSTEM CAPABILITY

Most tasks, whether performed by human operators or EQUIPMENT, involve three phases:
       1. Pre-Mission Preparation or conﬁguration/reconﬁguration.
       2. Mission Performance of the task.
       3. Post-mission Delivery of the required results and any residual housecleaning in prepara-
          tion for the next tasks.
                                                                                49.4 Operational Tasking of a System Capability                             605


                                                            Typical Task

                                                                                                  Output                                      System,
                         Arrival                                                                   Output
Inputs                    ArrivalQueue
                                  Queue                          Processing
                                                                  Processing                      Results                                     Product,
                                                                                                   Results                                   or Service


                                  Queue Time                       Processing Time                   Transport Time
                                      tQueue                              tProcessing                       tTransport
                    t0                                      t1                               t2                                   t3
Figure 49.5 Anatomy of Typical Task Performance


               Arrival/
           Execute Command
   1                                                                                                                                                  9
                                                                      tCYCLETIME

                                                                 Task Cycle Time
           tQueue
       Queue Time                  Latest
       Wait                        Start
       Time
                                                                 tProcess                               5       tAdmin.           6
        tQ1
                                                                                                                                            Latest
                                                                                                                                            Finish
                                                                   Processing Time
                              Initialization                Execution Time                  Report          Administration
Earliest                          Time                                                      Delay              Time
 Start
                                  tInit            tExec1        tExec2       tExec3        tDelivery                    tTransport
                                                                   tExec
                          2                                                                                       Transport Time
                                               3                                        4                   Xport 1          Enroute        Xport 2
                                                                                                             Delay            Delay          Delay

                                                                                                             tTT1            tEnroute            Earliest
                                                                                                                                                  Finish
                                                                                                                         7              8

Figure 49.6 Task Throughput/Cycle Time Analysis



Communications intensive systems such as humans, computers, et al have a similar pattern that
typically includes QUEUES—or waiting line theory. We illustrate this pattern in Figure 49.5.
     In the illustration, a typical task provides three capabilities: 1) queue new arrivals, 2) perform
processing, and 3) output results. Since new arrivals may overwhelm the processing function, queue
new arrivals establish a buffer or holding area for ﬁrst in–ﬁrst out (FIFO) processing or some other
priority processing algorithm.
     Each of these capabilities is marked by its own cycle time: tQueue = Queue Time, tProcess = Pro-
cessing Time, and tTransport = Transport Time. Figure 49.6 illustrates how we might decompose each
of these capabilities into lower level time constraints for establishing budgets and safety margins.

Guidepost 49.1 At this point we have identiﬁed and partitioned task performance into three
phases: queue time, processing time, and transport time. Philosophically, this partitioning enables
606     Chapter 49     System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins

us to decompose allocated task performance times into smaller, more manageable pieces. Beyond
this point, however, tasks analysis becomes more complicated due to timing uncertainties. This
brings us to our next topic, understanding statistical characteristics of tasking.


49.5 UNDERSTANDING STATISTICAL
CHARACTERISTICS OF TASKING

All tasks involve some level of performance uncertainty. The level of uncertainty is created by the
inherent reliability of the System Elements—PERSONNEL, MISSION RESOURCES, and so forth.
In general, task performance and its uncertainty can be characterized with statistics using normal
(Gaussian) (Normal), Binomial, and LogNormal (Poisson) frequency distributions. Based on meas-
ured performance over a large number of samples, we can assign a PROBABILITY that task or
capability performance will complete processing within a minimum amount of time and should not
exceed a speciﬁed amount of time. To see how this relates to system performance and allocated
performance budgets and margins, refer to Figure 49.7.
     Let’s suppose a task that is initiated at Event 1 and must be completed by Event 2. We refer
to this time as tAllocation. To ensure a margin of safety as a contingency and for growth, we establish
a performance safety margin, tMargin. This leaves a remaining time, tExec, as the maximum budgeted
performance.
     Using the lower portion of the graphic, suppose that we perform an analysis and determine
that the task, represented by the gray rectangular box, is expected to have a mean ﬁnish time, tMean.
We also determine with a level of probability that task completion may vary about the mean by
±3s designated as early ﬁnish and late ﬁnish. Therefore, we equate the latest ﬁnish to the maximum
budgeted performance, tBudget. This means that once initiated at Event 1, the task must complete
and deliver the output or results to the next task no later than tBudget. Based on the projected distri-


             Event 1                                                                              Event 2
                                                       tAllocation

                                               tExec                                    tMargin


  Task                                     Task A Time Allocation                                             Task
Initiation                                                                             Design               Completion
                           Maximum Budgeted Performance
                                                                                       Margin

                  Queue                                              Transport
                                  Processing Time
                  Time                                                 Time


                                                 Early         Mean (mA)       Late
                                                 Finish         Finish        Finish



                       Task Execution
                        Performance

                                                           -3s          +3s
                               tMin.

                                       tMean                                           tMargin
                                           tBudget

Figure 49.7 Task Timeline Elements
                                         49.6 Applying Statistics to Multi-Task System Performance      607

bution, we also expect the task to be completed no sooner than the -3s point—the early ﬁnish
point.
     If we translate this analysis into the Requirements Domain Solution, we generate a require-
ments statement that captures the capability and its associated performance allocation. Let’s suppose
that Capability B requires that Capability A complete processing and transmit data within 250 mil-
liseconds AFTER Event 1 occurs. Consider the following example of a speciﬁcation requirement
statement.


 EXAMPLE 49.2
“When event 1 occurs, (Capability A) shall process the incoming data and transmit the results to (Capabil-
ity B) within 250 milliseconds.”

Now let’s suppose that Capability B requires receipt of the data within a window of time between
240 milliseconds and 260 milliseconds. The requirement might read as follows:


 EXAMPLE 49.3
“When event 1 occurs, (Capability A) shall process the incoming data and transmit the results to (Capabil-
ity B) within 250 ± 10 milliseconds.”

Guidepost 49.2 Our discussion emphasizes how overall system task performance can vary. To
understand how this variation occurs, let’s take it one step further and discuss it relative to the key
task phases.


49.6 APPLYING STATISTICS TO MULTI-TASK
SYSTEM PERFORMANCE

Our previous discussion focused on the performance of a single capability. If the statistical vari-
ations for a single capability are aggregated for a multi-level system, we can easily see how this
impacts overall system performance. We can illustrate this by the example shown in Figure 49.8.
     Let’s assume we have an overall task called Perform Task A. The purpose of Task A is to
perform a computation using variable inputs, I1 and I2, and produce a computed value as an output.
The key point of our discussion here is to illustrate time-based statistical variances to complete
processing.


 EXAMPLE 49.4
Let’s assume that Task A consists of two subtasks, Subtask A1 and Subtask A2. Subtask A1 enters inputs I1 and
I2. Each input, I1 and I2, has values that vary about a mean.

When Subtask A1 is initiated, it produces a response within tA1Mean that varies from tA1Min to tA1Max.
The output of Subtask A1 serves as an input to Subtask A2. Subtask A2 produces a response within
tA2Mean that may occur as early as tA2Min or as late as tA2Max.
      If we investigate the overall performance of Task A, we ﬁnd that Task A is computed within
tCompute as indicated by the central mean. The overall Task A performance is determined by the sta-
tistical variance of the summation of Subtask A1 and Subtask A2 processing times.
608    Chapter 49      System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins




                                                        Perform Task A


       -3s   +3s                                                                                  -3s   +3s    Time
                       Value
   Variable Input I1                                          tCompute


                                       Perform
                                        Perform                                 Perform
                                                                                 Perform
                                      SubTaskAA1 1
                                     SubTask                                   SubTaskAA2 2
                                                                              SubTask


                                     Task A1 Cycle Time                     Task A2 Cycle Time

                                        Mean (mA1)                                  Mean (mA2)


       -3s   +3s       Value

   Variable Input I2              tA1Min.                                tA2Min.                        Time
                                                -3s    +3s                          -3s       +3s
                                     tA1Mean                                 tA2Mean
                                            tA1Max.                                tA2Max.

                                             tA1Transport                              tA2Transport

Figure 49.8 Task Timeline (MET) Statistical Analysis


Guidepost 49.3 We have seen how statistical variations in inputs and processing affect system
performance from a timing perspective. Similar methods are applied to the statistical variations of
inputs 1 and 2 as independent variables over a range of values. The point of our discussion is to
heighten your awareness of these variances. THINK about and CONSIDER statistical variability
when allocating performance budgets and margins as well as analyzing data produced by the
system to determine compliance with requirements.

Referral For more information about statistical variability, refer to Chapter 48 on Statistical Inﬂu-
ences on System Design Practices.

Given this understanding, let’s return to a previous discussion about applying statistical variations
to phases of a task.


49.7 APPLYING STATISTICAL VARIATIONS
TO INTRA-TASK PHASES

In our earlier discussion of task phases—consisting of queue time, capability performance time,
and transport time—we identiﬁed the various time segments within each phase. Let’s examine how
statistical inﬂuences affect those phases. Figure 49.9 serves as the focal point for our discussion.
     The central part of the ﬁgure represents an overall task and its respective queue time, pro-
cessing time, and transport time phases. Below each phase is a statistical representation of the exe-
cution time. The top portion of the chart illustrates the aggregate performance of the overall task
execution.
                                                                            49.8 Mathematical Approximation Alternative                            609

   Frequency                                                                                         Mean (mTask)

                                              Task Execution
                                                                                                                                          Time

                                                                                                 -3s                +3s
                                  Minimum Task Cycle Time
                                              Nominal Task Cycle Time
                                                                                                                                 tTaskMargin
                                                   Budgeted (Maximum) Task Cycle Time
                                                            Allocated Task Cycle Time


                                                  AllocatedTask
                                                 Allocated       CycleTime
                                                            TaskCycle  Time
         QueueTime
        Queue  Time                  CapabilityPerformance
                                    Capability  PerformanceTime
                                                             Time        Transport
                                                                          TransportTime
                                                                                    Time
                                                                                       Allocated
   Allocated Queue Time           Allocated Capability Performance Time             Transport Time
            Mean (mQueue)                                Mean (mCap)                       Mean (mTransport)




            -3s +3s                                    -3s   +3s                              -3s +3s                            Time
   tQMin.                            tTMin.                                                                         tTrMargin.
                      tQMargin.                                        tCapMargin. tTMin.
    tQMean                                tCapMean                                   tTMean
      tQBudget                                  tCapBudget                                tTBudget

Figure 49.9 Task Timeline (MET) Statistical Analysis



     How does this relate to SE? If a given capability or task is supposed to be completed within
the allocated cycle time and you are designing a system—with queues, computational devices, and
transmission lines—you need to factor in these times as performance budgets and safety margins
to ﬂow down to lower levels.

Applying Statistics to Overall System Performance
Our discussions to this point focused on the task and multi-tasking level. The ultimate challenge
for SEs is: HOW will the overall system perform? Figure 49.10 illustrates the effects of statistical
variability of the System Element Architecture and its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

49.8 MATHEMATICAL APPROXIMATION ALTERNATIVE

Our conceptual discussions of statistical system performance analysis were intended to highlight
key considerations for establishing and allocating performance budgets and margins and analyz-
ing data for system performance tuning. Most people do not have the time to perform the statisti-
cal analyses. For some applications, this may be acceptable and you should use the method
appropriate for your application. There is an alternative method you might want to consider using,
however.
     Scheduling techniques such as the Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) employ
approximations that serve as analogs to a Gaussian (normal) distribution. The formula stated below
is used:
                                                                                               ta + 4t b + t c
                                                        Expected or mean time =                                                                  (49.1)
                                                                                                     6
where
610     Chapter 49   System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins



       OPERATING                                       SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI)
      ENVIRONMENT
                                -3s    +3s
         Element                                                  MISSION SYSTEM

                                                         EQUIPMENT
                                                          EQUIPMENT
        MAN-MADE
        MAN-MADE                                                                SYSTEM
                                                                                 SYSTEM
                                                             Element
                                                               Element
         Systems
          Systems                                                             RESPONSES
                                                                               RESPONSES
                                                           • •Hardware
                                                               Hardware
         Element
          Element                                                                Element
                                                                                  Element
                                                            •Software
                                                              •Software


         INDUCED
          INDUCED
      ENVIRONMENT
       ENVIRONMENT                                       PERSONNEL          PROCEDURAL
          Element                                         PERSONNEL          PROCEDURAL
           Element                                         Element
                                                            Element          DATAElement
                                                                            DATA  Element


        NATURAL                                            MISSION
                                                           MISSION
         NATURAL
      ENVIRONMENT                                        RESOURCES
                                                          RESOURCES
       ENVIRONMENT
         Element                                           Element
                                                            Element
          Element



                                                                   SUPPORTSYSTEM
                                                                  SUPPORT  SYSTEM
                               -3s    +3s


Figure 49.10 Statistical Variations in SYSTEM Level Performance



      ta = optimistic time
      tb = most likely time
      tc = pessimistic time

Do SEs Actually Perform This Type of Analysis?
Our discussion here highlights the theoretical viewpoint of task analysis. A question people often
ask is: Do people actually go to this level of detail? In general, the answer is yes, especially in
manufacturing and scheduling environments. In those environments statistical process control
(SPC) is used to minimize process and material variations in the production of parts, and this trans-
lates into cost reduction.

Modeling and Simulation
If you develop a model of a system whereby each of the capabilities, operations, processes, and
tasks is represented by a series of sequential and concurrent elements or feedback loops, you can
apply statistics to the processing time associated with each of those elements. By analyzing how
each of the input variables varies over value ranges bounded on the ±3s points, you can determine
the overall system performance relative to a mean.

Guidepost 49.4 Our discussions highlighted some basic task-oriented methods that support a
variety of systems engineering activities. These methods can be applied to Mission Event Timelines
(METs), system capabilities and performance as a means of determining overall system perform-
ance. Through decomposition and allocation of overall requirements, developers can establish the
appropriate performance budgets and safety margins for lower level system entities.
                                                       49.10 System Performance Optimization     611

49.9 REAL-TIME CONTROL AND FRAME-BASED SYSTEMS

Some systems operate as real-time, closed loop, feedback systems. Others are multi-tasking
whereby they have to serve multiple processing tasks on a priority basis. Let’s explore each of these
types further.

Real-Time, Closed Loop Feedback Systems
Electronic, mechanical, and electromechanical systems include real-time, closed loop, feedback
systems that condition or process input data and produce an output, which is sampled and summed
with the input as negative feedback. Rather than feedback impulse functions to the input, ﬁlters
may be required to dampen the system response. Otherwise, the system might overcompensate and
go unstable while attempting to regain control. The challenge for SEs is determining and allocat-
ing performance for the optimal feedback responses to ensure system stability.

Frame-Based System Performance
Electronic systems often employ software to accomplish CYCLICAL data processing tasks using
combinations of OPEN and CLOSED loop cycles. Systems of these types are referred to as frame-
based systems.
     Frame-based systems perform accomplish multi-task processing via time-based blocks of time
such as 30 Hertz (Hz) or 60 Hz. Within each block, processing of multiple CONCURRENT tasks
is accomplished by allocating a portion of each frame to a speciﬁc task, depending on priorities.
For these cases, apply performance analysis to determine the appropriate mix of concurrent task
processing times.

Author’s Note 49.3 One approach to frame-based system task scheduling is rate monotonic
analysis (RMA). Research this topic further if frame-based systems apply to your business domain.


49.10 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION

System performance analysis provides a valuable tool for modeling and prediction the intended
interactions of the SYSTEM in its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. Underlying assumptions are
validated when the SYSTEM is powered up and operated. The challenge for SEs becomes one of
optimizing overall system performance to compensate for the variability of the embedded PROD-
UCTS, SUBSYSTEMS, ASSEMBLIES, SUBASSEMBLIES, and PARTS.

Minimum Conditions for System Optimization
When the system enters the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) Phase, deﬁciencies
often consume most of the SE’s time. The challenge is getting the system to a state of equilibrium
that can best be described as nominal and acceptable as deﬁned by the System Performance Spec-
iﬁcation (SPS).
     Once the system is in a state of nominal operation with no outstanding deﬁciencies, there may
be a need to tweak performance to achieve optimum performance. Let’s reiterate the last point: you
must correct all major deﬁciencies BEFORE you can attempt to optimize system performance in
a speciﬁc area. Exceptions include minor items that are not system performance effecters. Consider
the following example:
612     Chapter 49   System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins


 EXAMPLE 49.5
Suppose that you are developing a fuel-efﬁcient vehicle and are attempting to optimize road performance via
a test track. If the fuel ﬂow has a deﬁciency, can you optimize overall system performance? Absolutely not!
Does having a taillight out impact fuel efﬁciency performance? No, its not a contributing element to fuel ﬂow.
It may, however, impact safety.

Pareto-Based Performance Improvements
There are a number of ways to optimize system performance, some of which can be very time-con-
suming. For many systems, however, there is limited time to optimize performance prior to deliv-
ery, simply because the system development schedule has been consumed with correcting system
deﬁciencies.
     When you investigate options for WHERE to focus system performance optimization efforts,
one approach employs the Pareto 80/20 rule. Under the 80/20 rule, 80% of system performance is
attributable to 20% of the processing tasks. If you accept this analogy, the key is to identify the
20% processes and focus performance analysis efforts on maximizing or minimizing their impact.
So, employ diagnostic tools to understand HOW each item is performing as well as interface laten-
cies between items via networks, and so forth.
     Today electronic instrumentation devices and software are available to track processing tasks
that consume system resources and performance. Plan from the beginning of system development
HOW these devices and software can be employed to identify and prioritize system processing task
performance and optimize it.
     System performance optimization begins on day 1 after Contract Award via:
      1. System performance requirements allocations.
      2. Plans for “test points” to monitor performance after the system has been fully integrated.


49.11 SYSTEM ANALYSIS REPORTING

As a disciplined professional, document the results of each an analysis. For engineering tasks that
involve simple assessments, ALWAYS document the results, even informally, in an engineering
notebook. For tasks that require a more formal, structured approach, you may be expected to deliver
a formal report. A common question many SEs have is: HOW do you structure an analytical report?
     First, you should consult your contract for speciﬁc requirements. If the contract does not require
a speciﬁc a structure, consult your local command media. If your command media does not provide
guidance, consider using the outline provided in Chapter 47 on Analytical Decision Support
Practices.


49.12 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system performance analysis, budgets, and safety margins practices.

Principle 49.1 Every SYSTEM/entity design must have performance budgets and margins that
bound capabilities and provide a margin of safety to accommodate uncertainty in material, com-
ponent, and operational performance.
                                                                     Organizational Centric Exercises   613

Principle 49.2 Every measure of performance (MOP) has an element of development risk. Mit-
igate the risk by establishing one or more boundary condition thresholds to trigger risk mitigation
actions.

Principle 49.3 When planning task processing, at a minimum, include considerations for queue
time, processing time, and transport time in all computations.

Principle 49.4 System performance for a speciﬁc capability should only be optimized when all
performance effecters are operating normally within their speciﬁcation tolerances.


49.13 SUMMARY

Our discussions of system performance analysis, budgets, and margins practices provided an overview of key
SE design considerations. We described the basic process and methods for:
    1. Allocating measures of performance (MOPs) to lower levels
    2. Investigating task-based processing relative to statistical variability
    3. Publishing analysis results in a report using a recommended outline.
We also offered an approach for estimating task processing time durations and introduced the concept of rate
monotonic analysis (RMA) for frame-based processing.
     Finally, we showed from an SE perspective the performance variability of System Elements that must be
factored into performance allocations.
    • Each SPS or item speciﬁcation measure of performance (MOP) should be partitioned into a “design-
      to” MOP and a safety margin MOP.
    • Each program must provide guidance for establishing safety margins for all system elements.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Select an element of the system. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) If you had been the developer of the system, what guidance would you have provided for perform-
       ance allocations, budgets, and safety margins? Give examples.
   (b) What types of budgets and margins would you recommend?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact an in-house program that designs real time software intensive systems for laboratory environments.
   Interview SE personnel regarding the following questions and prepare a report on your ﬁndings and
   observations.
   (a) How were the system tasking, task performance, and EQUIPMENT sized, timed, and optimized?
   (b) How did the program document this information?
   (c) Is rate monotonic analysis (RMA) applicable to this program and how is it applied?
2. Contact an in-house program that designs real time products for deployment in external environments—
   such as missiles or monitoring stations. Interview SE personnel regarding the following questions and
   prepare a report on your ﬁndings and observations.
614    Chapter 49     System Performance Analysis, Budgets, and Safety Margins

   (a) How were the system tasking, task performance, and EQUIPMENT sized, timed, and optimize.
   (b) How did the program document this information?
   (c) Is RMA applicable to this program and how is it applied?
3. Search the Internet for papers on rate monotonic analysis (RMA). Develop a conceptual report on how
   you would apply RMA to the following types of systems or products or others of your choosing. Include
   responses to inputs and output results.
   (a) Automobile engine controller
   (b) Multi-tasking computer system
4. Contact a small, medium, and a large contract program within you organization.
   (a) What guidance did they establish for design safety margins? Provide examples.
   (b) How were design-to parameters and safety margins allocated, documented, and tracked? Provide
       examples.
   (c) How was the guidance communicated to developer?
   (d) Were technical performance measures (TPMs) required?
   (e) How did the program link TPMs and performance budgets and safety margins?


ADDITIONAL READING

SHA, LUI and SATHAYE, SHIRISH. Distributed System Design   ers’ Handbook for Real-Time Analysis: Guide to Rate
  Using Generalized Rate Monotonic Theory, Technical       Monotonic Analysis for Real-Time Systems. Boston, MA:
  Report CMU/SEI-95-TR-011, Carneige-Mellon Univer-        Kluwer Academic. Publishers, Norwell, MA.
  sity, 1995.
Klein, MARX, RALYA, THOMAS; POLLAK, BILL; OBENZA,
  RAY; HARBOUR, MICHAEL GONZALE. 1993. A Practition-
Chapter              50

     Reliability, Availability,
     and Maintainability

50.1 INTRODUCTION

The purpose of any system is to accomplish the intended User’s missions and objectives as bounded
by a prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. The focus of any mission is on successful com-
pletion of the objectives efﬁciently and effectively with minimal or no safety risk to its system’s
operators, the system, general public, and the environment.
     What does it take to accomplish these objectives? Three key system requirements emerge.
     • The system has to be immediately available on-demand when the User wants to conduct
       their missions.
     • The system must be reliable and dependable to complete the mission safely.
     • The system must be capable of being maintained and achieve turnaround requirements that
       support its operational readiness—or availability—to conduct new missions.
We refer to the three requirements as: 1) availability, 2) reliability, and 3) maintainability
respectively.
    As an SE you may be expected to:
     1. Lead efforts to specify (Acquirer role), analyze and allocate (System Developer) RAM
        requirements for the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) and item development
        speciﬁcations.
     2. Integrate engineering specialty disciplines into the RAM speciﬁcation and analysis
        decision-making process.
     3. Ensure those engineering specialties are integrated into the multi-level SYSTEM and item
        SE design and development activities.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What is RAM?
      2. Why are reliability, availability, and maintainability addressed as a set?
      3. Who is accountable for RAM?
      4. What is reliability?
      5. How is reliability determined?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                               615
616     Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

       6. What is availability?
       7. How is availability determined?
       8. What is maintainability?
       9. How is maintainability determined?
      10. What is the RAM trade space?
      11. How do you improve availability?
      12. How do you improve reliability?
      13. How do you improve maintainability?
      14. When is RAM addressed in a program?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Compensating Provision “Actions that are available or can be taken by an operator to
        negate or mitigate the effect of a failure on a system.” (Source: MIL-STD-1629A [canceled],
        para. 3.1.3)
      • Corrective Maintenance “All actions performed as a result of failure, to restore an item to
        a speciﬁed condition. Corrective maintenance can include any or all of the following steps:
        Localization, Isolation, Disassembly, Interchange, Reassembly, Alignment and Checkout.
        (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G, glossary, p. G-3)
      • Delay Time That element of downtime during which no maintenance is being accomplished
        on the item because of either supply or administrative delay.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A,
        Appendix G, Glossary, p. G-3)
      • End Effect “The consequence(s) a failure mode has on the operation, function, or status of
        the highest indenture level.” (Source: MIL-STD-1629A [canceled], para. 3.1.13.3)
      • Failure “The event, or inoperable state, in which any item or part of an item does not, or
        would not, perform as previously speciﬁed.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G)
      • Failure Cause “The physical or chemical processes, design defects, quality defects, part
        misapplication, or other processes which are the basic reason for failure or which initiate the
        physical process by which deterioration proceeds to failure.” (Source: MIL-STD-1629A
        [canceled], para. 3.1.12)
      • Failure Effect “The consequence(s) a failure mode has on the operation, function, or status
        of an item. Failure effects are typically classiﬁed as Local, Next Higher Level, and End
        Effect.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G)
      • Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) “A procedure by which each potential failure
        mode in a product (system) is analyzed to determine the results or effects thereof on the
        product and to classify each potential failure mode according to its severity or risk proba-
        bility number.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G)
      • Latent Defects Fault characteristics in an item’s physical implementation due to design
        errors and ﬂaws, component and material properties, imperfections, abnormalities, or impu-
        rities; poor work process and method practices due to poor quality assurance or lack of
        training.
      • Maintainability Refer to the deﬁnition provided in Chapter 35 on System To/For Design
        Objectives.
      • Reliability Refer to the deﬁnition provided in Chapter 35 on System Design To/For
        Objectives.
                                                               50.2 Approach to This Chapter   617

50.2 APPROACH TO THIS CHAPTER

RAM is a specialty engineering skill. Due to the SERIOUSNESS of safety, legal, ﬁnancial, and
political consequences resulting from the lack of application or misapplication of the specialty,
QUALIFIED, COMPETENT, professional reliability engineers and maintainability engineers must
perform RAM. With qualiﬁed credentials, these engineers are subject matter experts (SMEs) who
understand and know HOW TO:
    1. Apply RAM methodologies
    2. Interpret the results and their subtleties for informed decision making.
Because competencies and experience are required to understand which formulas to apply as well
as the risk of misapplication, you are hereby advised to employ the services of a CERTIFIED pro-
fessional RAM SME with a PROVEN track record, either on your staff or as a consultant. DO
NOT attempt to apply these practices unless you are properly TRAINED and CERTIFIED.
     Your job, as an SE is to develop a working knowledge of the basic RAM concepts to enable
you to:
    1. Know WHEN to employ these services.
    2. Gain a level of conﬁdence in the individual(s) performing RAM.
    3. Understand how to apply the results provided by the SMEs.
Our discussion is NOT intended to be an all-encompassing discourse on RAM. The intent is to
introduce you to RAM concepts that provide a foundation for understanding and conversing about
the subject matter.
     So, rather than repeat what other authors have published in detail, we will approach RAM from
an SE task perspective. As such, SEs need to understand two aspects of RAM: its fundamentals
and its implementation. For detailed RAM speciﬁcs, research the following sources or later
editions:
    • Patrick D. T. O’Connor, Practical Reliability Engineering (Wiley, 3rd edition, 1992).
    • Benjamin S. Blanchard and Wolter J. Fabrycky, System Engineering and Analysis, second
      edition (Wiley, 1990).
    A prerequisite to RAM is a basic knowledge of mathematical frequency distributions and their
application as best-ﬁt characteristic models. Speciﬁcally, RAM employs these distributions to
model component failure rates that can be integrated at higher levels to provide an estimate of
overall system RAM.

Frequency Distribution Modeling
There are numerous mathematical models with characteristic curves and parameters that enable us
to model a speciﬁc component, item, or system. Example distributions include normal, lognormal,
binomial, exponential, and Weibull, distributions. For discussion purposes, there are three stand-
ard types of distributions that provide a best ﬁt for most reliability applications: 1) normal or
Gaussian distribution, 2) lognormal distribution, and 3) negative exponential distribution. Figure
50.1 illustrates the characteristic proﬁles of these distributions.
    Let’s begin our discussion of RAM with the system reliability.
618      Chapter 50            Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

                         Normal or Gaussian                        C        LogNormal
              A                                                        Frequency Distribution
                        Frequency Distribution
                                                                         Median (Geometric Mean)
Frequency                Mean/Median                   Frequency
                                                                                Mean




             -3s -2s      -s       +s +2s +3s
                                                Time                                                      Time
                               68%
                               95%
                               99.7%


                          Cumulative
              B        Probability Density                         D   Negative Exponential
Cumulative              Function (PDF)                                     Distribution
  PDF                                                  Frequency
       1.0




                  t1                   t2    Time                                                  Time

Figure 50.1 Types of Frequency Distributions


50.3 SYSTEM RELIABILITY

What is system reliability? Reliability is deﬁned as the probability of successfully completing a
bounded mission with speciﬁed objectives within a speciﬁc operating duration for a prescribed set
of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions, use cases, and scenarios without a failure. This
leads to the question: WHAT constitutes a failure?

What Constitutes a Failure?
MIL-HDBK-470A (Appendix G, p. G-5) deﬁnes a failure as “an event, or inoperable state, in which
any item or part of an item does not, or would not, perform as previously speciﬁed.” Taking a literal
interpretation of this deﬁnition, a lightbulb in a car’s trunk that becomes inoperable during the
course of a day trip—the mission—qualiﬁes as a failure. However, a trunk light failure at night
may be important, especially if the driver has to retrieve a tire jack, tools, and space tire to replace
a ﬂat or damaged tire.
     A failure is determined by:
      1. Criteria that establish the criticality of system components to achieving the mission.
      2. What degree of performance degradation is allowable and still meet performance standards.
We refer to these components as mission critical items. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 50.1
A car should have four tires and a spare in a qualiﬁed condition prior to its driver leaving on a trip. During
travel if a ﬂat occurs, the mission can continue, though with some level of elevated risk due to having to use
the spare until the tire is repaired. Tires on a car irrefutably are mission critical items. The signiﬁcance of a
tire failure event depends on criteria such as the condition of the tires prior to the trip, trip distance of 1 mile
or 1000 miles, and the circumstances required for emergency applications.
                                                                         50.3 System Reliability   619

Reliability Philosophy Precepts
Reliability is founded on a multi-faceted philosophy that includes the following precepts:
    1. Every EQUIPMENT element has a probability of success that is determined by its pre-
       mission operational health status, mission duration, and prescribed set of OPERATING
       ENVIRONMENT conditions, uses cases, and scenarios.
    2. Systems have an inherent failure rate at delivery due to latent defects from design errors
       and ﬂaws, component/material properties, and workmanship processes and methods.
    3. The characterization and modeling of component RAM can be approximated with various
       mathematical distributions.
    4. With proper attention, latent defects within a speciﬁc system are eliminated via corrective
       maintenance actions over time when identiﬁed.
    5. By eliminating potential fail points, the system failure rate decreases, thereby improving
       the reliability, assuming the system is deployed, operated, and supported according to the
       System Developer’s instructions.
    6. At some point during a mission or useful service life of a SYSTEM, failure rates begin to
       increase due to the combinational and cumulative effects of component failure rates result-
       ing from physical interactions and mass property degradation due to operating and envi-
       ronmental stresses.
    7. These effects are minimized and the component’s useful service life extended via a proac-
       tive program of system training, proper use, handling, and timely preventive and corrective
       maintenance actions at speciﬁed operating intervals.
To better understand these precepts, let’s explore the service life proﬁle of a ﬁelded system.

System Service Life Proﬁles
Humans and human-made systems exhibit service life proﬁles characterized by a level of infant
mortality early followed by a growth and stability and ﬁnally aging. Textbook discussions on reli-
ability often introduce the concept of service life proﬁles via a model referred to as the Bathtub
Curve. Conceptually, the Bath Tub Curve represents a plot of failure rates over the active service
life of the equipment. The name is derived from the characteristic Bathtub Curve hazard rate proﬁle
as illustrated in Figure 50.2. We will delineate hazard rate versus failure rate later.
      The Bathtub Curve consists of three distinct service life proﬁle regions: 1) a period of decreas-
ing hazard rates, 2) a period of stabilized hazard rates characterized by random failures, and 3) a
period of increasing hazard rates. Each of these periods is characterized by different types of expo-
nential distributions.
      The three service life proﬁle regions are often referred to by a variety of names. The period of
decreasing failures is also referred to as the Infant Mortality, Burn-In, and Early Failure Period.
The period of stabilized failures is often referred to as the Useful Service Life period. The period
of increasing failures is sometimes referred to as the Wearout Period.
      The Bathtub Curve is actually a paradigm, a model for thinking. Unfortunately, like most par-
adigms, the Bathtub has become ingrained as a “one size” mindset that it applies universally to all
systems and components. This is a fallacy! Most experts agree that ﬁeld data, though limited, suggest
that the failure rate proﬁles vary signiﬁcantly by component type. This is illustrated in Figure 50.2
by the dashed lines in the Period of Decreasing Failures and the Period of Increasing Failures.
      Smith [1992] notes the origin of the Bathtub Curve dates back to the 1940’s and 1950’s with
the embryonic stages of reliability engineering. Early attempts to characterize failure rates of elec-
620     Chapter 50      Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability


         SystemProduction
        System  ProductionPhase
                           Phase
                                SystemOperations
                              System                Support(O&S)
                                       Operations&&Support  (O&S)Phase
                                                                  Phase
                                                                                   SystemDisposal
                                                                                  System  DisposalPhase
                                                                                                   Phase
               1
                                          2                                3                      4
                     System Fielding                                            System Disposal
 Hazard
  Rate                 Period of                    Period of                Period of
                   Decreasing Failure           Stabilized Failure       Increasing Failure
  h(t)

                   Field Elimination of       System/Component           System/Component
                   System/Component              Failure Rate               Failure Rate
                     Defects Reduces          Remains Relatively          Increases Due to
                       Failure Rate                Constant              Effects of Aging &
   Reality                                                                                            Reality
                                                                            Maintenance

                                               Bathtub Paradigm


                            5                          6                          7

                                                                                                    Time
Figure 50.2 Bathtub Curve Paradigm Equipment Failure Proﬁle



tronic components lead to the formulation of the Bathtub Curve. Examples of these components
included vacuum tube and early semiconductor technologies that exhibited high failure rates.
     Many subject matter experts (SMEs) question the validity of the Bathtub Curve in today’s
world. Due to the higher component reliabilities available today, most systems become obsolete
and are replaced or disposed of long before their useful service life proﬁle reaches the Period of
Increasing Failure. Most computers will last for many years or decades. Yet, newer technologies
drive the need to upgrade or replace computers every 2–3 years.
     Smith [1992] observes that the Bathtub Curve may provide an appropriate proﬁle for a few
components. However, the Bathtub Curve has been ASSUMED to be applicable to more components
than is supported by actual ﬁeld data measurements. Large, statistically valid sample sizes are
required to establish age-reliability characteristics of components. Often, large populations of data
are difﬁcult to obtain due to their proprietary nature, assuming they exist. Nelson [1990] also notes
that the Bathtub Curve only represents a small percentage of his experiences.
     Anecdotal evidence suggests that most reliability work in the US is based on the Period of
Stabilized Failure, primarily due to the simplicity of dealing with the constant hazard rate from
negative exponential distributions. Although any decreasing or increasing exponential distribution
can be used to model the three failure rate regions, the Weibull distribution typically provides more
ﬂexibility in accurately shaping the characteristic proﬁle.
     Based on these observations, the validity of the Bathtub Curve may better serve as an instruc-
tional tool for describing “curve ﬁtting” than as “one size ﬁts all” paradigm for every type of elec-
tronic equipment.

Low Rate and Mass Production Systems. The discussion of the decreasing failure period
of the Bathtub Curve does provide some key insights, especially in terms of systems planned for
production. Figure 50.3 might represent the initial failure rate period for a ﬁrst article system and
set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions. For example, assume the instantaneous failure
rate or hazard rate at POWER ON is f0, which represents the mean of a statistically valid sample
of ﬁrst article systems. During the System Design Segment, f0 is strictly an analytical estimate.
                                                                                     50.3 System Reliability   621

      Failure
      Rate (λ)
                                Initial Failure Rate Mean for a Given System and
                                   OPERATING ENVIIRONMENT Conditions
     f0


                                                      Frequency Distributions
                                                       about a Central Mean


                                             1σ

     f1                                        2σ



                       3σ                                                                            1σ
                                                                                                       2σ
f2
                                                                                3σ

                 t0              t1                                                        t2   Time

                                  DecreasingFailure
                                  Decreasing         Period(DFP)
                                             FailurePeriod  (DFP)
Figure 50.3 Electronic Equipment Failure Proﬁle




     Once we have a statistically valid sampling of ﬁrst article systems, we can validate the distri-
bution with actual ﬁeld data. By correcting latent defects such as design errors and ﬂaws, compo-
nent material defects, and workmanship process and method problems for a speciﬁc serial number
system, its failure rate should decrease thereby improving its reliability. The strategy is to posture
the system design and manufacturing processes for a Low Rate Initial Production (LRIP) failure
rate near f2, not f0.
     From an infant mortality perspective, Figure 50.3 also illustrates the effects of a diminishing
failure rate resulting from a component “burn-in.” Based on this premise, some organizations estab-
lish a “burn-in” strategy to speciﬁc components for a prescribed number of hours prior to assem-
bly to reduce infant mortality.

System/Component Mortality
Traditionally, complex systems were viewed as having a failure rate that decreased with time based
on the frequency distribution of initial failures. These failures were referred to as infant mortality
due to weak components. Therefore, the Decreasing Failure Period (DFP) was viewed as a burn-
in period to eliminate these failures.
     If the failure rate diminishes initially during the defect elimination phase, why not subject the
system/component to an operational burn-in period at the factory? Some System Developer or Pro-
duction organizations do this. They know that mission critical components must achieve a speci-
ﬁed level of reliability and perform a burn-in. Some organizations driven by proﬁtability may tend
to rebuff this extra burn-in as follows:
     1. Unnecessary due to the higher reliability of today’s components.
     2. Consumes investment resources with no immediate return.
622     Chapter 50         Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability


                                                                                                   Upgrade #2 Decreasing
                                                                      Upgrade #1 Decreasing
                  Original System           Original System                                         Failure Period (DFP)
Failure                                                                Failure Period (DFP)
                 Decreasing Failure        Stabilized Failure
 Rate              Period (DFP)              Period (SFP)             Original System Increasing Failure Period (SFP)
  (l)
                                                                           Legacy                           Original Fielded
       l1                                                             System/Component                      System Failure
                                                      2                  Failure Rate                            Curve
                                                                       Increases Due to
                    1                          Item Major              Stress, Friction,
                                               Maintenance
                                                                            Aging                             3
                                                                                                         Item Major
                                                                                                         Maintenance
       l2
       l3
       l4


            t0                        t1                         t2                           tn              Time
                                                                              Useful Service Life Extensions

Figure 50.4 Mechanical Equipment Service Life Extension


      3. Drives up the cost such that the product will no longer be competitive.
      4. Performed by consumers (i.e., if the item “breaks” consumers will bring it back as
         “defective”).

Characterizing the Failure Rate Proﬁles
The Bathtub Curve provides a graphical concept for R&M engineers to characterize each of the
three failure regions with mathematical models. Initially, analytical models are developed to char-
acterize a component, item, or system’s reliability proﬁle. Data from existing systems or prototypes
may be used to collect data for validating the models. When the system is ﬁelded, actual data should
be available to validate the models.


The Reliability Function
The cornerstone of reliability is success over a speciﬁed mission duration and prescribed operating
conditions. The degree of success, in turn, is dependent on the degree of failure, which is pro-
babilistic and can be characterized and estimated statistically.
     Using probability theory, we can state that the probability of mission success, PSuccess, is a func-
tion of the probability of failure, PFailure as a function of elapsed time. Since the probability density
function (PDF) is a normalized to 1.0, we can mathematically express this relationship as a func-
tion of time as:
                                                    PSuccess (t ) = 1.0 - PFailure (t )                                        (50.1)
If the degree of success represents the reliability of an entity at a speciﬁc point in time for a pre-
scribed set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions, we equate:
                                                  PSuccess (t ) ∫ Reliability, R(t )                                           (50.2)
Failures, as random time and condition-based functions, can occur throughout a mission. An item’s
probability of failure, PFailure(t), or mission UNRELIABILITY, is the represented by its cumulative
                                                                                     50.3 System Reliability     623

failure probability density function (PDF), F(t) at a speciﬁc point in time. Therefore, we can express
Reliability (t) as follows:
                                        R(t ) ∫ 1 - PFailure( t )        for t ≥ 0                             (50.3)
We can state that R(t) represents the probability that the system or entity will SURVIVE a planned
mission of a speciﬁc duration under a prescribed set of operating conditions and elapsed time since
the start of the mission without failure. We refer to this bounded condition as the system or entity’s
reliability, which is also referred to as the Survival Function.
     Using Eq. 50.3, we can express reliability, R(t), over the time interval from t 0, the installation
time, to t1, the current time, in terms of the Cumulative PDF, F(t), as shown in Eq. 50.4.
                                                                        t1

                                          R(t ) ∫ 1 - F(t ) = 1 - Ú f (t )dt                                   (50.4)
                                                                        t0


Since the total area under the density function is 1.0, we can rewrite Eq. 50.4 over the time inter-
val from t1 to t• as:
                                   •             •

                           R(t ) = Ú f (t )dt = Ú le - lt dt        for t > 0 and l > 0                        (50.5)
                                   t1            t1



                                                       R(t ) = e - lt                                          (50.6)


The Hazard Rate
Our discussion up to this point characterizes the reliability of a system in SURVIVING from t0 to
the current time, t1. Given that the system has survived to t1, the question is: what rate of failure
can be expected in the next Dt time as Dt Æ 0. We refer to the rate of change over this time incre-
ment as the hazard rate, h(t); some refer to it as the instantaneous failure rate. Figure 50.5 Panel
A, which represents a NEGATIVE exponential failure density distribution for a system of compo-
nent, illustrates the t1 + Dt time increment. Based on this discussion, we deﬁne the hazard rate as
follows:




Figure 50.5 Contrasting Failure Density Proﬁle and Hazard Rate Proﬁle
624    Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

     • Hazard Rate—the conditional probability density that the system or entity will continue to
        perform its mission within speciﬁcation limits without failure through the next time incre-
        ment t1 + Dt.
Since a hazard represents a condition that has a likelihood of occurrence, probability theory is used
to characterize the f(t) and R(t) relationship over the next time increment. For systems or entities
that can be characterized using the Exponential Failure Law (EFL), we can express the hazard rate,
h(t), in terms of its failure density, f(t), and Reliability, R(t), for a speciﬁc point in time. For NEG-
ATIVE exponential distributions, h(t) can be expressed as shown in Eq. 50.7:
                                                      f (t )
                                           h(t ) =                 For t > 0                      (50.7)
                                                      R(t )
Referral For information concerning the derivation of the Hazard Function, refer to Billinton
and Allan pp. 126–129.
     Eq. 50.7, which appears to be a typical time variant equation, offers a unique proportionality
that is CONSTANT over time. Let’s explore this point further.
     For negative exponential failure density distributions:
                                   f (t ) = le - lt            For t ≥ 0 and l > 0                (50.8)
Substituting f(t) from Eq. 50.8 and R(t) from Eq. 50.6 into Eq. 50.7 yields Eq. 50.9

                                         le - lt
                                 h(t ) =                   For t ≥ 0 and l > 0
                                          e - lt
                                 h(t ) = l                                                        (50.9)
The result shown in Eq. 50.9 illustrates that the hazard rate, h(t), for systems or components exhibit-
ing a NEGATIVE exponential distribution, is a CONSTANT as illustrated in Figure 50.5 Panel B.
     This point characterizes the Period of Stabilized Failures in Figure 50.2 representing the Useful
Service Life of a system or component. Most reliability computations, for analytical simplicity and
convenience, are based on a system or entity with negative exponential characteristics operating in
this period.

Author’s Note 50.2 Remember—the Periods of Decreasing Failure, Stabilized Failure, and
Increasing Failure are INDEPENDENT and characterized by DIFFERENT failure rate distribu-
tions. Observe that the Y-axis in Figure 50.2 is labeled Hazard Rate, NOT Failure Rate. These are
different computations.

Understanding Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF)
To better understand SYSTEM failure concepts, we shift our attention to the base element of reli-
ability, PART level or component reliability. Figure 50.6 illustrates key points of our discussion.

Failure Frequency Distributions. Beginning with graph A, suppose we test the life span of 50
lightbulbs in a controlled laboratory environment with a speciﬁed set of OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT conditions. We allow the lightbulbs to burn continuously until they fail. Thus, at the
time of failure we record a failure event and the elapsed operating hours from the time the lights
were powered ON until failure.
     When we complete testing of all lightbulbs, we plot the results and observe a Normal or Gauss-
ian distribution provides a best-ﬁt characterization. We compute the mean of the distribution, m.
Reviewing the plot we observe that over the population of 50 light bulbs for a given set of OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT conditions, we had our ﬁrst bulb failure, a single instance, at t1 indicat-
                                                                                            50.3 System Reliability     625


   Item                                       “y” units with a
Frequency                A
                                             failure rate of l16                 “z” units with a
of Failure
                                                                                failure rate of l27
                                      “x” units with a
                                     failure rate of l10

                Operating Interval

                                                     t1                                tn        Time

                     MTBM                    DSM
             (Scheduled Maintenance)                                   Cumulative
                                                                        Failures
                                  MTTF                                   PDF
                                (Reliability)                      m
                                                                           100%

                                                                                            B
             Where: DSM = Design Safety Margin
                    MTBF = Mean-Time-To-Failure                              50%
                    MTBM = Mean-Time-Between-Maintenance
                    PDF = Probability Density Function



                                                                                                t1      m   tn   Time
                                                                                                                  5
Figure 50.6 Maintenance Interval Concepts




ing a failure rate of l1. The last failure, a single instance, occurs at tn indicating a failure rate
of ln. Based on this analysis, we appropriately label the mean, m, as the Mean Time To Failure
(MTTF).
     So, what is the point of this discussion? It provides insights about an entity’s failure frequency
distribution. So, if we are asked, how many failures can we expect at tx, we can point to Figure
50.5 at time tx and observe that based on a sample testing of 50 lightbulbs, a speciﬁc number of
failures can be expected to fail. In this regard, we refer to this as the instantaneous failure rate at
time, tx. Now suppose that we are asked WHAT percentage of the lightbulbs can be expected to
fail by tx. This brings us to our next topic, the probability density function (PDF) of cumulative
failure.

Cumulative Failure Probability Density Function (PDF). Beginning with t1 when the ﬁrst
bulb fails, we plot the cumulative failures over time until all have failed by tn. Since the area under
the Normal Distribution curve is normalized to 1.0, we can exploit the characteristic proﬁle to derive
probabilities. As a result, we plot the cumulative probability density function of the frequency dis-
tribution as illustrated in Panel B of Figure 50.6. Thus, we can say that at tm, there is a probability
of 0.50 that 25 lightbulbs can be expected to fail between t = 0 and that instant in time.

MTBF, TTF, and MTTR Relationships. Engineers often interchange terms that have subtle but
important differences. Such is the case with two reliability terms, Mean-Time-Between Failures
(MTBF) and Mean-Time-To-Failure (MTTF).
     MTTF, as the name implies, encompasses the elapsed time duration for an item from installa-
tion until failure. Once the item fails, there is a Mean-Time-To-Repair, (MTTR) to perform a
corrective action. In contrast, MTBF is the summation of MTTF and MTTR as indicated in
Eq. 50.10:
626   Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability


                                      MTBF = MTTF + MTTR                                     (50.10)
The mean failure rate, m, is the reciprocal of MTTF:
                                                       1
                                                m∫                                           (50.11)
                                                      MTTF
Since MTTF >> MTTR, we can say that:
                                             MTBF @ MTTF
Therefore:
                                                       1
                                               m@                                            (50.12)
                                                      MTBF



Modeling Reliability Conﬁgurations
Given a basic understanding in entity reliability, we now shift our attention to modeling conﬁgu-
rations of entity reliabilities. Three basic constructs enable us to compute the reliability of net-
worked entities. These constructs are: 1) series, 2) parallel, and 3) series parallel. Let’s explore
each of these individually.


Series Network Conﬁguration Reliability. The ﬁrst reliability network construct is a series
network conﬁguration. This conﬁguration consists of two or more entities connected in SERIES as
shown in Panel A of Figure 50.7. Mathematically, we express this relationship as follows:
                                      RSeries = ( R1 )( R2 )( R3 ) K ( Rn )                  (50.13)
where
   RSeries = overall reliability of the series network conﬁguration
   R1 = reliability of Item 1
   R2 = reliability of Item 2
   ...
   Rn = reliability of Item n
Substituting Eq. (50.6) into Eq. (50.13) using a NEGATIVE exponential distribution:
                                        RSeries = e - ( l + l + l Kl )( t )
                                                         1   2   3    n
                                                                                             (50.14)
where:
   ln = unique failure rate of the nth item
   t = NOMINAL operating cycle duration


Parallel Network Conﬁguration Reliability. The second reliability network construct is
based on a set entities connected in parallel as illustrated in Panel B of Figure 50.7. We refer to
this construct as a Parallel Reliability Network and express this relationship as follows:
                RParallel = ( R1 ) + ( R2 ) - ( R1 )( R2 ) for one out of two redundancies   (50.15)
                                                                                  50.3 System Reliability   627

 A    Series Entities Reliability Construct

                                     Mission/System/Entity
            Input
                                                                                     Output
         Stimulus or              Item11
                                 Item            Item22
                                                Item             Item33
                                                                Item
                                                                                   Response(s)
          Excitation




  B   Parallel Entities Reliability Construct

                                       Mission/System/Entity
              Input
                                                                                      Output
           Stimulus or                            Item11
                                                 Item
                                                                                    Response(s)
            Excitation



                                                  Item22
                                                 Item



Figure 50.7 Examples of Series and Parallel Reliability Conﬁguration Constructs


where:
   RParallel = overall reliability of the parallel network conﬁguration
   R1        = reliability of component 1
   R2        = reliability of component 2
Equation (50.15) can become unwieldy. However, we can simplify the equation by restructuring it
in the form noted below:
       RParallel = 1 - [(1 - R1 )(1 - R2 ) K (1 - Rn )] for one out of n redundancies                   (50.16)
Observe that each (1 - R) term represents the respective item’s unreliability.
     While each additional entity interjects an additional component subject to failure, the parallel
network conﬁguration increases the overall reliability of the system to successfully complete its
mission.
     To illustrate this point further, consider the illustrations shown in Panels A to C of Figure 50.8.
Note how the addition of redundant entities with identical reliabilities increases the overall
reliability.

Series-Parallel Network Conﬁguration Reliability. The third reliability network con-
struct is conﬁgured with a combination of series-parallel branches as shown in Figure 50.9. We
refer to this construct as a Series-Parallel Network. Computation of the reliability is a multi-step
process:
     Compute the reliability of PRODUCT A.
Step 1: Compute the reliability for the series network containing Subsystems A1 and A3.
Step 2: Compute the reliability for the series network containing Subsystems A2 and A4.
Step 3: Compute the reliability for PRODUCT A using the parallel network construct composed
        of the results from Step 1 (Subsystems A1–A3) and Step 2 (Subsystems A2–A4).
628       Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

                Single Point
      A          of Failure                               Item11
                                                         Item                               Rsystem = 0.95
                                                       RRE ==0.95
                                                              0.95
               Configuration                              E




                                                          Item11
                                                         Item
                                                       RRE ==0.95
                                                              0.95
                  Dual                                    E
                                                                                            Rsystem = 0.9975
      B        Redundancy              OR                                   OR

              Configuration                          Item
                                                      Item11Backup
                                                              Backup
                                                        RRE ==0.95
                                                               0.95
                                                          E




                                                          Item11
                                                         Item
                                                       RRE ==0.95
                                                              0.95
                                                          E

                 Triple
      C                                              Item
               Redundancy              OR             Item11Backup
                                                              Backup        OR              Rsystem = 0.999875
                                                        RRE ==0.95
              Configuration                               E    0.95


                                                      Item11Reserve
                                                     Item     Reserve
                                                        RRE ==0.95
                                                               0.95
                                                          E


Figure 50.8 Improving System Reliability via Redundancy

                     Parallel, Sequential Design              Single Point of
                    (Subsystem A1 - A4 provide                   Failure             Redundant Paths
                    separate sets of capabilities)              Component        (Items C1 - C3 identical)


                             Product A                                                   Product C
                   Subsystem            Subsystem                                       Subsystem
                                                                                         Subsystem
                    Subsystem            Subsystem                                         C1
                      A1
                       A1                  A3
                                            A3                                              C1
   Input                                                         Product                                           Output
Stimulus or                                                       Product
                                                                    BB                  Subsystem                Response(s)
 Excitation                                                                              Subsystem
                                                                                           C2
                                                                                            C2
                   Subsystem
                    Subsystem           Subsystem
                                         Subsystem
                      A2
                       A2                  A4
                                            A4
                                                                                        Subsystem
                                                                                         Subsystem
                                                                                           C3
                                                                                            C3



                  Input
                                                                                                                 Output
               Stimulus or         Product
                                    ProductAA                    ProductBB
                                                                Product                  ProductCC
                                                                                        Product                Response(s)
                Excitation

Figure 50.9 Example of a Series-Parallel Reliability Reliability Construxt


      Compute the reliability of PRODUCT C.
Step 4: Compute the reliability for the parallel network containing Subsystems C1 and C2.
Step 5: Compute the reliability of the parallel network consisting of Subsystems C1 and C2
        combination in parallel with C3.
      Compute the reliability of the SYSTEM.
Step 6: Compute the reliability for the SYSTEM using the product of reliability series
        composed of PRODUCT A (Step 3), PRODUCT B, and PRODUCT C (Step 5).
                                                                                50.3 System Reliability     629

Author’s Note 50.3 As illustrated by the series conﬁguration, every item added to a system
increases the system’s probability of experiencing a failure (proportional to the failure rate). Adding
redundant items increases the number of items and thus requires more repairs. However, insight-
ful use of redundant items may substantially INCREASE the likelihood of a successful mission.
However, increased maintenance is likely due to the added hardware.

Reliability Predictions or Estimates?
Based on the preceding discussions, reliability is usually approached with a series of characteris-
tic equations. This often leaves the casual observer with the misperception that reliability is an exact
science. In fact, reliability is heavily based on probability theory. It employs statistical methods and
techniques based on approximations and assumptions about a population of system entities. As a
result, you will hear people comment about PREDICTING the reliability of a system. So, if relia-
bility theory is based on assumptions, observations, approximations, and probabilities, do you
PREDICT or ESTIMATE the reliability of a system?
     If the basis for computation is approximations, the best you can expect to achieve is an esti-
mate, not a prediction. The estimate represents the probability of a component, item, or system
completing its mission based on a prescribed set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions and
assumptions about system dynamics, statistics, knowledge, experience, and ﬁeld data.
     Since we tend to associate predictions with mythical wizards, soothsayers, and crystal balls,
our discussions in this chapter will employ the term estimate. Combined with seasoned experience
of a qualiﬁed R&M engineer, estimates can be as cost effective and accurate as in-depth analyses
that require assumptions and consume extensive resources without necessarily improving the
reliability of the product. Reliability estimates, coupled with “worst case” analyses, can be very
effective.

Expressing Reliability Estimates
The preceding discussion brings us to a key question: HOW do you express the reliability of your
system? If you ask a system designer, they might respond 0.91. There is a fundamental problem
with this response. Remember, reliability is more than simply picking a number. Reliability esti-
mates require four key elements:
     1. Probability of successfully completing a deﬁned mission.
     2. Bounded mission duration.
     3. Elapsed operating time since the start of the mission.
     4. Prescribed set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
Therefore, when you simply respond that your system reliability is 0.91, you have failed to condi-
tionally constrain the parameter in terms of the other three qualifying elements.
     Reliability can be speciﬁed in several ways. The most common approach is to express relia-
bility as a percentage. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 50.2
Electronics reliability can be stated as a not-to-exceed failure rate, typically as number/percentage of failures
per hour or failures per million hours, in a given environment.

The problem of specifying in these rate terms is that redundancies, which can improve overall
mission reliability, increase the potential rate of failure by adding to the parts count. When speci-
630    Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

ﬁed as a percentage, redundancies can easily be calculated that show the mission reliability
improvement.
     Reliabilities are sometimes stated in terms of a Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF). However,
instantaneous failure rates change with each hour of operation and operating condition. The MTBF
is the reciprocal of the failure rate ONLY when using a NEGATIVE exponential distribution! In
general, the negative exponential distribution applies ONLY to systems that have all exponentially
distributed components, such as electronics, with NO redundancies. In keeping with the true deﬁ-
nition of reliability and its four elements, it is strongly suggested that reliability be expressed as a
PERCENTAGE instead of MTBF for highly complex systems. The same applies to PRODUCT
and SUBSYSTEM allocation. Additionally, reliability engineers suggest avoiding the speciﬁcation
of reliability below the Subsystem Level. This may unnecessarily constrain the solution set that
might otherwise improve overall reliability and reduce cost. Exceptions include externally procured
components based on proper reliability allocations.

Guidepost 50.1 Our discussions to this point focus on the reliability of systems to accomplish
their missions of a speciﬁed duration and set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions. Each
mission assumes that the system will begin operating at a given level of capability, performance,
and physical condition. If properly operated and maintained in accordance with the prescribed
PROCEDURAL DATA instructions, the User can expect a useful service life of XX hours, years,
and so forth. Under these assumptions the system can expect a nominal failure rate that varies over
the service life proﬁle. So, how is the nominal failure rate achieved? This brings us to our next dis-
cussion topic, maintainability.

50.4 SYSTEM MAINTAINABILITY

When systems fail, they impact the revenue stream or could adversely affect the operator and public.
Corrective actions are required immediately to return the system to normal active service. The efﬁ-
ciency and effectiveness of these actions centers on the system’s maintainability. Maintainability
is a measure of a system, product, or service’s capability to be returned from a failed state to a
functioning state within time limits established by a performance standard.
     Maintainability must be an integral part of the SE Design segment beginning with Contract
Award. The starting point begins with formulation of the maintenance concept, our next topic.

The Importance of the Maintainability Concept
The cornerstone for planning system maintainability resides in the maintenance concept. The main-
tenance concept often begins as a basic strategy addressed conceptually in the system Concept of
Operations (ConOps) document.
     The ConOps document provides an initial starting point for documenting the maintenance
concept unless there is a compelling need for a stand-alone document. As a conceptual strategy,
the ConOps documents the WHO, WHAT, WHEN, WHERE, and HOW the system, product, or
service will be maintained. For example, maintenance on complex systems may be performed by:
1) the User, 2) an internal support organization, 3) contractors, or 4) a combination of these.
     Subsequently, a System Operations and Support (O&S) Plan or Integrated Support Plan (ISP)
may be required or prepared to document the maintenance concept implementation details such as
types of maintenance and levels of maintenance.

Types of Maintenance
Once a system is deployed to the ﬁeld, there are two basic types of maintenance that are performed:
preventive maintenance and corrective maintenance.
                                                                     50.4 System Maintainability   631

Preventive Maintenance. Preventive Maintenance refers to scheduled, periodic, maintenance
actions performed on the system or product in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
Note the operative term scheduled. The intent is to perform proactive maintenance in risk areas
BEFORE they start to have an impact or result in degraded system performance as illustrated in
Figure 50.5.


 EXAMPLE 50.3
Automobile manufacturers recommend that you change oil at 3,000 mile or greater intervals.

     In general, routine system maintenance elements include ﬂuids, lubricants, and ﬁlters and other
maintenance actions such as calibrations and alignments performed at intervals. Components,
referred to as line replaceable units (LRUs), are replaced at longer intervals. In these cases, cor-
rective maintenance actions may also be required in conjunction with the preventive maintenance.


 EXAMPLE 50.4
Some automobile manufacturers recommend that you replace the engine timing chain at 90,000 mile inter-
vals for speciﬁc types of cars to avoid a serious engine malfunction.

Because of the expense of repairs and unnecessary preventive maintenance, some complex systems
include condition-based maintenance (CBM) systems. These systems monitor and analyze the
status and health of engine ﬂuids, such as motor oils, to determine the level of metal ﬁlings and
other conditions that may indicate premature wear or potential failure condition. CBM systems are
critical for systems such as aircraft engines applications.

Corrective Maintenance. Corrective maintenance is referred to as unscheduled maintenance.
It represents those maintenance actions required to restore the system or product performance back
to the manufacturer’s performance speciﬁcations after failure. In general, corrective maintenance
includes removal and replacement (R&R) of LRUs, recalibration, and realignment.

Levels of Maintenance
Organizations often employ a three-level maintenance model: 1) organizational maintenance, 2)
intermediate maintenance, and 3) factory maintenance.

Field or Organizational Level Maintenance. Field or organizational level maintenance con-
sists of preventive and corrective maintenance actions performed in the ﬁeld by the User or their
support organization. At a MINIMUM these actions entail removal and replacement (R&R) of an
item with a new or repaired item. In some instances, the item may be repaired at this level with
common support equipment (CSE) tools. The support organization may be internal to the User’s
organization or contractor support referred to as contract logistics support (CLS).

Intermediate Maintenance. Intermediate maintenance consists of corrective maintenance
actions that require removal of an item by the User or CLS personnel and return to a central repair
facility that may have specialized peculiar support equipment (PSE) to accomplish the maintenance
action. When the repaired item is returned to the ﬁeld, User or CLS personnel reinstall, checkout,
and verify the item’s operation.
632    Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

Factory Maintenance. Factory maintenance actions require that an item be sent by the central
repair facility back to the factory that has the specialized PSE and expertise required to determine
the cause of failure. This may include site visits back to the User to interview personnel, review
records, and inspect other items that may provide insights into the circumstances and operating
conditions leading to the required maintenance action.

50.5 FAILURE REPORTING, ANALYSIS, AND
CORRECTIVE ACTION SYSTEM (FRACAS)

When a component, item, or system is developed, Reliability and Maintainability Engineers employ
SE designs and Engineering Bills of Materials (EBOMs) and vendor/manufacturer data to construct
reliability and maintainability models to estimate system performance. These models provide
insights related to the premature wear, thermal stress, adequacy of periodic inspections, and per-
formance metrics tracking. These data provide early indications of wear out that may lead to failure.
Once the component, item, or system is ﬁelded, actual ﬁeld data should be used to further reﬁne
and validate the models. So, how can these data be obtained and tracked?
     The solution resides in a Failure Reporting, Analysis, and Corrective Action System
(FRACAS). MIL-HDBK-470A (para. 4.5.1.1, p. 4–58) describes FRACAS as “a closed-loop data
reporting system for the purpose of systematically recording, analyzing, and resolving equipment
reliability AND maintainability problems and failures.”
     Depending on the organizational plans for the system, the FRACAS provides a history of main-
tenance ACTIONS for each component and replacements with new components. This enables the
organization to continue to cost effectively extend the useful service life and employment of the asset.
Author’s Note 50.4 When you review FRACAS data, make sure that you understand the context
of the failure. Depending on the discipline instilled in maintenance personnel, errors such as order-
ing the incorrect part number and installing the incorrect part may sometimes be recorded as a
failure initiating yet another maintenance action. In addition FRACAS as a maintainability task
may not include maintenance time tracking.

Maintainability Computations
Organizationally, the subject of maintainability often receives “lip service” and usually falls second
in priority to reliability. Yet, operational support costs, which include maintenance, account for
approximately 70% of system life cycle costs, especially for complex systems. As a result, post
deployment support costs and their contributory factors should be a MAJOR concern EARLY
in the SE Design Segment. The primary system design factors that contribute to support costs are:
1) reliability, which impacts the frequency of maintenance, and 2) maintainability, which impacts
the amount of time required to perform preventive and corrective maintenance.
     Once a system is ﬁelded, the User must live with the consequences of SE design decision-
making and its accountability or the lack thereof for the reliability and maintainability factors. Addi-
tionally, these considerations manifest themselves in another factor, availability, which represents
the level of operational readiness of a system to perform its mission on demand for a given set of
operating conditions. If unavailable, the system: 1) is NOT generating revenue and 2) even worse,
is costing the organization funds for repairs.
     Engineering textbooks often approach maintainability with equation-itis. Equation-itis, like
analysis paralysis, is a condition created by a preoccupation with equations WITHOUT under-
standing the operational challenges Users have to address and the base assumptions to be estab-
lished that lead to the need for equations. Maintainability is a classic topical example. To illustrate
WHY we need to understand User challenges, let’s brieﬂy explore a SUPPORT SYSTEM scenario.
                       50.5 Failure Reporting, Analysis, and Corrective Action System (FRACAS)     633

     A system is either: 1) operating—performing a mission or supporting training, 2) in storage,
3) awaiting maintenance, 4) being maintained, or 5) awaiting return to active service. System main-
tenance is categorically referred to as Maintenance Down Time (MDT). Every hour spent in MDT
equates to $$ of lost revenue as in the case of commercial systems such as production machinery,
airlines, and so forth. To ensure that the enterprise can sustain schedules, extra systems may be pro-
cured, leased, rented, and so forth to maintain continuity of operations while one system is being
maintained.
     When a system failure occurs, you need a system of spare parts on-site along with skilled main-
tenance technicians who can perform the repair with the least amount of MDT. Therefore, you need
some insight concerning: 1) the quantity of spare parts required for a given type of failure, 2) the
quantity maintenance technicians required “full time” and “part time”, 3) the quantity of mainte-
nance workstations, if applicable, 4) the types and quantities of test equipment, 5) system and parts
storage space allocations, 6) ordering systems, 7) logistical support systems, and so forth. This chal-
lenge is compounded by seasonal usage factors for some systems. All of this translates into $COST.
To minimize the cost of maintaining an inventory of spare parts, many organizations arrange strate-
gic partnerships or tier level suppliers to provide parts Just in Time (JIT), when required.
     How do we minimize the cost of maintenance in the SE Design Segment? We can: 1) incorpo-
rate a Built-In Test (BIT) capability into major items to detect Line Replaceable Unit (LRU) fail-
ures, 2) perform corrective maintenance on mission critical items during a preventive maintenance
cycle BEFORE they fail, 3) promote standardization and interchangeability of LRUs, 4) provide
easy access, quick removal and installation of LRUs, and so forth. For example, some complex,
mission critical systems are designed for condition-based maintenance (CBM).
     As an Acquirer representing the User’s contract and technical interests, your job as an SE may
be to prepare System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements for mission reliability (MTBF),
maintainability (MTTR), and operational availability (Ao) discussed in a later section. As a System
Developer SE, you may be confronted with analyzing, allocating, and ﬂowing these requirements
down to conﬁguration items and their LRUs. For example, how do you design the system for a
30-minute MTTR?
     To answer this question, maintainability engineers employ a series of equations and analysis
data to support informed SE Design. The strategy is that if we know the quantity of ﬁelded systems
and the state of maintenance of each system, failure rate data for system LRUs, and the prescribed
preventive maintenance schedule, we can ESTIMATE the parameters of the SUPPORT SYSTEM
such as quantities of spare parts, maintenance technicians and levels of training, work stations,
ordering systems, and so forth.
     The intent of the computation discussion that follows is to provide you with a general working
knowledge of the maintainability terminology, metrics, and their interrelationships, not “plug and
chug” equations. Given a working knowledge, you should be better prepared to communicate with
maintainability engineers and understand the speciﬁcation requirements they respond to as well as
review the work products they produce in response to contract requirements.


Maintenance Down Time (MDT). When a system fails, Users want to know: how long the
system will be out of service—DOWNTIME. In the commercial world, system downtime means an
interruption to the revenue stream. In the military and medical ﬁelds, downtime can mean the dif-
ference in life or death situations.
     The answer to the question resides in an Organizational Level metric referred to as Maintenance
Down Time (MDT). MDT is a function of three key elements: 1) Mean Active Maintenance Time,
2) Logistic Delay Time, and 3) Administrative Delay Time. Eq. 50.17 illustrates the computation.
                                     MDT = M + LDT + ADT                                       (50.17)
634   Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

Where:
   —
   M = Mean Active Maintenance Time (Eq. 50.22)
   LDT = Logistics Delay Time
   ADT = Administrative Delay Time
The three MDT elements have two perspectives: System Developer versus Users.
                                                                   —
    • System Developers inﬂuence the Mean Active Maintenance Time (M ) via the System Design
      process and should be familiar with the LDT and ADT of the User’s support system.
      However, the System Developer DOES NOT have control over LDT and ADT; those are
      typically User responsibility functions.
                                                 —
    • Users EXERCISE degrees of control over the M , LDT, and ADT, depending on their orga-
      nizational and political authority.
We will see these subtleties emerge during our discussion of system availability. On the topic of
availability, many of the maintenance parameters are key elements of availability equations.

Logistics Delay Time (LDT). Logistics Delay Time (LDT) is the actual time required to perform
actions that support a corrective maintenance. Examples include: 1) research for replacement or
equivalent parts, 2) procurement and tracking of parts orders, 3) delivery of parts from the sup-
plier, 4) receiving inspection of parts, 5) routing to maintenance technician, 6) reordering of incor-
                                                                                                 —
rect parts, and so forth. LDT is sometimes expressed in terms of Mean Logistics Delay Time, M LD.

Administrative Delay Time (ADT). Administrative Delay Time (ADT) consists of actual time
spent on activities such as stafﬁng the maintenance organization; training personnel; vacation,
holiday, and sick leave; and so forth. ADT is sometimes expressed in terms of Mean Administra-
                  —
tive Delay Time, M AD.

Preventive Maintenance (PM) Time. SEs often have to answer: how much time is required
to perform preventive maintenance actions on the system? The solution resides in an Organizational
level metric referred to a Preventive Maintenance (PM) Time. PM time represents the actual time
required to perform routine maintenance such as inspections and replacement of ﬂuids, ﬁlters, belts,
and so forth.
     The preventive maintenance time for a speciﬁc type of maintenance action is represented by
     —
Mpt. M pt, which represents the mean time for all preventive maintenance actions within the system,
is computed as shown in Eq. 50.18.
                                                 n

                                            Â (f )(M    pt ( i )              pt ( i )   )
                                                 i =1
                                        M =                                                   (50.18)
                                                Âf
                                           pt
                                                                   pt ( i )


Where:
      —
       M pt = Mean Preventive Maintenance Time
       Mpt(i) = Time required to perform the ith preventive maintenance action
       i      = Sequential identiﬁer for a speciﬁc type of preventive maintenance action
       fpt(i) = Frequency of the ith preventive maintenance action
                       50.5 Failure Reporting, Analysis, and Corrective Action System (FRACAS)   635
                                            —                                                —
Mean Corrective Maintenance Time ( M ct). The Mean Corrective Maintenance Time (M ct),
which is equivalent to Mean Time to Repair (MTTR), represents the actual time required at the
Organizational Level to perform a repair action on a system to replace a failed or damaged LRU.
MTTR, for example, is usually expressed in hours or fractions thereof. What does the repair action
include? It includes the time required to:
    1. Isolate the fault to a Line Replaceable Unit (LRU).
    2. Quickly and easily replace the LRU.
    3. Retest to assure that the total system is functioning at a speciﬁed or acceptable perform-
       ance levels.
The corrective maintenance time for a speciﬁc type of corrective maintenance action is represented
        —
by Mct. M ct, which represents the mean for all corrective maintenance actions within the system, is
computed as shown in Eq 50.19.

                                               n

                                           Â (l )(M    ( i)          ct ( i )   )
                                               i =1
                                       M =                                                   (50.19)
                                              Âl
                                         ct
                                                              ( i)


Where:
   —
   M ct = Mean Corrective Maintenance Time
   Mct(i) = Time required to perform the ith corrective maintenance action
   i      = Sequential identiﬁer for a speciﬁc type of corrective maintenance action
   l(i) = Frequency of the ith corrective maintenance action
A plot of the frequency of corrective maintenance actions is often assumed to follow a
LogNormal Distribution as illustrated in Figure 50.1. That is, a few of the failures can be isolated
and repaired rather quickly. Most of the corrective actions will require longer time periods and
center about the median of the frequency distribution. The remainder of the corrective actions may
be few in number but require a considerable number of hours to correct.

Failure Rate or Corrective Maintenance Frequency ( l). The Corrective Maintenance Fre-
quency is represented by l and is computed as shown in Eq. 50.20.

                                                       1
                                              l=                                             (50.20)
                                                      MTTF
Where:
   MTTF = Mean Time To Failure
From Eq. 50.12, l, which is referred to as the failure rate, is approximately equivalent to the MTBF.

Repair Rate. Some systems track the repair rate, m, which is computed as illustrated in 50.21
                                                        1
                                               m=                                            (50.21)
                                                       M ct
Where:
   —
   M ct = Mean Corrective Maintenance Time (Eq. 50.19)
636     Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

                                       —
Mean Active Maintenance Time (M ). As the system design evolves, SEs need to know: what
is the mean time to accomplish a preventive maintenance action or a corrective maintenance
action? The solution resides in an Organizational Level metric referred to as the Mean Active Main-
               —
tenance Time (M ). Eq. 50.22 illustrates the computation.
                                                fpt (M pt ) + (l)(M ct )
                                          M=                                               (50.22)
                                                        fpt + l
Where:
   —
   M = Mean Active Maintenance Time
   —
   M pt = Mean Preventive Maintenance Time (Eq. 50.18)
   fpt = Frequency of Preventive Maintenance
   —
   M ct = Mean Corrective Maintenance Time (Eq. 50.19)
   l = Failure rate or frequency of corrective maintenance (Eq. 50.20)

Mean Time Between Maintenance (MTBM). Mean Time Between Maintenance (MTBM) is
the mean operating interval since the last maintenance action. MTBM is expressed in terms of
elapsed operating hours for a speciﬁc set of operating conditions for the system based on the mean
                   —                     —
of all preventive (M pt) and corrective (M ct) maintenance actions. MTBM is computed as shown in
Eq. 50.23.
                                                        1               1
                                     MTBM =                      =                         (50.23)
                                                   1    1                    1
                                                      +              fpt +
                                                  M pt M ct                  l
Where:
   MTBM = Mean Time Between Maintenance
   —
   M pt = Mean Preventive Maintenance time (Eq. 50.18)
   —
   M ct = Mean Corrective Maintenance Time (Eq. 50.19)


Sources of Maintainability Data. The validity of maintenance computations is dependent on
having good data sets derived from actual designs and ﬁeld data. Potential sources of maintain-
ability data include:
      • Historical data from similar items
      • Item design and/or manufacturing data
      • Data recorded during item demonstration
      • Field maintenance repair reports or FRACAS data.

Guidepost 50.2 At this juncture we have addressed a few of the fundamentals of system relia-
bility and maintainability. The critical question is: Will the system be operationally available
to conduct its missions when tasked? You can have a system that is reliable and well maintained
but be unavailable when needed to conduct missions. This leads us to our next topic, system
availability.
                                                                       50.6 System Availability   637

50.6 SYSTEM AVAILABILITY

Availability focuses on a SYSTEM’s state of readiness to perform missions WHEN tasked. This
requires two criteria:
    1. Operational readiness in terms of completion of preventive and corrective maintenance
       actions within a speciﬁed timeframe.
    2. The ability to reliably start and operate.
Therefore, a SYSTEM’S availability is a function of its design reliability and its maintainability.
    Availability can drive the System Developer in a decision-making circle as they attempt to
balance maintainability and reliability objectives. Consider the two cases at opposite extremes:
    • SYSTEM A is a highly reliable SYSTEM. During development the Acquirer had a choice:
      improve reliability or improve maintainability. The Acquirer chooses to focus design
      resources on reliability. The rationale is: “If the system is highly reliable, we don’t need a
      lot of repairs, and therefore won’t need a large maintenance organization.” So, when the
      system does need maintenance, it requires weeks for corrective maintenance actions due to
      the difﬁculty in accessing maintenance repair areas. Clearly, the highly reliable SYSTEM is
      unavailable for missions for long periods of time when maintenance is required.
    • SYSTEM B has less reliability because the Acquirer had to make a choice similar to that for
      SYSTEM A above. The Acquirer reduces the reliability requirement and focuses on IMPROV-
      ING the maintainability. The rationale is: “We have an outstanding maintenance organization
      that can repair anything.” As a result, SYSTEM B fails continuously and is prone to numer-
      ous corrective maintenance actions, thereby making it unavailable to perform most missions.
The point of this discussion is: system design and development must include a practical availabil-
ity requirement that enables the achievement of a balance between a system’s reliability and main-
tainability and still meet mission and organizational objectives. Close collaboration between the
Acquirer and User is important during the System Procurement Phase and with the System Devel-
oper after Contract Award.
     There are three types of availability: 1) operational availability (Ao), 2) achieved availability
(Aa), and 3) inherent availability (Ai). Let’s explore each of these concepts brieﬂy.

Operational Availability (Ao)
Operational availability, which is symbolized by Ao, represents the probability that the system will
operate in accordance with its speciﬁed performance and prescribed operating environment con-
ditions when tasked to perform its mission. Ao includes maintenance delays and other factors inde-
pendent of its design. An item’s operational availability, Ao, is expressed mathematically as follows:

                                                MTBM
                                       Ao =                                                   (50.24)
                                              MTBM + MDT
where:
   Ao   = Operational Availability
   MDT = Maintenance Downtime (Eq. 50.17)
   MTBM = Mean Time Between Maintenance (Eq. 50.23)
Observe that the MDT parameter includes both preventive (scheduled) and corrective (unsched-
uled) maintence times.
638     Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

Achieved Availability (Aa)
System Developers typically have no control over the User’s support system factors such as LDT
and ADT. So, achieved availability (Aa) represents the level of availability under the control of the
System Developer as constrained by the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
    An item’s Achieved Availability, Aa, is the ratio of the Mean Time Between Maintenance
                                                                                –
(MTBM) to the summation of MTBM and Mean Active Maintenance Time (M ):
                                                     MTBM
                                             Aa =                                               (50.25)
                                                    MTBM + M
where:
   Aa      = Achieved Availability
      –
      M    = Mean Active Maintenance Time (Eq. 50.22)
      MTBM = Mean time Between Maintenance (Eq. 50.23)


Inherent Availability (Ai)
Finally, the third type of availability is inherent availability, Ai. Inherent availability assumes that
the system operates within its speciﬁed performance limits and prescribed operating environment
                                                                                                —
conditions with an ideal support system that performs only corrective maintence actions, M ct. Pre-
ventive maintenance actions, LDT, and ADT are excluded. An item’s inherent availability, Ai, is
the ratio of the Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF) to the summation of MTBF and Mean Cor-
                             —
rective Maintenance Time (M ct). Ai is deﬁned as follows:
                                                     MTBF
                                             Ai =                                               (50.26)
                                                    MTBF + Mct
where:
   Ai   = Inherent Availability
    –
   Mct  = Mean Corrective Maintenance Time or MTTR (Eq. 50.19)
   MTBF = Mean Time Between Failure
Note the switch from MTBM used to compute Ao and Aa to MTBF for Ai.
    The FAA s National Airspace System-Systems Engineering Manual (2003, para. 4.8.2.1.1.3)
notes two key points about Inherent Availability.
      • First, “This availability is based solely on the MTBF and MTTR characteristics of the system
        or constituent piece and the level of redundancy, if any, provided. For systems or constituent
        pieces employing redundant elements, perfect recovery is assumed. Downtime occurs only
        if multiple failures within a common timeframe result in outages of the system or one or more
        of its pieces to the extent that the need for redundant resources exceed the level of redun-
        dancy provided. Inherent availability represents the maximum availability that the system or
        constituent piece is theoretically capable of achieving . . . if automatic recovery is 100
        percent effective.”
      • Secondly, inherent availability “does not include the effects of scheduled downtime, short-
        ages of spares, unavailability of service personnel, or poorly trained service personnel.”

Final Thoughts
In summary, we have brieﬂy deﬁned each of the three types of availability. From a contractual
System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) perspective, Ao obviously has a major signiﬁcance to the
                                                        50.7 Applying RAM to System Design      639

User versus Aa and Ai. So, how does a System Developer deal with the LDT and ADT factors for
which they have no control?
     First, the contract should delineate Acquirer and User accountability for supplying LDT and
ADT data and/or assumptions. Second, the SE should consider creating a Logistical Support Inte-
grated Product Team (IPT) that includes the LDT and ADT stakeholders to supply the data and par-
ticipate in making recommendations via the formal contract protocol.
     Assuming the IPT performs as expected, these stakeholders must assume accountability for
their contributions to achieving the overall success of the system and veriﬁcation of the appropri-
ate SPS requirements. Blanchard (SE Management, p. 121) observes that there is limited value in
                                                                   –
constraining the design of EQUIPMENT to achieve a 30 minute Mct if the supply system requires
three months on average, consisting of LDT + ADT, to RESPOND with parts. Ao is certainly not
achieved in this manner.

Guidepost 50.3 The preceding discussions addressed some of the fundamentals of RAM. Given
this foundation, we shift our attention to applying RAM to system design.


50.7 APPLYING RAM TO SYSTEM DESIGN

The application of RAM to system design is one of the most challenging of the SE discipline. The
challenge comes in scoping, estimating, and quantifying minimum parameter performance to meet
User operational mission and system service life needs while balancing those needs with available
User budgets and schedules.
     One of the ways of meeting this challenge is to establish a RAM strategy. The strategy, which
includes both Acquirer and System Developer role-based tasks, should be documented in the
program’s Technical Management Plan (TMP). At a minimum, RAM tasks include the following:
Task 1:   Establish User mission RAM requirements.
Task 2:   Analyze and allocate RAM requirements.
Task 3:   Model system RAM performance.
Task 4:   Review RAM modeling results.
Task 5:   Implement compensating provision actions.
Task 6:   Implement a parts program (optional).
Task 7:   Improve EQUIPMENT characteristic proﬁles.
Each of these tasks iterates with others from Contract Award through system delivery and acceptance.

Task 1: Establish User Mission RAM Requirements
The objective of Task 1 is to develop or contract the development of objective, quantiﬁable
performance-based RAM requirements necessary and sufﬁcient for procurement or development
actions. This requires mission analysis of the item or system within its prescribed OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT use cases and scenarios.
     The challenge for the Acquirer (role) is to collaborate with the User to understand and
objectively:
    1. Specify the minimum, quantiﬁable, and affordable mission reliability that satisﬁes budget
       and schedule constraints.
    2. Allocate the appropriate RAM requirements to the various System Elements.
Accomplishment of these two objectives is a highly iterative and time-consuming process.
640    Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

     When specifying RAM, SEs and Reliability and Maintainability (R&M) Engineers have to
answer a challenging question: WHAT level of RAM is the minimum required for a system or product
to accomplish a mission of a speciﬁed duration in a prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT?
This is the hard part for SEs and R&Ms that often requires extensive analysis, modeling, simula-
tion, and collaboration with Users—the operators and maintainers.
     Every system has its own unique applications, system mission use cases and scenarios, mission
objectives, priorities, and values to the Users. So, the answer to this question resides in high-level
SE concepts that must be quantitatively translated into objective capability and performance
requirements.

Create the Initial Reliability and Availability Starting Points. As an initial starting point,
you must identify a system reliability number that expresses the probability of mission success
required of the item. You also need to select an availability number based on the criticality of the
SYSTEM to support the mission. Finally, you need a maintenance concept that describes the phi-
losophy of maintenance.

Author’s Note 50.5 For this ﬁrst step most people are reluctant to pick a reasonable number.
From an engineering perspective, you need an initial starting point and that is ALL it is. Unfortu-
nately, there are those who criticize these efforts without recognizing that it may not be the “end
game” reliability number; it is only a starting point . . . Nothing more, and nothing less.

Establish Development Objectives and Constraints. One of the key User objectives is to
minimize system or product life cycle cost. Inevitably, there are trade-offs at high levels between
system development costs and support costs. Depending on the type of system, 60% to 70% of the
recurring life cycle costs of many systems occur in the System Operations and Support Phase
(O&S). Most of these costs are incurred by system corrective and preventive maintenance. (Refer
to DSMC, Acquisition Logistics Guide, Fig. 13-1, p. 13–6, and Fig. 20-2, p. 20–3.). So, you may
have to make trade-off decisions for every dollar you spend on design reliability. WHAT is the cost
avoidance in maintenance and support costs? Let’s explore this point further.
      Using the illustrative example of Figure 50.10, let’s increase the design reliability of a system
or product—its system development cost. We should then expect a corresponding decrease in the
system maintenance costs. If we sum the nonrecurring system development cost and system main-
tenance costs over the range of reliability, we emerge with a bowl-shaped curve representing total
life cycle cost, or more appropriately the total ownership cost (TOC). Ideally, there is a Target Reli-
ability Objective, RA, and a Target LC Cost Objective, CA, that represent the minimum TOC (A)
for the User. These objectives, in combination with the core RAM criterion of identifying the reli-
ability level, should form the basis for specifying RAM requirements.
      Philosophically, the TOC minimization approach assumes that the User, by virtue of resources,
has the ﬂexibility to select the optimal level of reliability. However, as is typically the case, the
User has limited resources for how much reliability they can afford “up front” as system develop-
ment costs. Depending on the operational need(s) and level of urgency to procure the system, they
may be confronted with selecting a more affordable reliability, RB, based on system development
cost limitations that result in a higher than planned system maintenance cost (MAINTB) and a higher
TOCB.
      For innovative organizations, this presents both an opportunity and a challenge. For organiza-
tions that do not perform SE from the standpoint of analysis of alternative (AoA) solutions and
jump to a point solution, this may be a missed business opportunity. During the AoA activity new
approaches may be discovered that enables the User to minimize TOC within the constraints of
system development costs.
                                                               50.7 Applying RAM to System Design            641



          Cost
        (Dollars)
                                                    TotalOwnership
                                                   Total            Cost(TOC)
                                                          OwnershipCost  (TOC)
                                      TOC==System
                                     TOC           DevelopmentCost
                                            SystemDevelopment         SystemMaintenance
                                                               Cost++System MaintenanceCost
                                                                                        Cost




           TOCB                             TOCB                                                     System
                      D                                                                            Development
           TOCA                                                     TOCA                              Cost
                    Target LC Cost
                                           MAINTB
                      Objective

                    System Development                                                             System
                       Cost Objective                                                            Maintenance
                                            DEVB                                                    Cost
                                                            MAINTA           DEVA

                                             RB                        RA                      Reliability
                                                                Target Reliability
                                                                   Objective
        Figure 50.10 Notional Optimal Reliability



Task 2: Analyze and Allocate RAM Requirements
When potential Offerors receive the RAM requirements via a formal Request for Proposal (RFP)
solicitation, conduct analyses to fully understand WHAT is required to satisfy the system or item’s
speciﬁcation requirements. Therefore, the objective of Task 2 is to analyze RAM requirements spec-
iﬁed in the RFP System Requirements Document (SRD) or contract System Performance Speciﬁ-
cation (SPS) requirements and allocate RAM requirements to PRODUCTs, SUBSYSTEMs, and so
forth.
     From an SE perspective, accomplishment of the mission requires that the MISSION SYSTEM
and SUPPORT SYSTEM operate at a level of RAM sufﬁcient for successful completion of the
mission. Recall that a system, by deﬁnition, includes MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM
elements: PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT, PROCEDURAL DATA, MISSION RESOURCES,
FACILITIES, and SYSTEM RESPONSES. Therefore, the overall mission reliability must be allo-
cated to each of these system elements and subelements. On allocation, this requires the following
considerations:
    • PERSONNEL Element considerations include RAM related to human system interfaces,
      human factors and performance, training, and skills.
    • EQUIPMENT Element considerations include SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM,
      ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY level RAM related to HARDWARE and SOFTWARE
      design and development.
    • PROCEDURAL DATA Element considerations include RAM of organizational Standard
      Operating Procedures and Practices (SOPPs) and EQUIPMENT operating procedures
      required to safely conduct system missions, operate the EQUIPMENT, and return.
    • MISSION RESOURCES Element considerations include RAM related to the timely deliv-
      ery and quality of mission data, expendables, and consumables required to perform the
      mission and sustain mission operations.
642     Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

      • FACILITIES Element (SUPPORT SYSTEM) considerations include RAM related to
        MISSION SYSTEM interfaces, environmental conditions that impact storage “shelf life” and
        maintenance.
      • SYSTEM RESPONSES Element considerations include products, by-products, and services
        RAM related to:
        1. The timely delivery of system outputs to accomplish mission objectives and Mission
           Event Timelines (METs).
        2. “Fitness-for-use” quality requirements.
        3. Compliance to standards.
The resulting RAM allocations to the System Elements and subelements provide the basis for pro-
curement of contractor PERSONNEL services or training of internal PERSONNEL, EQUIPMENT,
FACILITIES, MISSION RESOURCES, and PROCEDURAL DATA. Our discussion in the remain-
der of this chapter will focus on the EQUIPMENT element RAM.
      If a system is being developed using several item/conﬁguration item (CI) suppliers, then it will
be necessary to ALLOCATE a proportion of the total system reliability to each SUBSYSTEM. This
enables each supplier to understand WHAT their allocated contribution to reliability is.
      Since the ﬁnal SYSTEM Level reliability will be the multiplicative product of all item reliabil-
ities, individual components generally require a higher reliability requirement than the total system.
However, there is chance of misallocating and specifying requirements too high for some items,
resulting in substantial additional costs to the program. As a general rule, avoid allocating BELOW
the highest possible levels of abstraction—the SUBSYSTEM—unless there is a requirement to do
so, due to the potential added program costs.

Task 3: Model System RAM Performance
Once the initial RAM performance allocations are made to items, Task 3 determines if the design
solution for each item meets or exceeds the allocated RAM requirements. The objective of Task 3
is to employ the simplest, most cost-effective modeling method to determine an item’s compliance
with the RAM requirement. If conditions require it, higher ﬁdelity models may be required.

Develop Quick Look Reliability Models. Due to the need to make assumptions about con-
ﬁgurations and component/item failure rates, the ﬁrst step is to create a simple model of the item’s
RAM. Typically, component failure rate data and quantities are derived from each item’s Engi-
neering Bill of Materials (EBOM) and entered into a spreadsheet to arrive at a “ballpark” estimate.
This is referred to as a parts count estimate. The estimate either does or does not meet the minimum
RAM allocation requirements threshold. If the model is insufﬁcient, more complex mathematical
models that employ curve ﬁtting reﬂecting the applications are employed.
     The parts count estimate employs average stresses and environments. The preferred data
source is actual test data collected from a statistically valid sample of test articles and ultimately
system population test and operations data from your system. However, time and cost constraints
usually prevents or limits accumulation of sufﬁcient data to be of value, especially early in the
program where FMEA is most economically effective. In most cases data can be extracted from
handbooks such as
      1. MIL-HDBK-217 Reliability Prediction Of Electronic Equipment.
      2. NPRD-95 Non-Electronic Parts Reliability Data (NPRD).
MIL-HDBK-217 provides a knowledgebase of reliability information such as general failure rates
for various types of electronic components, quality factors, and environmental factors, temperature
                                                          50.7 Applying RAM to System Design        643

derating curves. Later in the development when the circuit parameters are deﬁned, a stress level
factor can be applied using actual design values to reﬁne the estimate.

Employ Physical Models as the Basis for Reliability Estimates. On initial inspection,
reliability modeling may appear to be a simple and straightforward procedure. SEs are tempted to
employ functional models of the system as the basis for estimating reliability. However, recognize
that the system functional model may not be an accurate reliability model. A model of the physi-
cal system provides the most accurate representation; the ﬁdelity of the model depends on the
application.
     A functional model of the system is necessary and serves as the basis for the reliability model.
However, in most cases the two models will NOT be identical. In simple cases, the functional model
may be adequate and actually serve as the initial reliability model. The reliability model never-
theless must account for any system redundancies, and any peculiarities such as component design
and properties that might have impact on completion of the mission. Functional models MAY NOT
sufﬁciently reveal this.

Model Architectural Conﬁguration Reliability. Reliability computations for any SYSTEM
or entity are predicated on its physical architecture conﬁguration at various levels of abstraction.
At any level of abstraction, the SYSTEM/entity can be characterized by one of three types of con-
structs that are representative of various architectural network conﬁgurations: 1) series, 2) paral-
lel, and 3) series-parallel.

Perform a FMEA/FMECA. Simply constructing reliability network models of system architec-
tural elements provides some indication of system reliability. However, component failure effects
range from nonthreatening to catastrophic. As a result, SEs need to understand HOW and in WHAT
ways a system fails and WHAT the potential ramiﬁcations of that failure are to completing the
mission.
     Human-made systems should undergo safety analysis to assess the risks and potential adverse
impacts to the system, general public, and the environment. The safety analysis involves conduct-
ing a failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA). The purpose of the FMEA is to understand HOW
a system or product and its components might fail because of misapplication, misuse, or abuse by
operators or Users, poor design, or a single point of failure.
     One method for understanding HOW and in WHAT ways a system may fail is to create fault
trees. Figure 50.11 provides an example of a simple remote controlled television system fault tree.
Through FMEA, SEs employ compensating provisions such as redesign and procedural changes
that enable cost-effective ways to mitigate the risks of failure mode effects.
     For systems that require high levels of reliability such as spacecraft and medical equipment,
the FMEA may be expanded to include a criticality analysis of speciﬁc component reliability and
their effects. We refer to this as a failure modes, effects, and criticality analysis (FMECA).
     The FMEA should recommend cost effective, corrective action solutions referred to as com-
pensating provisions to the system elements—including PERSONNEL (skills/training), EQUIP-
MENT (design), and PROCEDURAL DATA (usage). The FMEA assesses design documentation
such as functional block diagrams (FBDs), assembly drawings, schematics, Engineering Bill of
Materials (EBOM), and fault trees to identify and prioritize areas that may be prone to failure and
their associated level of impacts on the system.

Identify Reliability Critical Items (RCIs). The FMEA and FMECA should analytically iden-
tify reliability critical items (RCIs) that require speciﬁcation, selection, and oversight. Consider the
following example:
644      Chapter 50      Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability


                    TVFails
                   TV  Failstoto
                    Turn
                     TurnON
                          ON
                                            OR
           FrontPanel
          Front  PanelPower
                       Power
                                                                 RemoteControl
                                                                Remote     Control
             SwitchFails
            Switch  Failstoto
                                                               FailstotoActivate
                                                              Fails      ActivateTV
                                                                                  TV
              ActivateTV
             Activate  TV
                                                                                                       Note: Due to space
                                                                                                       restrictions, remote
                                                                                                      control distance from
                   AND                                                            AND                   Sensor not shown.
                                           Power
                                           Supply
                                           Failed
                                                                                    Remote Control
        Power                                                                        (RC) Fails to
                                         Electrical                                    Transmit
        Switch




                                                                 Remote Control
                                        Fuse Blown
      Inoperable
                                                                                        RC POWER
                                        Power Cord                                         Button
                                        Disconnected                                     Inoperable
                                         or Broken
                          Electrical
                           Power                                                        RC Battery
                         Unavailable                                                      Failed


Figure 50.11 Remote Control TV-FTA Feature Example


 EXAMPLE 50.5
Failures in gyroscopes and accelerometers in ﬂight control systems for aircraft and sensors can result in major
accuracy, safety, and political risks. Therefore, these components may be designated as RCIs.

RCI solutions include singling out these components, specifying higher reliability components, or
implementing redundancy with LESS reliability components. Redundancy, however, compounds
the system reliability and increases expense and maintenance because of increased parts counts.
     Some systems require special considerations such as electrostatic discharge (ESD) during man-
ufacture and testing to preclude premature failures due to poor procedures. Additionally, systems
that go into storage for extended periods of time prior to usage may have components with a limited
shelf life. Therefore, factor ESD and shelf life considerations into reliability estimates and design
requirements.

Perform an Electronic Parts/Circuits Tolerance Analysis. Some systems may require
investigation using tolerance analysis sometimes referred to as worst-case analysis. Electronic
parts/circuits components are derated and assigned their maximum tolerance values that will have
maximum effect on circuit output. The system is then evaluated to assure that it can still function
under these extreme conditions. The analysis is then evaluated again at the other extreme end of
the maximum tolerance values to assure that the system can still function. Since most of today’s
products are digital and have high reliabilities, the marginal utility of this analysis should be
assessed on a program needs basis.

Eliminate Single-Point Failures in Mission Critical Items. Since failures in mission criti-
cal items can force an aborted mission, SEs and R&Ms often specify higher levels of reliability
that drive up system costs. Yet, they ignore interfaces to the item that are also single points of failure
                                                          50.7 Applying RAM to System Design        645

(SPFs) and may have a higher probability of failure. When searching for SPFs, investigate not only
at the component reliability but also its interface implementation reliability.

Improve System Reliability through Redundancy. Mission critical systems often have
stringent reliability requirements that are very expensive to achieve. Additionally, the possibility of
a SPF may be too risky from a safety point of view. One approach to developing solutions to these
types of challenges is through system design redundancy. In some cases elements with lesser reli-
abilities and costs can be combined to achieve higher performance reliability requirements but at
the expense of increased parts counts and maintenance.

Author’s Note 50.6 Customers and speciﬁcations often mandate redundancy, without deter-
mining if there is a compelling need. Remember, redundancy is a design method option exercised
to achieve a system reliability requirement or to eliminate a single point of failure of a mission crit-
ical item. Avoid specifying redundancy, which drives up costs, without ﬁrst determining IF the
current design solution is insufﬁcient to meet the reliability requirements.

Architectural Redundancy versus Component Redundancy. SEs sometimes convince
themselves they have designed in system redundancy by simply adding redundant components.
This may be a false perception. There is a difference between creating redundant components and
design implementation redundancy. To see this, refer to Figure 50.12.
     In the ﬁgure, we have a simple system that includes Item 1 and Item 1 Backup. Panel A shows
the design implementation redundancy in signal ﬂow by way of separate, independent interfaces to
Item 1 and Item 1 Backup from a single input stimulus or excitation. The same is true with the output
interface. Architecturally, if either interface fails and both Item 1 and Item 1 Backup are working
properly, an output response is produced. Thus, we can avoid a single point of failure (SPF).
     In contrast, Panel B includes redundant elements Item 1 and Item 1 Backup. Here, there is a
SINGLE interface entry to Item 1 and Item 1 Backup. Therefore, the interface becomes a single


       A           Independent                                     Independent
                      Input       Mission/System/Entity              Output
                   Connections                                     Connections
    Input
                                                                                      Output
 Stimulus or                                Item11
                                           Item
                                                                                    Response(s)
  Excitation


                                           Item11
                                          Item
                                          Backup
                                           Backup




               Single Point of                                    Single Point of
                  Failure                                            Failure
       B
                                  Mission/System/Entity
                   Input
                                                                       Output
                Stimulus or                 Item11
                                           Item
                                                                     Response(s)
                 Excitation


                                           Item11
                                          Item
                                          Backup
                                           Backup


Figure 50.12 System Design Redundancy Considerations
646     Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

point of failure such that IF it fails, Item 1 and Item 1 Backup are both useless as redundant archi-
tectural elements despite their redundant architectural elements.

Task 4: Review RAM Modeling Results
As the RAM models evolve, reviews should be conducted with the System Engineering and Inte-
gration Team (SEIT). The primary objective of the review is to perform a sanity check of the system
RAM model results to:
      1. Validate assumptions.
      2. Identify failures modes and effects.
      3. Characterize component reliabilities.
      4. Identify compensating provisions for trade-offs and implementation.
Evaluation of the system RAM results and recommendations should be performed by competent,
qualiﬁed SMEs.

Review Reliability Estimates. Reliability estimates should be evaluated at each major design
review. As is typically the case, subject matter experts (SMEs) are seldom available to scrutinize
reliability estimates, nor are any of the other attendees inclined to listen to debates over reliability
prediction approaches. Because of the criticality of this topic, conduct a review of the reliability
data and approaches PRIOR TO major program reviews. Then, report a summary of the results at
the review.

Identify Compensating Provision Actions. As part of the review, compensating provisions
should be identiﬁed to mitigate any risks related to achieving RAM requirements. Each compen-
sating provision should be assigned a unique action item and tracked to closure.

Allocate RAM Resources Based on Risk. For some programs, there may only be a limited
number of resources for reliability tasks. How might you deal with this? First, you should investi-
gate further funding resources. Second, you may have to allocate those resources based on relia-
bility estimates of the system that may have the highest risk.
     How do you identify CANDIDATE risk items? The risk items might include: 1) newly devel-
oped items, 2) new technologies, 3) mission critical items, 4) critical interfaces, 5) thermal areas,
6) power conditioning, 7) pressurization systems, and 8) toxic failures.

Task 5: Implement Compensating Provision Actions
Once decisions are made concerning the RAM recommendations, the objective of Task 5 is to
implement the FMEA/FMECA compensating provisions. These actions may require:
      1. Trade-off and reallocation of RAM performance requirements at the SYSTEM, PRODUCT,
         SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY or PART levels.
      2. Redesign of items.
      3. Renegotiation of the contract/subcontract/task.

Task 6: Implement a Parts Program
Some aerospace and defense systems establish standards to ensure that quality components are
used. Where this is the case, a parts program may be created to establish part speciﬁcations and
standards and to screen incoming parts for compliance. Parts programs are very costly to imple-
                                                                        50.8 RAM Challenges     647

ment and maintain. An alternative to a parts program may be to identify and manage reliability
critical items (RCIs).

Task 7: Improve EQUIPMENT Characteristic Proﬁles
A common question SEs must face is: HOW do we minimize the number of initial failures and
prolong life expectancy of useful service regions? You can:
    1. Increase the reliability by using lower failure rate components, which increases system
       development cost.
    2. Conduct environmental stress screening (ESS) selection of incoming components.
    3. Improve system design practices.
    4. Improve quality assurance/control to drive out inherent errors and latent defects prior to
       ﬁelding.
The last point reinforces the need for a robust testing program for new system or product designs.
The bottom line is: increase the useful service life by engineering the job correctly beginning with
the proposal and certainly at Contract Award.

Concluding Point
RAM engineers CANNOT and SHOULD NOT perform these tasks in a vacuum. As specialty engi-
neers, they provide critical decision support to the system developers in the “engineering of
systems.” Your job, as an SE, is to make sure a collaborative engineering environment exists with
frequent reviews and communications between R&M engineers and Integrated Product Teams
(IPTs). Assuming they are implemented properly, IPTs can provide such an environment.


50.8 RAM CHALLENGES

Implementation of RAM practices poses a number of challenges. Let’s explore some of the key
challenges.

Challenge 1: Deﬁning and Classifying Failures
Despite all the complexities of curve ﬁtting and creating mathematical equations to model RAM,
one of the most sensitive issues is simply WHAT constitutes a failure. Does it mean loss of a crit-
ical mission function? Your task, as an SE, is to develop a consensus deﬁnition of a failure that is
shared by Acquirer and System Developer teams.

Challenge 2: Failure to Document Assumptions
and Data Sources
The validity of any engineering data typically requires:
    1. Making assumptions about the mission/SYSTEM use cases and scenarios and OPERAT-
       ING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
    2. Identifying credible data sources.
    3. Documenting any assumptions or observations.
Yet, few organizations ingrain this discipline in their engineers. Then, when the time comes to
make critical informed decisions, the decision process is left in a quandary as to whether the R&M
648   Chapter 50   Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

Engineer DID or DID NOT consider all relevant factors. Time exacerbates the problem. Therefore,
train engineers in your organization to document assumptions and data sources as part of a RAM
analysis.

Challenge 3: Validating RAM Models
RAM analyses, assuming they are performed properly, are only as good as the models employed
to generate data for the analyses. George E.P. Box (1979, p. 202) once remarked “All models are
wrong but some are useful.” From the beginning of a program, strive to validate the models used
to generate decision-making data with actual vendor or ﬁeld data.

Challenge 4: The Criticality of Scoping System Availability
Today, the government and private sectors are moving toward a contracting for services environ-
ment in which a contractor provides systems and services on a fee-per-service basis. For example,
contracts will often state that the EQUIPMENT and services must be operationally available from
8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday and at other times under speciﬁed conditions. The Acquirer
pays a fee for mission time—for system use within those time frames.
     Here is something for a System Developer/Services Provider to consider. Depending on the
size and complexity of the EQUIPMENT and services rendered, some missions MAY NOT require
speciﬁc pieces of EQUIPMENT to be operationally available simultaneously. Should the Services
Provider be penalized? What about holiday occurrences between Monday and Friday?
     The challenge in developing the contract is to thoroughly understand all of the use cases and
scenarios that may become major showstoppers for progress payments in performance of the con-
tract and clarifying HOW all parties will accommodate them. Think SMARTLY before signing con-
tracts that have system availability requirements.

Challenge 5: Quantifying the RAM of Software
We live in an Information Age where seemingly all systems, especially complex systems, are soft-
ware intensive. Despite RAM curve ﬁtting and the mathematical equations discussed, HOW do you
measure and model the RAM of software? Unlike hardware components that can be tested in con-
trolled laboratory conditions and maintained via repairs, HOW do you model the RAM of software?
      This is perhaps one of the most perplexing areas of engineering. What about the RAM of soft-
ware used in basic computer applications versus mission critical software for the International
Space Station (ISS), Space Shuttle, passenger aircraft, and medical equipment? There are no easy
or simple answers.
      One solution may be to employ the services of independent veriﬁcation and validation (IV&V)
contractors. IV&V contractors perform services to review and test software designs for purposes
of identifying and eliminating design ﬂaws, coding errors, and product defects—and their services
can be very costly, especially from a system development perspective. Depending on the legal and
ﬁnancial ramiﬁcations of system abuse or misuse, the return on investment (ROI) for IV&V activ-
ities may be cost effective. Contact SMEs in your industry to gain insights into how to specify soft-
ware RAM.


50.9 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis to establish several guiding principles to
govern Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability practices.
                                                                   Organizational Centric Exercises    649

Principle 50.1 Express reliability in terms of its four key elements:
    1. A probability of successfully completing a deﬁned mission.
    2. A bounded mission duration.
    3. Elapsed operating time since the start of the mission.
    4. A prescribed set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
Avoid using MTBF as the reliability requirement without bounding these conditions.

Principle 50.2 Components have service life proﬁles that may exhibit regions of decreasing,
stable, and increasing failure rates, each with differing failure rate distributions.

Principle 50.3 Only systems or components that are characterized by negative exponential dis-
tributions have a constant hazard rate (Period of Stabilized Failures).

Principle 50.4 Avoid RAM analysis paralysis; couple RAM analysis with “worst case” analysis.


50.10 SUMMARY

Our discussion of RAM practices is intended to provide a basic understanding that will enable you to
communicate with reliability engineers, logisticians, and others. There are several key points you should
remember:
    • RAM practices apply model-based mathematical and scientiﬁc principles to estimate reliability, avail-
      ability, and maintainability to support SE design decision making.
    • RAM estimates are only as valid as the assumptions and inputs used to generate the data from vali-
      dated models.
    • RAM models require best-ﬁt selection to provide an estimate of probability related to mission, system,
      and item success.
    • RAM practices involve art, science, and sound judgment: art from the standpoint of empirical knowl-
      edge, wisdom, and experience gleaned over an entire career, science from the application of mathe-
      matical and scientiﬁc principles, and sound judgment from being able to know and understand the
      difference between the art and the science.
    • ALWAYS entrust the RAM estimates to a qualiﬁed, professional, Reliability and Maintainability
      (R&M) Engineer recognized as a subject matter expert (SME), either as a staff member or as a cred-
      ible consultant with integrity. Remember, RAM involves critical areas that involve ethical, legal, and
      safety issues and their associated ramiﬁcations.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media to learn what processes and methods are to be employed
   when conducting RAM practices. Report your ﬁndings.
2. Contact several contract programs within your organization and research the requirements for RAM. Inter-
   view program personnel to determine the following:
650     Chapter 50     Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability

   (a) How did they allocate and document the requirements allocations to system elements?
   (b) What lessons did the development team learn?
   (c) How would they advise approaching RAM on future programs?
   (d) What sources of RAM data and models did they use to develop RAM predictions?
   (e) What type of FRACAS system did the User have in place?
   (f ) Did the development team use this information?
   (g) How was availability computed for the system?


REFERENCES

ASD-100. 2004. System Engineering Manual, National Air-       MIL-HDBK-470A. 1997. DoD Handbook: Designing and
  space System, Architecture and System Engineering,            Developing Maintainable Systems and Products, Vol. 1.
  Washington, DC: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).        Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
Billinton, Roy, and Allan, Ronald N. 1987. Reliability        MIL-STD-1629A (canceled). 1980. Military Standard Pro-
  Evaluation of Engineering Systems: Concepts and Tech-         cedures for Performing a Failure Modes, Effects, and
  niques. New York: Plenum Press.                               Criticality Analysis. Washington, DC: Department of
Blanchard, Benjamin S. 1998. System Engineering Man-            Defense (DoD).
  agement, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.                           Nelson, Wayne. 1990. Accelerated Testing: Statistical
Blanchard, Benjamin S., and Fabrycky, Wolter J.                 Models, Test Plans, and Data Analyses. New York: Wiley.
  1990. Systems Engineering and Analysis, 2nd ed.             Rossi, Michael J. 1987. NonOperating Reliability Data-
  Engelwood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.                          book (aka, NONOP-1). Grifﬁss Air Force Base, NY: Reli-
Box, George E.P. 1979. “Robustness is the Strategy of Sci-      ability Analysis Center, Rome Air Development Center.
  entiﬁc Model Building” in Robustness in Statistics. eds,    NPRD-95. Non-electronic Parts Reliability Data (NPRD).
  R.L. Launer and G.N. Wilkinson, Academic Press, New           1995. Grifﬁss Air Force Base, NY: Reliability Analysis
  York, NY.                                                     Center, Rome Air Development Center.
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001. DoD          O’Connor, Patrick D. 1995. Practical Reliability Engi-
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 3rd         neering. New York: Wiley.
  ed. Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.   SMITH, ANTHONY M. 1992. Reliability-Centered Mainte-
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1997.                nance: New York: McGraw-Hill.
  DSMC Acquisition Logistics Guide, 3rd ed. Ft. Belvoir,
  VA: DSMC.


ADDITIONAL READING

HDBK-1120. 1993. Failure Modes, Effects, and Criticality      MIL-HDBK-1908B. 1999. DoD Deﬁnitions of Human
  Analysis, Rome, NY: Reliability Analysis Center (RAC).        Factors Terms. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
HDBK-1140. 1991. Fault Tree Analysis Application Guide,         (DOD).
  Rome, NY: Reliability Analysis Center (RAC).                MIL-HDBK-2155. 1995. (Cancelled) Failure Reporting,
HDBK-1610. 1999. Evaluating the Reliability of Commer-          Analysis, and Corrective Action System. Washington, DC:
  cial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) Items, Rome, NY: Reliability        Department of Defense (DoD).
  Analysis Center (RAC).                                      MIL-STD-721C. 1981. Deﬁnition of Terms for Reliability
HDBK-1190. 2002. A Practical Guide to Developing Reli-          and Maintainability. Washington, DC: Department of
  able Human-Machine Systems and Processes, Rome, NY:           Defense (DoD).
  Reliability Analysis Center (RAC).                          MIL-STD-882D. 2000. DoD Standard Practice for System
HDBK-3180. 2004. Operational Availability Handbook,             Safety. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DOD).
  Rome, NY: Reliability Analysis Center (RAC).                National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
Leitch, R.D. 1988. BASIC Reliability Engineering Analy-         1994. Systems Engineering “Toolbox” for Design-
  sis. Stoneham, MA: Butterworth.                               Oriented Engineers. NASA Reference Publication 1358.
MIL-HDBK-0217. 1991. Reliability Prediction of Elec-            Washington, DC.
  tronic Equipment. Washington, DC: Department of
  Defense (DoD).
MIL-HDBK-470A. 1997. Designing and Developing Main-
  tainable Products and Systems. Washington, DC: Depart-
  ment of Defense (DoD).
Chapter              51

     System Modeling and Simulation

51.1 INTRODUCTION

Analytically, System Engineering requires several types of technical decision-making activities:
     1. Mission Analysis Understanding the User’s problem space to identify and bound a solu-
        tion space that provides operational utility, suitability, availability, and effectiveness.
     2. Architecture Development Hierarchical organization, decomposition, and bounding of
        operational problem space complexity into manageable levels of solutions spaces, each with
        a bounded set of requirements.
     3. Requirements Allocation Informed appropriation and assignment of capabilities and
        quantiﬁable performance to each of the solution spaces.
     4. System Optimization The evaluation and reﬁnement of system performance to maximize
        efﬁciency and effectiveness in achieving solution space mission objectives.
Depending on the size and complexity of the system, most of these decisions require tools to facil-
itate the decision making. Because of the complex interacting parameters of the SYSTEM OF
INTEREST (SOI) and its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, humans are often unable of internalize
solutions on a personal level. For this reason engineers as a group tend to employ and exploit deci-
sion aids such as models and simulations to gain insights into the system interactions for a pre-
scribed set of operating scenarios and conditions. Assimilation and synthesis of this knowledge and
interdependencies via models and simulations enable SEs to collectively make these decisions.
     This chapter provides an introductory overview of how SEs employ models and simulations
to implement the SE Process Model. Our discussions are not intended to instruct you in model or
simulation development; numerous textbooks are available on this topic. Instead, we focus on the
application of models and simulations to facilitate SE decision making.
     We begin our discussion with an introduction to the fundamentals of models and
simulations. We identify various types of models, deﬁne model ﬁdelity, address the need to certify
models, and describe the integration of models into a simulation. Then, we explore HOW SEs
employ models and simulations to support technical decisions involving architecture evaluations,
performance requirement allocations, and validating the performance.

What You Should Learn from This Section
     1. What is a model?
     2. What are the various types of models?
     3. How are models employed in SE decision making?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                651
652     Chapter 51   System Modeling and Simulation

      4. What is a simulation?
      5. How are simulations employed in SE decision making?
      6. What is a mock-up?
      7. What is a prototype?
      8. What is a testbed?
      9. How is a testbed employed in SE decision making?




Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Accreditation “The formal certiﬁcation that a model or simulation is acceptable for use for
        a speciﬁc purpose. Accreditation is conferred by the organization best positioned to make
        the judgment that the model or simulation in question is acceptable. That organization may
        be an operational user, the program ofﬁce, or a contractor, depending upon the purposes
        intended.” (DSMC SE Fundamentals, Section 13.4 Veriﬁcation, Validation, and Accredita-
        tion; p. 120)
      • Certiﬁed Model A formal designation by an ofﬁcially recognized decision authority for val-
        idating the products and performance of a model.
      • Deterministic Model “A model in which the results are determined through known rela-
        tionships among the states and events, and in which a given input will always produce the
        same output; for example, a model depicting a known chemical reaction. Contrast with: sto-
        chastic model. (DIS Glossary of M&S Terms, and IEEE STD 610.3, (references (b) and (c))”
        (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 153,
        p. 102)
      • Event “A change of object attribute value, an interaction between objects, an instantiation
        of a new object, or a deletion of an existing object that is associated with a particular point
        on the federation time axis. Each event contains a time stamp indicating when it is said to
        occur. (High Level Architecture Glossary, (reference (m)).” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Mod-
        eling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 193, p. 107)
      • Fidelity “The accuracy of the representation when compared to the real world. (DoD Pub-
        lication 5000.59-P, (reference (g)).” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simulation
        (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 218, p. 112)
      • Initial Condition “The values assumed by the variables in a system, model, or simulation
        at the beginning of some speciﬁed duration of time. Contrast with: boundary condition; ﬁnal
        condition. (DIS Glossary of M&S Terms, (reference (b)).” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Mod-
        eling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 270, p. 123)
      • Initial State “The values assumed by the state variables of a system, component, or simu-
        lation at the beginning of some speciﬁed duration of time. Contrast with: ﬁnal state. (DIS
        Glossary of M&S Terms, (reference (b)).” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simula-
        tion (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 271, p. 123)
      • Model A virtual or physical representation of an entity for purposes of presenting, study-
        ing, and analyzing its characteristics such as appearance, behavior, or performance for a pre-
        scribed set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions and scenarios.
      • Model-Test-Model “An integrated approach to using models and simulations in support of
        pre-test analysis and planning; conducting the actual test and collecting data; and post-test
                                                            51.2 Technical Decision-Making Aids     653

      analysis of test results along with further validation of the models using the test data.” (Source:
      DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 342, p. 137)
    • Monte Carlo Algorithm “A statistical procedure that determines the occurrence of pro-
      babilistic events or values of probabilistic variables for deterministic models; e.g., making a
      random draw. (DSMC 1993–94 Military Research Fellows Report, (reference (k)).” (Source:
      DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 345, p. 138)
    • Monte Carlo Method “In modeling and simulation, any method that employs Monte Carlo
      simulation to determine estimates for unknown values in a deterministic problem. (DIS
      Glossary of M&S Terms, and IEEE STD 610.3, (references (b) and (c)).” (Source: DoD
      5000.59-M Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 346, p. 138)
    • Simulation Time “A simulation’s internal representation of time. Simulation time may
      accumulate faster, slower, or at the same pace as sidereal time. (DIS Glossary of M&S Terms,
      and IEEE STD 610.3, (references (b) and (c)).” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Sim-
      ulation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 473, p. 159)
    • Stimulate “To provide input to a system in order to observe or evaluate the system’s
      response.” (Source: DSMC Simulation Based Acquisition: A New Approach—Dec. 1998)
    • Stimulation “The use of simulations to provide an external stimulus to a system or sub-
      system.” (Source: DSMC Simulation Based Acquisition: A New Approach—Dec. 1998)
    • Stochastic Process “Any process dealing with events that develop in time or cannot be
      described precisely, except in terms of probability theory. (DSMC 1993–94 Military
      Research Fellows Report, (reference (k)).” (Source: DoD 5000.59-M Modeling and Simu-
      lation (M&S) Glossary, Part II, item 493, p. 161)
    • Validated Model An analytical model whose outputs and performance characteristics iden-
      tically or closely match the products and performance of the physical system or device.
    • Validation (Model) “The process of determining the manner and degree to which a model
      is an accurate representation of the real world from the perspective of the intended uses of
      the model, and of establishing the level of conﬁdence that should be placed on this assess-
      ment.” (DSMC SE Fundamentals, Section 13.4 Veriﬁcation, Validation, and Accreditation;
      p. 120.)
    • Veriﬁcation (Model) “The process of determining that a model implementation accurately
      represents the developer’s conceptual description and speciﬁcations that the model was
      designed to.” (DSMC SE Fundamentals, Section 13.4 Veriﬁcation, Validation, and Accred-
      itation; p. 120.)

51.2 TECHNICAL DECISION-MAKING AIDS

SE decision making related to system performance allocations, performance budgets and safety
margins, and design requires decision support to ensure that informed, fact-based recommendations
are made. Ideally, we would prefer to have an exact representation of the system you are analyz-
ing. In reality, exact representations do not exist until the system or product is designed, developed,
veriﬁed, and validated.
     There are, however, some decision aids SE can employ to provide degrees of representations
of a system or product to facilitate technical decision making. These include models, prototypes,
and mock-ups. The purpose of the decision aids is to create a representation of a system on a small,
low-cost scale that can provide empirical form, ﬁt, or function data to support design decision
making on a much larger scale.
654    Chapter 51    System Modeling and Simulation

51.3 MODELS

Models generally are of two varieties: deterministic and stochastic.

Deterministic Models
Deterministic models are structured on known relationships that produce predictable, repeatable
results. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 51.1
Each work period an employee receives a paycheck based on a formula that computes their gross salary—
hours worked times hourly rate less any distributions for insurance, taxes, charitable contributions, and so
forth.

Stochastic Models
Whereas deterministic models are based on precise relationships, stochastic models are structured
using probability theory to process a set of random event occurrences. In general, stochastic models
are constructed using data from statistically valid samples of a population that enable us to infer
or estimate results about the population as a whole. Consider the following theoretical example:


 EXAMPLE 51.2
A manufacturer produces 0.95 inch spacer parts in which three of the parts are assembled onto an axle. The
axle is then installed into a constrained space of a larger ASSEMBLY. If we produced several thousand parts,
we might discover the individual spacers randomly vary in size from 0.90 to 1.0 inch; no two parts are exactly
the same. So, what must the dimension of the constrained space be to accommodate dimensional variations
of each spacer? We construct a stochastic model that randomly selects dimensions for each of three spacers
within their allowable ranges. Then, it computes the integrated set of dimensions to estimate the mean of a
typical stacked conﬁguration. Based on the results, a dimension of the constrained space is selected that factors
in any additional considerations such degrees of looseness, if applicable.

The example above illustrates theoretically how a stochastic model could be employed. SEs often
use a worst-case analysis in lieu of developing a model. For some applications this may be accept-
able. However, suppose a worst-case analysis results in too much slack between the spools? What
the SEs need to know is: For randomly selected parts assembled into the conﬁguration, based on
frequency distributions of part dimensions and their standard deviations, WHAT is the estimated
mean of any conﬁguration?
     In summary, stochastic models enable us to estimate or draw inferences about system per-
formance for highly complex situations. These situations involve random, uncontrollable events or
inputs that have a frequency of occurrence under prescribed conditions. Based on the frequency
distributions of sampled data, we can apply statistical methods that infer a most probable outcome
for a speciﬁc set of conditions. Examples include environmental conditions and events, human reac-
tions to publicity, and pharmaceutical drug medications.

Model Development
Analytical methods require a frame of reference to represent the characteristics of an entity. For
most systems, a model is created using an observer’s frame of reference, such as the right-handed
coordinate system.
                                                                                  51.3 Models     655

     Analytically, model development is similar to system development. SE model developers should
fully understand the problem space a model’s solution space is intended to satisfy. Based on this
understanding, design methodology requires that we ﬁrst survey or research the marketplace to see
if the model(s) we require has already been developed and is available. If available, we need to
determine if it has necessary and sufﬁcient technical detail to support our system or entity appli-
cation. Conventional design wisdom (Principle 41.1) says that new models should only be devel-
oped after you have exhausted all other alternatives to locate an existing model.

Model Validation
Models are only as valid as the quality of its behavioral and physical performance characteristics
to replicate the real world entity. We refer to the quality of a model in terms of its ﬁdelity—meaning
its degree of realism. So, the challenge for SEs is: Even if we develop a model of a system or
product, HOW do we gain a level of conﬁdence that the model is valid and accurately and pre-
cisely represents the physical instance of an item and its interactions with a simulated real world
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT?
     In general, when developing models, we attempt to represent physical reality with simulated
or scaled reality. Our goal is to try to achieve convergence of the two within the practicality or
resource constraints. So, HOW do we achieve convergence? We do this by collecting empirical
data from actual physical systems, prototypes, or ﬁeld tests. Then, we validate the model by
comparing the actual ﬁeld data with the simulated behavioral and physical characteristics.
Finally, we reﬁne the model until its results closely match those of the actual system. This leads to
the question: HOW do we get ﬁeld data to validate a model for a system or product we are
developing?
     There are a number ways of obtaining ﬁeld data. We can:
    1. Collect data using controlled laboratory experiments subjected to OPERATING ENVI-
       RONMENT conditions and scenarios.
    2. Install a similar component on a ﬁelded system and collect measurement data for OPER-
       ATING ENVIRONMENT conditions and scenarios.
    3. Instrument a ﬁeld platform such as an aircraft with transducers and sensors to collect
       OPERATING ENVIRONMENT data.
Regardless of the method we use, a model is calibrated, adjusted, and reﬁned until it is validated
as an accurate and precise representation of the physical system or device. The model is then placed
under formal conﬁguration control. Finally, we may decide to have an independent decision author-
ity or subject matter expert (SME) to certify the model, which brings us to our next topic.

Model Certiﬁcation
The creation of a model is one thing; creating a valid model and getting it certiﬁed is yet another.
Remember, SE technical decision making must be founded in objective, fact-based data that accu-
rately represent real world situations and conditions. The same applies with models. So, what is
certiﬁcation?
     IEEE 610.12–1990 deﬁnes certiﬁcation as “A written guarantee that a system or component
complies with its speciﬁed requirements and is acceptable for operational use. For example, a
written authorization that a computer system is secure and is permitted to operate in a deﬁned envi-
ronment.” For many applications an independent authority validates a model by authenticating that
model results identically match those obtained from measurements of an actual system operating
under a speciﬁed set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
656     Chapter 51   System Modeling and Simulation

    In general, one SE can demonstrate to a colleague, their manager, or a Quality Assurance (QA)
representative that the data match. Certiﬁcation comes later when a recognized decision authority
within industry or governmental organization reviews the data validation results and ofﬁcially issues
a Letter of Certiﬁcation declaring the model to be certiﬁed for use in speciﬁc applications and
conditions.
    Do you need certiﬁed models? This depends on you’re the program’s needs. Certiﬁcation:
      1. Is expensive establish and maintain.
      2. Has an intrinsic value to the creator and marketplace.
Some models are used one time; others are used repeatedly and reﬁned over several years. Since
engineering decisions must be based on the integrity of data, models are generally validated but
not necessarily certiﬁed.

Understanding Model Characteristics
Models are generally developed to satisfy speciﬁc needs of the analyst. Although models may
appear to match two different analysis needs, they may not satisfy the requirements. Consider the
following example:


 EXAMPLE 51.3
Let’s suppose Analyst A requires a sensor model to investigate a technical issue. Analyst A develops a func-
tional model of Sensor XYZ to meet their needs of understanding the behavioral responses to external stimuli.
Later, Analyst B in another organization researches the marketplace and learns that Analyst A has already
developed a sensor model that may be available. However, Analyst B soon learns that the model describes the
functional behavior of Sensor XYZ whereas Analyst B is interested in the physical model of Sensor XYZ. As
a result, Analyst B either creates their own physical model of Sensor XYZ or translates the functional domain
model into the physical domain.

Understanding Model Fidelity
One of the challenges of modeling and simulation is determining the type of model you need.
Ideally, you would want a perfect model readily available so that you could provide simple inputs
and conduct WHAT IF games with reliable results.
    Due to the complexities and practicalities of modeling, among which are cost and schedule
constraints, models are estimates or approximations of reality—termed levels of ﬁdelity. For
example, is a ﬁrst-order approximation sufﬁcient? Second-order? Third-order? etc. The question
we have to answer is: WHAT minimum level of ﬁdelity do we need for a speciﬁc area of investi-
gation? Consider the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 51.4
Hypothetically, a mechanical gear system has a transfer function that can be described mathematically as
y = 0.1x where x = input and y = output. You may ﬁnd a simple analytical math model may be sufﬁcient for
some applications. In other applications the area of analytical investigation might require a physical model
of each component within the gear train, including the frictional losses due to the loading effects on axle
bearings.
                                                                                       51.3 Models     657


 EXAMPLE 51.5
Let’s assume you are developing an aircraft simulator. The key questions are:

    1. Are computer-generated graphic displays of cockpit instruments with simulated moving
       needle instruments and touch screen switches sufﬁcient, or do you need the actual working
       hardware used in the real cockpit to conduct training?
    2. What level of ﬁdelity in the instruments do you need to provide pilot trainees with the “look
       and feel” of ﬂying the actual aircraft?
    3. Is a static cockpit platform sufﬁcient for training, or do you need a three-axis motion sim-
       ulator to provide the level of ﬁdelity in realistic training?

The point of these examples is: SEs, in collaboration with analysts, the Acquirer, and Users,
must be able to determine WHAT levels of ﬁdelity are required and then be able to specify it. In
the case of simulator training systems, various levels of ﬁdelity may be acceptable. Where this
is the case, create a matrix to specify the level of ﬁdelity required for each physical item and
include scoping deﬁnitions of each level of ﬁdelity. To illustrate this point, consider the following
example:


 EXAMPLE 51.6
The level of ﬁdelity required for some switches may indicate computer-generated images are sufﬁcient. Touch
screen displays that enable switch activation by touch may be acceptable to create the effects of ﬂipping
switches.



 EXAMPLE 51.7
In other instances hand controls, brake pedals, and other mechanisms may require actual working devices that
provide the tactile look and feel of devices of the actual system.

Specifying Model Fidelity
Understanding model ﬁdelity is often a challenge. One of the objectives of modeling and simula-
tion is being able to realistically model the real world. In the case of training simulators that require
visual representations of the environment inside and outside the simulated vehicle, what level of
ﬁdelity in the terrain and trees and cultural features such as roads, bridges, and buildings is neces-
sary and sufﬁcient for training purposes?
    • Are computer-generated images with synthetic texture sufﬁcient for landscapes?
    • Do you require photographic images with computer-generated texture?
The answer to these questions depends on trade-offs between resources available and the positive
or negative impacts to training. Increasing the level of ﬁdelity typically requires signiﬁcantly more
resources—such as data storage or computer processing performance. Concepts such as cost as an
independent variable (CAIV) enable Acquirer decision makers to assess WHAT level of CAPA-
BILITY can be achieved at WHAT cost.
658    Chapter 51    System Modeling and Simulation

51.4 SYSTEM SIMULATION

Models serve as “building block” representations or approximations of physical reality. When we
integrate these models into an executable framework that enables us stimulate interactions and
behavioral responses under controlled conditions, we create a simulation of a SYSTEM OF INTER-
EST (SOI).
     As analytical models, simulations enable us to conduct WHAT IF exercises with each model
or system. In this context the intent is for SEs to understand the functional or physical behavior
and interactions of the system for a given set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT scenarios and
conditions.

Guidepost 51.1 The preceding discussions provide the foundation for understanding models
and simulations. We now shift our focus to understanding HOW SEs employ models and simula-
tions to support analytical decision making as well as create deliverable products for Users.


51.5 APPLICATION EXAMPLES OF
MODELING AND SIMULATION

Modeling and simulation (M&S) are applied in a variety of ways by SEs to support technical deci-
sion making. SEs employ models and simulations for several types of applications:
Application 1:      Simulation-based architecture selection
Application 2:      Simulation-based architectural performance allocations
Application 3:      Simulation-based acquisition (SBA)
Application 4:      Test environment stimuli
Application 5:      Simulation-based failure investigations
Application 6:      Simulation based training
Application 7:      Test bed environments for technical decision support
To better understand HOW SEs employ models and simulations, let’s describe each type of
application.

Application 1: Simulation-Based Architecture Selection
When you engineer systems, you should have a range of alternatives available to support informed
selection of the best candidate to meet a set of prescribed OPERATING ENVIRONMENT sce-
narios and conditions. In practical terms, you cannot afford to develop every candidate architec-
ture just to study it for purposes of selecting the best one. We can construct, however, models and
simulations that represent functional or physical architectural conﬁgurations. To illustrate, consider
the following example using Figure 51.1.


 EXAMPLE 51.8
Let’s suppose we have identiﬁed several promising Candidate Architectures 1 through n as illustrated on the
left side of the diagram. We conduct a trade study analysis of alternatives (AoA) and determine that the com-
plexities of selecting the RIGHT architecture for a given system application requires employment of models
and simulations. Thus, we create Simulation 1 through Simulation n to provide the analytical basis for select-
ing the preferred architectural conﬁguration.
                                               51.5 Application Examples of Modeling and Simulation        659

  1
      Candidate Architecture #1

        Entity
         Entity         Entity
                         Entity           3
          AA              BB
                                              Simulation
                                               Simulation
                                                  #1
                                                   #1
                  Entity
                   Entity                                                                    6
                    CC
                                                              5                        Architectural
                                                                                         Selection
                                                                                     Recommendations
                                                                  Architecture
                                                                  Trade Study         #1 Architecture #3
  2                                                                                   #2 Architecture #1
      Candidate Architecture #n                                                       #3 Architecture #2
        Entity
         Entity         Entity
                         Entity
          AA              BB              4
                                              Simulation
                                               Simulation
                                                  #n
                                                   #n
        Entity
         Entity         Entity
                         Entity
          DD              EE


Figure 51.1 Simulation-Based Architecture Selection




We exercise the simulations over a variety of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT scenarios and con-
ditions. Results are analyzed and compiled and documented in an Architecture Trade Study. The
Architecture Trade Study rank orders the results as part of its recommendations. Based on a review
of the Architecture Trade Study, SEs select an architecture. Once the architecture is selected, the
simulation serves as the framework for evaluation and reﬁning each simulated architectural entity
at lower levels of abstraction.

Application 2: Simulation-Based Architectural
Performance Allocations
Modeling and simulation are also employed to perform simulation-based performance allocations
as illustrated in Figure 51.2. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 51.9
Suppose that Requirement A describes and bounds Capability A. Our initial analysis derives three subordinate
capabilities, A1 through A3, that are speciﬁed and bounded by Requirements A1 through A3: The challenge
is: How do SEs allocate Capability A’s performance to Capabilities A1 through A3?
     Let’s assume that basic analysis provides us with an initial set of performance allocations that is “in the
ballpark.” However, the interactions among entities are complex and require modeling and simulation to
support performance allocation decision making. We construct a model of the Capability A’s architecture to
investigate the performance relationships and interactions of Entities A1 through A3.
     Next, we construct the Capability A simulation consisting of models, A1 through A3, representing
subordinate Capabilities A1 through A3. Each supporting capability, A1 through A3, is modeled using the
System Entity Capability Construct shown in Figure 22.1. The simulation is exercised for a variety of stimuli,
cues, or excitations using Monte Carlo methods to understand the behavior of the interactions over a range of
operating environment scenarios and conditions. The results of the interactions are captured in the system
behavioral response characteristics.
660        Chapter 51            System Modeling and Simulation


  1                                 Requirement    2
                                    Derivations
       RequirementAA
      Requirement                                                     4
          (Capability                                                               Capability A Architecture
           (CapabilityA)A)

                        Derived                                              Entity          Entity           Entity
                                 Reqmt.A1
                         DerivedReqmt.  A1                                    Entity
                                                                              A1
                                                                                              Entity
                                                                                              A2
                                                                                                               Entity
                                                                                                               A3
                             (Capability A1)                                   A1              A2               A3
                              (Capability A1)

      3                 Derived  Reqmt.A2
                         DerivedReqmt.  A2
Performance                   (CapabilityA2)
                             (Capability  A2)
 Allocations
                        Derived                                   5
                                 Reqmt.A3
                         DerivedReqmt.  A3                            Capability A
                              (CapabilityA3)
                             (Capability  A3)
                                                                       Simulation
                                                                                                                           7
                                                                                                                    System Behavioral
                    8
                                                                                                                        Response
                                                Entity A1 Model        Entity A2 Model      Entity A3 Model           Characteristic

      6      Stimulus, Cue,
              or Excitation




      Acceptable Range of Inputs

Figure 51.2 Simulation-Based Performance Allocations


     After several iterations to optimize the interactions, SEs arrive at a ﬁnal set of performance allocations
that become the basis for requirements speciﬁcations for capability A. Is this perfect? No! Remember, this is
a human approximation or estimate. Due to variations in physical components and the OPERATING ENVI-
RONMENT, the ﬁnal simulations may still have to be calibrated, aligned, and tweaked for ﬁeld operations
based on actual ﬁeld data. However, we initiated this process to reduce the complexity of the solution space
into more manageable pieces. Thus, we arrived at a very close approximation to support requirements’ allo-
cations without having to go to the expense of developing the actual working hardware and software.

Application 3: Simulation-Based Acquisition (SBA)
Traditionally, when an Acquirer acquired a system or product, they had to wait until the System
Developer delivered the ﬁnal system for Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) or ﬁnal accept-
ance. During OT&E the User or an Independent Test Agency (ITA) conducts ﬁeld exercises to eval-
uate system or product performance under actual OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions.
Theoretically there should be no surprises. Why?
      1. The System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) perfectly described and bounded the well-
         deﬁned solution space.
      2. The System Developer created the ideal physical solution that perfectly complies with the
         SPS.
In REALITY every system design solution has compromises due to the constraints imposed.
Acquirers and User(s) of a system need a level of conﬁdence “up front” that the system will perform
as intended. Why? The cost of developing large complex systems, for example, and ensuring that
they meet User validated operational needs is challenging.
     One method for improving the chances of delivery success is simulation-based acquisition
(SBA). What is SBA? In general, when the Acquirer releases a formal Request for Proposal (RFP)
solicitation for a system or product, a requirement is included for each Offeror to deliver a working
simulation model along with their technical proposal. The RFP stipulates criteria for meeting a
                                                  51.5 Application Examples of Modeling and Simulation          661

                                           1
                                               Existing System Simulation
                                                  Entity
                                                   Entity                Entity
                                                                          Entity
                                                    AA                     BB


                                                            2
                                                                Entity
                                                                  C                           6
                                                                                                    Product
                                                                                                  Acquisition
 3                         4                                                                      Trade Study
     Competitor
      CompetitorAA             Product
                                ProductAA                                                           Report



      CompetitorBB
     Competitor                 Product BB
                               Product           OR                                           7
                                                       Candidate                                 Acquisition
                                                                         5                    Recommendations
                                                      Performance
                                                      Evaluations                              #1 Product #3
                                                                                               #2 Product #n
     Competitor “n”            Product C                                           Priority    #3 Product #1
                                                                                               ……….
                                                                                               #n Product #2
Figure 51.3 Simulation-Based Acquisition (SBA)




prescribed set of functionality, interface and performance requirements. To illustrate how SBA is
applied, refer to Figure 51.3.


 EXAMPLE 51.10
Let’s suppose a User has an existing system and decides there is a need to replace a SUBSYSTEM such as a
propulsion system. Additionally, an Existing System Simulation is presently used to investigate system per-
formance issues.
     The User selects an Acquirer to procure the SUBSYSTEM replacement. The Acquirer releases an RFP
to a qualiﬁed set of Offerors, competitors A through n. In response to RFP requirements, each Offeror
delivers a simulation of their proposed system or product to support the evaluation of their technical proposal.
     On delivery, the Acquirer Source Selection Team evaluates each technical proposal using predeﬁned
proposal evaluation criteria. The Team also integrates the SUBSYSTEM simulation into the Existing System
Simulation for further technical evaluation.
     During source selection, the offeror’s technical proposals and simulations are evaluated. Results of the
evaluations are documented in a Product Acquisition Trade Study. The TSR provides a set of Acquisition Rec-
ommendations to the Source Selection Team (SST), which in turn makes Acquisition Recommendations to a
Source Selection Decision Authority (SSDA).

Application 4: Test Environment Stimuli
System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) can be a very expensive element of system devel-
opment, not only from its labor intensiveness but also the creation of the test environment inter-
faces to the unit under test (UUT). There are several approaches SEs can employ to test a UUT.
The usual system integration, test, and evaluation (SITE) options include: 1) stimulation, 2) emu-
lation, and 3) simulation. The simulations in this context are designed to reproduce external system
interfaces to the (UUT). Refer to Figure 51.4.
662     Chapter 51     System Modeling and Simulation


        OPERATING
       ENVIRONMENT
      REPRESENTATION

        1
             Physical
              Physical
            Interfacing
             Interfacing            Stimulation
              Entity
               Entity
             • Hardware
               • Hardware
             • •Software
                 Software


        3
             Emulated
              Emulated              Emulation
                                                                      UnitUnder
                                                                     Unit  Under
            Interfacing
             Interfacing                            OR
                                                                      Test(UUT)
                                                                     Test  (UUT)
              Entity
               Entity

        5
             Simulated
              Simulated             Simulation
            Interfacing
             Interfacing
               Entity
                Entity


Figure 51.4 Stimulation, Emulation, and Simulation Testing Options



Application 5: Simulation-Based Failure Investigations
Large complex systems often require simulations that enable decision makers to explore dif-
ferent aspects of performance in employing the system or product in a prescribed OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT.
    Occasionally, these systems encounter an unanticipated failure mode that requires in-depth
investigation. The question for SEs is: What set of system/operator actions or conditions and
use case scenarios contributed to the failure? Was the root cause due to: 1) latent defects, design
ﬂaws, or errors, 2) reliability of components, 3) operational fatigue, 4) lack of proper mainte-
nance, 5) misuse, abuse, or misapplication of the system from its intended application, or 6) an
anomaly?
    Due to safety and other issues, it may be advantageous to explore the root cause of the
FAILURE using the existing simulation. The challenge for SEs is being able to:
      1. Construct the chain of events leading to the failure.
      2. Reliably replicate the problem on a predictable basis.
A decision could be made to use the simulation to explore the probable cause of the failure mode.
Figure 51.5 illustrates how you might investigate the cause of failure.
     Let’s assume that a System Failure Report (1) documents the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
scenarios and conditions leading to a failure event. It includes a maintenance history record among
the documents. Members of the failure analysis team extract the Operating Conditions and Data
(2) from the report and incorporate actual data and into the Existing System Simulation (3). SEs
perform analyses using Validated Field Data (4)—among which are the instrument data and a
metallurgical analysis of components/residues—and they derive additional inputs and make valid
assumptions as necessary.
                                                         51.5 Application Examples of Modeling and Simulation               663


            Initial
             State
                                                                         9                         8
                                                                  Yes                                   FailureModes,
                                                                                                       Failure  Modes,&&
                                                                              Predictable
                                                11                                                       EffectsAnalysis
                                                                                                        Effects  Analysis
                                                                               Results?
                                                                                                            (FMEA)
                                                                                                             (FMEA)
 1                                                   Final
                                                     State
     System                                                                           No
     Failure                         4                                  10
                                          ValidatedField
                                         Validated  Field                    Refine
     Report
                                              Data                            RefineModel/
                                                                                    Model/
                                               Data                           Operations
                                                                               Operations

                                                                  3
                                                                      Existing System Simulation        7
                                            5
                   2
                                                                         Entity
                                                                          Entity        Entity
                                                                                         Entity             Simulation
                       Operating
                        Operating                                          AA             BB                  Results
                       Conditions          Parameter A
                        Conditions   Acceptable Range of Inputs
  Failure Modes         &&Data
  & Effects Data
                           Data
                                           6
                                                                         Entity
                                                                          Entity
                                                                           CC
                                          Parameter “n”
                                     Acceptable Range of Inputs

Figure 51.5 Simulation-Based Failure Mode Investigations

     The failure analysis team explores all possible actions and rules out probable causes using
Monte Carlo simulations and other methods. As with any failure mode investigation, the approach
is based on the premise that all scenarios and conditions are suspect until they are ruled out by a
process of fact-based elimination. Simulation Results (7) serve as inputs to a Failure Modes and
Effects Analysis (FMEA) (8) that compares the results the scenarios and conditions identiﬁed in
the System Failure Report (1). If the results are not predictable (9), the SEs continue to Reﬁne the
Model/Operations (10) until they are successful in duplicating the root cause on a predictable basis.

Application 6: Simulation-Based Training
Although simulations are used as analytical tools for technical decision making, they are also used
to train system operators. Simulators are commonly used for air and ground vehicle training. Figure
51.6 provides an illustrative example.
     For these applications, simulators are developed as deliverable instructional training devices
to provide the look and feel of actual systems such as aircraft. As instructional training devices,
these systems support all phases of training including:1) brieﬁng, 2) mission training, and 3) post-
mission debrieﬁng. From an SE perspective, these systems provide a Human-in-the Loop (HITL)
training environment that includes:
      1. Brieﬁng Stations (3) support trainee briefs concerning the planned missions and mission
         scenarios.
      2. Instructor/Operator Stations (IOS) (5) control the training scenario and environment.
      3. Target System Simulation (1) simulates the physical system the trainee is being trained to
         operate.
      4. Visual Systems (8) generate and display (9) (10) simulated OPERATING
         ENVIRONMENTS.
      5. Databases (7) support visual system environments.
      6. Debrief Stations (3) provide an instructional replay of the training mission and results.
664      Chapter 51          System Modeling and Simulation


                                  7                                Visual Database
                                      Simulation
                                      Databases                     Visual                       8                   9
                                                       Other        Data           Image
                                                                                    Image             Visual Data            Visual
                                                                                                                              Visual
                                                     Databases                   Generation
                                                                                  Generation                               Projection
                                                                                                                            Projection
                                            Simulation                             System
                                                                                    System                                  System
                                                                                                                             System
         Simulation Inputs                 Parameters &
            & Control                        Control
                                                            1                                                       Projected
  4                          5                                  SYSTEM
                                  Instructor/                    SYSTEMOF   OF                                       Images
                                   Instructor/                   INTEREST
      Instructor                   Operator                       INTEREST                                      10
       Instructor                   Operator                         (SOI)
                                 Station                              (SOI)                 Simulation
                                  Station(IOS)
                                          (IOS)                   Simulation                Stimuli &
                                                                   Simulation                                            Simulated
                                                                                            Responses
            Scenarios
                                                                                                                          Imagery
                                       Playback
                                                                          6
                                                      Trainee Responses         Physical
                                                                                 PhysicalSystem
                                                                                          System
               3                                                               Interface
                      Brief/                                                    InterfaceDevice(s)
                                                                                          Device(s)
                       Brief/                                                    • Trainee Station(s)
                                                                                   • Trainee Station(s)
                     Debrief
                      Debrief                                                   • Operator Station(s)
                                                           System                 • Operator Station(s)
                    Station(s)
                     Station(s)                                                                              Physical
                                                         Responses/
                                                       Haptic Feedback                                       Motion
                                                                                                             Devices
                                          2
                                              Trainee(s)                      Visual Imagery and Cues
                                               Trainee(s)
      Instruction and Communications


Figure 51.6 Simulation-Based Training


Training Simulator Implementation. In general, there are several types of training
simulators:
      • Fixed Platform Simulators Provide static implementation and use only visual system
        motion and cues to represent dynamic motion of the trainee.
      • Motion System Simulators Employ one-, two-, or three-axis six-degree-of-freedom (6
        DOF) motion platforms to provide an enhanced realism to a simulated training session.
One of the challenges of training simulation development is the cost related to hardware and soft-
ware. Technology advances sometimes outpace the time required to develop and delivery new
systems. Additionally, the capability to create an immersive training environment that transcends
the synthetic and physical worlds is challenging.
     One approach to these challenges is to develop a virtual reality simulator. What is a virtual
reality simulation?
      • Virtual Reality Simulation The employment of physical elements such as helmet visors
        and sensory gloves to psychologically immerse a subject in an audio, visual, and haptic feed-
        back environment that creates the perception and sensation of physical reality.

Application 7: Test Bed Environments for
Technical Decision Support
When we develop systems, we need early feedback on the downstream impacts of technical deci-
sions. While methods such as breadboards, brassboards, rapid prototyping, and technical demon-
strations enable us to reduce risk, the reality is that the effects of these decisions may not be known
until the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) Phase. Even worse, the cost to correct
any design ﬂaws or errors in these decisions or physical implementations increases signiﬁcantly as
a function of time after Contract Award.
                                              51.5 Application Examples of Modeling and Simulation               665

     From an engineering perspective, it would be desirable to evolve and mature models, or pro-
totypes of a laboratory “working system,” directly into the deliverable system. An approach such
as this provides continuity of:
       1. The evolving system design solution and its element interfaces.
       2. Veriﬁcation of those elements.
The question is: HOW can we implement this approach?
    One method is to create a test bed. So, WHAT is a Test Bed and WHY do you need one?


Test Bed Development Environments. A test bed is an architectural framework and ENVI-
RONMENT that allows simulated, emulated, or physical components to be integrated as “working”
representations of a physical SYSTEM or conﬁguration item (CI) and be replaced by actual com-
ponents as they become available. IEEE 610.12 (1990) describes a test bed as “An environment
containing the hardware, instrumentation, simulators, software tools, and other support elements
needed to conduct a test.”
     Test beds may reside in environmentally controlled laboratories and facilities, or they may be
implemented on mobile platforms such as aircraft, ships, and ground vehicles. In general, a test
bed serves as a mechanism that enables the virtual world of modeling and simulation to transition
to the physical world over time.

Test Bed Implementation. A test bed is implemented with a central framework that integrates
the system elements and controls the interactions as illustrated in Figure 51.7. Here, we have a Test
Bed Executive Backbone (1) framework that consists of Interface Adapters (2), (5), (10) that serve
as interfaces to simulated or actual physical elements, PRODUCTS A through C.
     During the early stages of system development, PRODUCTS A, B, and C are MODELED and
incorporated into simulations: Simulation A (4); Simulations B1 (7), B2 (9), B3 (8); and Simulation



 3                                                              7      Subsystem
      PRODUCT A                                                       Subsystem
                                                                                B1
                                                                     SimulationB1
                                                                    Simulation

        Physical             2                                  6
        Device A          Interface
                         Interface                                               PRODUCT B
                          Adapter
                         Adapter
                                                                           Subsystem
     4 Simulation                         1
                                                                              B1
      Simulation
                                        Testbed
                                       Testbed
          AA                                           5                                        Subsystem
                                       Executive
                                      Executive     Interface
                                                   Interface                                       B2
                                       Backbone     Adapter
                                                   Adapter
11                                    Backbone                             Subsystem
      PRODUCT C                                                               B3


        Physical
        Device C            10                                      8      Subsystem        9      Subsystem
                                                                          Subsystem               Subsystem
                          Interface
                         Interface                                                  B3
                                                                         SimulationB3                       B2
                                                                                                 SimulationB2
                                                                        Simulation              Simulation
                          Adapter
                         Adapter
     12 Simulation
       Simulation
           CC
                                                                    Where:               = Simulated Interface
                                                                                         = Physical Interface

Figure 51.7 Simulation Testbed Approach to System Development
666    Chapter 51   System Modeling and Simulation

C (12). The objective is to investigate critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs) and facil-
itate technical decision making. These initial simulations may be of LOW to MEDIUM ﬁdelity. As
the system design solution evolves, HIGHER ﬁdelity models may be developed to replace the lower
ﬁdelity models, depending on speciﬁc requirements.
     As PRODUCTS A, B, and C or their subelements are physically implemented as prototypes,
breadboards, brassboards, and the like, the physical entities may replace simulations A through C
as plug-and-play modules. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 51.11
During the development of PRODUCT B, SUBSYSTEMS B1 through B3 may be implemented as Simula-
tion B1, B2, and B3. At some point in time SUBSYSTEM B2 is physically prototyped in the laboratory. Once
the SUBSYSTEM B2 physical prototype reaches an acceptable level of maturity, Simulation B2 is removed
and replaced by the SUBSYSTEM B2 prototype. Later, when the SUBSYSTEM B2 developer delivers the
veriﬁed physical item, the SUBSYSTEM B2 prototype is replaced with the deliverable item.

In summary, a test bed provides a controlled framework with interface “stubs” that enable devel-
opers to integrate—“plug-and-play”—functional models, simulations, or emulations. As physical
hardware (HWCI) and software conﬁguration items (CSCIs) are veriﬁed, they replace the models,
simulations, or emulations. Thus, over time the test bed evolves from an initial set of functional
and physical models and simulation representations to a fully integrated and veriﬁed system.

Reasons That Drive the Need for a Test Bed. Throughout the System Development and the
Operation and Support (O&S) phases of the system/product life cycle, SEs are confronted with
several challenges that drive the need for using a test bed. Throughout this decision-making process,
a mechanism is required that enables SEs to incrementally build a level of conﬁdence in the evolv-
ing system architecture and design solution as well as to support ﬁeld upgrades after deployment.
     Under conventional system development, breadboards, brassboards, rapid prototypes, and tech-
nology demonstrations are used to investigate COIs/CTIs. Data collected from these decision aids
are translated into design requirements—as mechanical drawings, electrical assembly drawings and
schematics, and software design, for example.
     The translation process is prone to human errors; however, integrated tool environments min-
imize the human translation errors but often suffer from format compatibility problems. Due to dis-
continuities in the design and component development workﬂow, the success of these decisions
and implementation may not be known until the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE)
Phase.
     So, how can a test bed overcome these problems? There are several reasons why test beds can
facilitate system development.
Reason 1:    Performance allocation–based decision making. When we engineer and develop
             systems, recursive application of the SE Process Model requires informed, fact-based
             decision making at each level of abstraction using the most current data available.
             Models and simulations provide a means to investigate and analyze performance and
             system responses to OPERATING ENVIRONMENT scenarios for a given set of
             WHAT IF assumptions. The challenge is that models and simulations are ONLY as
             GOOD as the algorithmic representations used and validated based on actual ﬁeld
             data measurements.
Reason 2:    Prototype development expense. Working prototypes and demonstrations provide
             mechanisms to investigate a system’s behavior and performance. However, full pro-
                                           51.5 Application Examples of Modeling and Simulation      667

             totypes for some systems may be too risky due to the MATURITY of the technology
             involved and expense, schedule, and security issues. The question is: Do you have
             incur the expense of creating a prototype of an entire system just to study a part of it?
             Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 51.12
To study an aerodynamic problem, you may not need to physically build an entire aircraft. Model a “piece”
of the problem for a given set of boundary conditions.

Reason 3:    System component delivery problems. Despite insightful planning, programs often
             encounter late vendor deliveries. When this occurs SITE activities may severely
             impact contract schedules unless you have a good risk mitigation plan in place. SITE
             activities may become bottlenecked until a critical component is delivered. Risk mit-
             igation activities might include some form of representation—simulation, emulation,
             or stimulation—of the missing component to enable SITE to continue to avoid inter-
             rupting the overall program schedule.
Reason 4:    New technologies. Technology drives many decisions. The challenge SEs must answer
             is:
    1. Is a technology as mature as its literature suggests.
    2. Is this the RIGHT technology for this User’s application and longer term needs.
    3. Can the technology be seamlessly integrated with the other system components with minimal
       schedule impact.
So a test bed enables the integration, analysis, and evaluation of new technologies without expos-
ing an existing system to unnecessary risk. For example, new engines for aircraft.
Reason 5:    Post deployment ﬁeld support. Some contracts require ﬁeld support for a speciﬁc
             time frame following system delivery during the System Operations and Support
             (O&S) Phase. If the Users are planning a series of upgrades via builds, they have a
             choice:
    1. Bear the cost of operating and maintaining a test article(s) of a ﬁelded system for assess-
       ing incremental upgrades to a ﬁelded conﬁguration.
    2. Maintain a test bed that allows the evaluation of conﬁguration upgrades.
Depending on the type of system and its complexity, test beds can provide a lower cost solution.

Synthesizing the Challenges. In general, a test bed provides for plug-and-play simulations of
a conﬁguration items (CIs) or the actual physical component. Test beds are also useful for work
arounds because they can minimize SITE schedule problems. They can be used to:
    • Integrate early versions of an architectural conﬁguration that is populated with simulated
      model representations (functional, physical, etc.) of conﬁguration items (CIs).
    • Establish a plug-and-play working test environment with prototype system components
      before an entire system is developed.
    • Evaluate systems or conﬁguration items (CIs) to be represented by simulated or emulated
      models that can be replaced by higher ﬁdelity models and ultimately by the actual physical
      conﬁguration item (PCI).
668     Chapter 51   System Modeling and Simulation

      • Apply various technologies and alternative architectural and design solutions for conﬁgu-
        ration items (CIs).
      • Assess incremental capability and performance upgrades to system ﬁeld conﬁgurations.

Evolution of the Test Bed. Test beds evolve in a number of different ways. Test beds may be
operated and maintained until the ﬁnal deliverable system completes SITE. At that point actual
systems serve as the basis for incremental or evolutionary development. Every system is different.
So assess the cost–beneﬁts of maintaining the test bed. All or portions of the test bed may be
dismantled, depending on the development needs as well as the utility and expense of maintenance.
     For some large complex systems, it may be impractical to conduct WHAT IF experiments on
the ACTUAL systems in enclosed facilities due to:
      1. Physical space requirements.
      2. Environmental considerations.
      3. Geographically dispersed development organizations.
In these cases it may be practical to keep a test bed intact. This, in combination with the capabil-
ities of high-speed Internet access, may allow geographically dispersed development organizations
to conduct work with a test bed without having to be physically colocated with the actual system.

51.6 MODELING AND SIMULATION
CHALLENGES AND ISSUES

Although modeling and simulation offer great opportunities for SEs to exploit technology to under-
stand the problem and solution spaces, there are also a number of challenges and issues. Let’s
explore some of these.

Challenge 1: Failure to Record Assumptions and Scenarios
Modeling and simulation requires establishing a base set of assumptions, scenarios, and operating
conditions. Reporting modeling and simulation results without recording and noting this informa-
tion in technical reports and brieﬁngs diminishes the integrity and credibility of the results.

Challenge 2: Improper Application of the Model
Before applying a model to a speciﬁc type of decision support task, the intended application of the
model should be veriﬁed. There may be instances where models do not exist for the application.
You may even be confronted with a model that has only a degree of relevance to the application.
If this happens, you should take the relevancy into account and apply the results cautiously. The
best approach may be to adapt the current model.

Challenge 3: Poor Understanding of
Model Deﬁciencies and Flaws
Models and simulations generally evolve because an organization has an operational need to satisfy
or resolve. Where the need to resolve critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs) is imme-
diate, the investigator may only model a segment of an application or “piece of the problem.” Other
Users with different needs may want to modify the model to satisfy their own “segment” needs.
Before long, the model will evolve through a series of undocumented “patches,” and then docu-
mentation accuracy and conﬁguration control become critical issues.
                                                                      51.7 Guiding Principles   669

     To a potential user, such a model may have risks due to potential deﬁciencies or shortcomings
relative to the User’s application. Additionally, undiscovered design ﬂaws and errors may exist
because parts of the model have not been exercised. Beware of this problem. Thoroughly investi-
gate the model before selecting it for usage. Locate the originator of the model, assuming they can
be located or are available. ASK the developers WHAT you should know about the model’s per-
formance, deﬁciencies, and ﬂaws that may be untested and undocumented.

Challenge 4: Model Portability
Models tend to get passed around, patched, and adapted. As a result, conﬁguration and version
control becomes a critical issue. Maintenance and conﬁguration management of models and sim-
ulations and their associated documentation is very expensive. Unless an organization has a need
to use a model for the long term, the item may go onto a shelf. While the physics and logic of the
model may remain constant over time, the execution of the model on newer computer platforms
may be questionable. This often necessitates migration of the model to a new computer system at
a signiﬁcant cost.

Challenge 5: Poor Model and Simulation Documentation
Models tend to be developed for speciﬁc rather than general applications. Since models and sim-
ulations are often nondeliverable items, documentation tends to get low priority and is often inad-
equate. Management decision making often follows a “do we put $1.00 into making the M&S better
or do we place $1.00 into documenting the product” mindset. Unless the simulation is a deliver-
able, the view is that it is only for internal use and so minimal documentation is the strategy.

Challenge 6: Failure to Understand Model Fidelity
Every model and simulation has a level of ﬁdelity that characterizes its performance and quality.
Understand what level of ﬁdelity you need, investigate the level of ﬁdelity of the candidate model,
and make a determination of utility of the model to meet your needs.

Challenge 7: Undocumented Features
Models or simulations developed as laboratory tools typically are not documented with the level
of discipline and scrutiny of formal deliverables. For this reason a model or simulation may include
undocumented “features” that the developer forgot to record because of the available time, budgets
cuts, and the like. Therefore, you may think that you can easily reuse the model but discover that
it contains problem areas. A worst-case scenario is believing and planning to use a model only to
discover deﬁciencies when you are “too far down the stream” to pursue an alternative course of
action.


51.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern modeling and simulation practices.

Principle 51.1 Model ﬁdelity resides in the User’s mind. HIGH ﬁdelity to one person may be
MEDIUM ﬁdelity to a second person and LOW ﬁdelity to a third person.

Principle 51.2 “All models are wrong but some are useful.” [George E.P. Box (1979) p. 202]
670    Chapter 51   System Modeling and Simulation

51.8 SUMMARY

In our discussion of modeling and simulation practices we identiﬁed, deﬁned, and addressed various types of
models and simulations. We also addressed the implementation of test beds as evolutionary “bridges” that
enable the virtual world of modeling and simulation to evolve to the physical world.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. If you were the Acquirer of the system:
   (a) Are there critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs) that drive the need to employ models
       and simulations to support system development? Identify the issues.
   (b) What elements of the system require modeling and simulation?
   (c) Would a test bed facilitate development of this system? HOW?
   (d) What requirements would you levy on a contractor in terms of documenting a model or simulation?
   (e) What strategy would you validate the model or simulation?
   (f) Could the models be employed as part of the deliverables operational system?
   (g) What types of system upgrades do you envision for the evolution of this system? How would a test
       bed facilitate evaluation of these upgrades?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media concerning modeling and simulation practices.
   (a) What requirements and guidance are provided?
   (b) What requirements are imposed on documenting models and simulations?
2. How are models and simulations employed in your line of business and programs?
3. Contact small, medium, and large contract programs within your organization.
   (a) How do they employ models and simulations in their technical decision-making processes?
   (b) What types of models do they use?
   (c) How did the program employ models and simulations (in architectural studies, performance alloca-
       tions, etc.)?
   (d) What experiences have they had in external model documentation or developing documentation for
       models developed internally?
   (e) What lessons learned in the employment and application of models and simulations do they suggest?
   (f) Do the programs employ test beds or use test beds of other external organizations?
   (g) Did the contract require delivery of any models or simulations used as contract line items (CLINs)? If
       so, what Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) items were required, and when?


REFERENCES

DoD 5000.59-M. 1998. DoD Modeling and Simulation        IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of
  (M&S) Glossary. Washington, DC: Department of           Software Engineering Terminology. New York: Institute
  Defense. (DoD).                                         of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).
DSMC. 1998. Simulation Based Acquisition: A New         Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.
  Approach. Defense System Management College             Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:
  (DSMC) Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.                           Wiley-InterScience.
                                                                                      Additional Reading      671

ADDITIONAL READING

Frantz, Frederick K. 1995. A Taxonomy of Model             Lewis, Jack W. 1994. Modeling Engineering Systems. Engi-
  Abstraction Techniques. Computer Sciences Corporation.     neering Mentor series. Solana Beach, CA: HighText Pub-
  Proceedings of the 27th Winter Simulation Conference.      lications.
DSMC. 1998. Simulation Based Acquisition: A New
  Approach. Defense System Management College
  (DSMC) Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.
Chapter              52

      Trade Study Analysis
      of Alternatives

52.1 INTRODUCTION

The engineering and development of systems requires SEs to identify and work through a large
range of critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs). These issues range from the minis-
cule to the complex, requiring in-depth analyses supported by models, simulations, and prototypes.
Adding to the complexity, many of these decisions are interrelated. How can SEs effectively work
through these issues and keep the program on schedule?
     This section answers this question with a discussion of trade study analysis of Alternatives
(AoA). We:
      1. Explore WHAT a trade study is and how it relates to a trade space.
      2. Introduce a methodology for conducting a trade study.
      3. Deﬁne the format for a Trade Study Report (TSR).
      4. Suggest recommendations for presenting trade study results.
      5. Investigate challenges, issues, and risks related to performing trade studies.
We conclude with a discussion of trade study issues that SEs need to be prepared to address.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What is a trade study?
       2. What are the attributes of a trade study?
       3. How are trade studies conducted?
       4. Who is responsible for conducting trade studies?
       5. When are trade studies conducted?
       6. Why do you need to do trade studies?
       7. What is a trade space?
       8. What methodology is used to perform a trade study?
       9. How do you select trade study decision factors/criteria and weights?
      10. What is a utility function?
      11. What is a sensitivity analysis?

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

672
                                                                              52.1 Introduction    673

    12. What is the work product of a trade study?
    13. How do you document, report, and present trade study results?
    14. What are some of the issues and risks in conducting a trade study?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Conclusion A reasoned opinion derived from a preponderance of fact-based ﬁndings and
      other objective evidence.
    • Decision Criteria Attributes of a decision factor. For example, if a decision factor is main-
      tainability, decision criteria might include component modularity, interchangeability, acces-
      sibility, and test points.
    • Decision Factor A key attribute of a system, as viewed by Users or stakeholders, that has
      a major inﬂuence on or contribution to a requirement, capability, critical operational, or
      technical issue (COI/CTI) being evaluated. Examples include elements of technical per-
      formance, cost, schedule, technology, and support.
    • Finding A commonsense observation supported by in-depth analysis and distillation of facts
      and other objective data. One or more ﬁndings support a conclusion.
    • Recommendation A logically reasoned plan or course of action to achieve a speciﬁc
      outcome or results based on a set of conclusions.
    • Sensitivity Analysis “A procedure for testing the robustness of the results of trade-off analy-
      sis by examining the effect of varying assigned values of the decision criteria on the result
      of the analysis.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering, p. 453)
    • Trade Space An area of evaluation or interest bounded by a prescribed set of boundary
      constraints that serve to scope the set of acceptable candidate alternatives, options, or choices
      for further trade study investigation and analysis.
    • Trade Study “An objective evaluation of alternative requirements, architectures, design
      approaches, or solutions using identical ground rules and criteria.” (Source: former
      MIL-STD-499)
    • Trade Study Report (TSR) A document prepared by an individual or team that captures
      and presents key considerations—such as objectives, candidate options, and methodology—
      used to recommend a prioritized set of options or course of action to resolve a critical oper-
      ational or technical issue.
    • Utility Function A linear or nonlinear characteristic proﬁle or value scale that represents
      the level of importance different stakeholders place on a system or entity attribute or capa-
      bility relative to constraints established by a speciﬁcation.
    • Utility Space An area of interest bounded by minimum and/or maximum performance cri-
      teria established by a speciﬁcation or analysis and a degree of utility within the performance
      range.
    • Viable Alternative A candidate approach that is qualiﬁed for consideration based on its
      technical, cost, schedule, support, and risk level merits relative to decision boundary
      conditions.

Trade Study Semantics
Marketers express a variety of terms to Acquirers and Users that communicate lofty goals that SEs
aspire to achieve. Terms include best solution, optimal solution, preferred solution, solution of
choice, ideal solution, and so on. Rhetorically speaking:
674     Chapter 52   Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives

      • HOW do we structure a course of action to know when we have achieved a “best solution”?
      • WHAT is a “preferred” solution? Preferred by WHOM?
These questions emphasize the importance of structuring a course of action that enables us to arrive
at a consensus of what these terms mean. The mechanism for accomplishing this course of action
is a trade study, which is an analysis of alternatives (AoA).
     To better understand HOW trade studies establish a course of action to achieve lofty goals,
let’s begin by establishing the objectives of a trade study:

52.2 TRADE STUDY OBJECTIVES

The objectives of a trade study are to:
      1. INVESTIGATE a critical operational or technical issue (COI/CTI).
      2. IDENTIFY VIABLE candidate solutions.
      3. EXPLORE the fact-based MERITS of candidate solutions relative to decision criteria
         derived from stakeholder requirements—via the contract, Statement of Objectives (SOO),
         speciﬁcation requirements, user interviews, cost, or schedules.
      4. PRIORITIZE solution recommendations.
In general, COIs/CTIs are often too complex for most humans to internalize all of the technical
details on a personal level. Adding to the complexity are the interdependencies among the
COIs/CTIs. Proper analysis requires assimilation and synthesis of large complex data sets to arrive
at a preferred approach that has relative value or merit to the stakeholders such as Users, Acquirer,
and System Developer. The solution to this challenge is to conduct a trade study that consists of a
structured analysis of alternatives (AoA).

Typical Trade Study Decision Areas
The hierarchical decomposition of a system into entities at multiple levels of abstraction and selec-
tion of physical components requires a multitude of technical and programmatic decisions. Many
of these decisions are driven by the system design-to/for objectives and resource constraints.

Referral For more information about system development objectives, refer to Chapter 35 on
System Design To/For Objectives.

If we analyze the sequences of many technical decisions, categories of trade study areas emerge
across numerous system, product, or service domains. Although every system, product, or service
is unique and has to be evaluated on its own merits, most system decisions can be characterized
using Figure 52.1. Speciﬁcally, the large vertical box in the center of the graphic depicts the top-
down chain of decisions common to most entities regardless of system level of abstraction.
     Beginning at the top of the center box, the decision sequences include:
      • Architecture trades
      • Interface trades including human-machine interfaces
      • Hardware/software (HW/SW) trades
      • Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)/nondevelopmental item (NDI)/new development trades
      • HW/SW component composition trades
      • HW/SW process and methods trades
      • HW/SW integration and veriﬁcation trades
                                                                                       52.2 Trade Study Objectives           675

                                                  Typical Trade Decisions at Every
 System Levels of Abstraction                       System Level of Abstraction

      SYSTEM                                        1
       SYSTEMLevel
              Level                                     Architecture Trades


                                                    2
      SEGMENTLevel
     SEGMENT  Level
                                                          Interface Trades


                                                    3
                                                        Hardware/Software
      PRODUCTLevel
     PRODUCT  Level                                          Trades
                                                                                                      DecisionAids
                                                                                                     Decision  Aids
                                Requirements                                         Requirements          • Analyses
                                                                                                             • Analyses
                                                    4                                                    • •Prototypes
    SUBSYSTEM                                            COTS/NDI/New                                         Prototypes
     SUBSYSTEMLevel
               Level                                    Development Trades
                                                                                                           • •Mockups
                                                                                                               Mockups
                                                                                                            • •Models
                                                                                                                Models
                                                                                                        • Simulations
                                                                                                          • Simulations
                                Recommendations     5                                     Data       • •Demonstrations
                                                                                                          Demonstrations
     ASSEMBLYLevel
    ASSEMBLY  Level                                     HW/SW Component                                 • Vendor Data
                                                        Composition Trades*                               • Vendor Data
                                                                                                        LegacyPrograms
                                                                                                    • •Legacy     Programs
     SUBASSEMBLY
      SUBASSEMBLY                                   6
         Level                                          HW/SW Process &
          Level                                          Methods Trades


         PARTLevel
        PART  Level                                 7
                                                        HW/SW Integration
                                                        & Verification Trades



Figure 52.1 Typical Trade Study Decision Sequences

This chain of decisions applies to entities at every system level of abstraction—from SYSTEM, to
PRODUCT, to SUBSYSTEM, and so forth, as illustrated by the left facing arrows. SEs employ
decision aids to support these decisions, such as analyses, prototypes, mock-ups, models, simula-
tions, technology demonstrations, vendor data, and their own experience, as illustrated by the box
shown at the right-hand side. The question is: HOW are the sequences of decisions accomplished?

Trade Studies Address Critical Operational/
Technical Issues (COIs/CTIs)
The sequence of trade study decisions represents a basic “line of questioning” intended to facili-
tate the SE design solution of each entity.
     1. What type of architectural approach enables the USER to best leverage the required system,
        product, or service capabilities and levels of performance?
     2. Given an architecture decision, what is the best approach to establish low risk, interoper-
        able interfaces or interfaces to minimize susceptibility or vulnerability to external system
        threats?
     3. How should we implement the architecture, interfaces, capabilities, and levels of perform-
        ance? Equipment? Hardware? Software? Humans? Or a combination of these?
     4. What development approach represents a solution that minimizes cost, schedule, and
        technical risk? COTS? NDI? Acquirer furnished equipment (AFE)? New development?
        A combination of COTS, NDI, AFE, and new development?
     5. Given the development approach, what should the composition of the HWCI or CSCI be in
        terms of hardware components or software languages, as applicable?
     6. For each HWCI, CSCI, or HWCI/CSCI component, what processes and methods should be
        employed to design and develop the entity?
     7. Once the HWCI, CSCI, or HWCI/CSCI components are developed, how should they be inte-
        grated and veriﬁed to demonstrate full compliance?
676                                                    Chapter 52     Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives

We answer these questions through a series of technical decisions. A trade study, as an analysis of
alternatives (AoA), provides a basis for comparative evaluation of available options based on a
predeﬁned set of decision criteria.


52.3 SEQUENCING TRADE STUDY DECISION DEPENDENCIES

Technical programs usually have a number of COIs/CTIs that must be resolved to enable progres-
sion to the next decision in the chain of decisions. If we analyze the sequences of these issues, we
discover that the process of decision making resembles a tree structure over time. Thus, the branches
of the structure represent decision dependencies as illustrated in Figure 52.2.
     During the proposal phase of a program, the proposal team conducts preliminary trade studies
to rough out key design decisions and issues that require more detailed attention after Contract
Award (CA). These studies enable us to understand the COI or CTI to be resolved after CA. Addi-
tionally, thorough studies provide a level of conﬁdence in the cost estimate, schedule, and risk—
leading to an understanding of the problem and solution spaces.

Author’s Note 52.1 Depending on the type of program/contract, a trade study tree is often
helpful to demonstrate to a customer that you have a logical decision path toward a timely system
design solution.

52.4 SYSTEM ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENT TRADE STUDIES

Once an entity’s problem and solution space(s) are understood, one of the ﬁrst tasks a team has to
perform is to select an architecture. Let’s suppose you are leading a team to develop a new type of
vehicle. What are the technical decisions that have to be made? We establish a hierarchy of vehicle
architecture elements as illustrated in Figure 52.3.

                                                                            Trade Study
                                                           Architecture
                                                             Trades         1                 Architecture A
                                                                                              Architecture A               Architecture B                    Architecture C
                                              Entity




                                                                                                                                Trade Study
                                          andEntity




                                                                                                                                                    Selection Decision
                                                         Interface Trades                                                               2
                                                                                            Interface Type 1                                                   Interface Type
                                                                                                                                                               Interface Type 22
                                    Leveland




                                                                                                                                            Trade Study
                             SystemLevel




                                                       Hardware/Software                                              Selection Decision
                                                                                                                                                                                           Unacceptable




                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                            UnacceptableRequirements




                                                            Trades                Personnel       Hardware
                                                                                                  Hardware                                                               Software
                        EachSystem




                                                                                                                 Trade Study
                                                          COTS/NDI/
                 WithinEach




                                                                                     COTS/NDI                                       4                                       COTS/NDI/New
                                                        New Development                                                                                                      Development
                                                                                     Components                                                New Development
                                                                                                                                               New Development
                                                            Trades                                                     Selection Decision                                    Combination
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Requirements
             FlowWithin




                                                                                                                          Trade Study
                                                                                                 Selection Decision
                                                       HW/SW Component
                                                                                                                                5
    DecisionFlow




                                                       Composition Trades                 Material X
                                                                                          Material X                                                   Material Y
   Decision




                                                                                                           Trade Study
                                                             HW/SW
                                                                                                                            6
                                                        Process & Methods
                                                                                      Method A                                                Method BB
                                                                                                                                              Method                     Method C
                                                             Trades                                            Selection Decision


                                                              HW/SW                                                         Trade Study
                                                                                                   Selection Decision
                                                          Integration &
                                                                                      II &                                          7
                                                        Verification Trades              &V  Approach A
                                                                                           V Approach A                                                     I & V Approach B

Figure 52.2 Typical Trade Study Decision Tree
                                                          52.5 Understanding the Prescribed Trade Space   677


                                        Self-Propelled,Mobile
                                       Self-Propelled,  Mobile
                                            VehicleSystem
                                           Vehicle  System




 Vehicle     Propulsion       Energy
                                Energy              Wheel        Cargo/       Security       Lighting
  Vehicle     Propulsion                             Wheel        Cargo/       Security       Lighting
 Frame         System         Transfer
                               Transfer             System       Payload      System         System
  Frame         System                               System       Payload      System         System
                               System
                                System




     Guidance,
      Guidance,      Crew/Passenger         Ingress/
   Navigation,        Crew/Passenger         Ingress/     Communications               Visual
    Navigation,&&     Compartment
                       Compartment           Egress
                                              Egress
                                                           Communications               Visual
  Control                                                     System                  Systems
   Control(GN&C)
           (GN&C)     Environment
                       Environment          Systems
                                             Systems
                                                               System                  Systems
      System
       System
Figure 52.3 Mobile Vehicle Trade Study Areas Example



    Each of these elements involves a series of technical decisions that form the basis for subse-
quent, lower level decisions. Additionally decisions made in one element as part of the SE process
may have an impact on one or more other elements. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 52.1
Cargo/payload constraints inﬂuence decision factors and criterion used in the Propulsion System trades—
involving technology and power; vehicle frame trades—involving size, strength, and materials; wheel system
trades—involving type and braking; and other areas as well.


52.5 UNDERSTANDING THE PRESCRIBED TRADE SPACE

Despite the appearance that trade study efforts have the freedom to explore and evaluate options,
there are often limiting constraints. These constraints bound the area of study, investigation, or
interest. In effect the bounded area scopes what is referred to as the trade space.

The Trade Space
We illustrate the basic trade space by the diagram in Figure 52.4. Let’s assume that the System
Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) identiﬁes speciﬁc measures of performance (MOPs) that can be
aggregated into a minimum acceptable level of performance—by a ﬁgure of merit (FOM)—as noted
by the vertical gray line. Marketing analyses or the Acquirer’s proposal requirements indicate there
is a per unit cost ceiling as illustrated by the horizontal line. If we focus on the area bounded by
the minimum acceptable performance (vertical line), per unit cost ceiling (horizontal line), and
cost–performance curve, the bounded area represents the trade space.
     Now suppose that we conduct a trade study to evaluate candidate Solutions 1, 2, 3, and 4. We
construct the cost–performance curve. To ensure a level of objectivity, we normalize the per unit
cost ceiling to the Acquirer maximum requirement. We plot cost and relative performance of each
of the candidate Solutions 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the cost–performance curve.
     By inspection and comparison of plotted cost and technical performance relative to required
performance:
678       Chapter 52        Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives


                                              Minimum
                    Normalized               Acceptable
                   Cost Per Unit            Performance
                                                                                       Solution 4 is Non-Compliant
                                                                                             with MAXIMUM
                                  1.3                                            4        Cost Per Unit Criteria

                                                        Cost Per Unit Ceiling         Design-to-Cost (DTC)
                                  1.0                                                         Level
                                                       Trade Space
                                  0.8                                      3
                                  0.5                            2

                                  0.3      1



Solution 1 is Technically                 0.8    1.0             1.4      1.8   2.0
  Non-Compliant with
       MINIMUM                          Normalized Technical Performanc e
 Performance Criteria

                                                Where: X      = Candidate Solutions

Figure 52.4 Candidate Trade Space Zone




      • Solutions 1 and 4 fall outside the trade space.
      • Solution 1 is cost compliant but technically noncompliant.
      • Solution 4 is technically compliant but cost noncompliant.
When this occurs, the Trade Study Report (TSR) documents that Solutions 1 and 4 were consid-
ered and determined by analysis to be noncompliant with the trade space decision criteria and were
eliminated from consideration.
    Following elimination of Solutions 1 and 4, Solutions 2 and 3 undergo further analysis to thor-
oughly evaluate and score other considerations such as organizational risk.

Optimal Solution Selection
The previous discussion illustrates the basic concept of a two-dimensional trade space. A trade
space, however, is multidimensional. For this reason it is more aptly described as a multidimen-
sional trade volume that encompasses technical, life cycle cost, schedule, support, and risk deci-
sion factors.
    We can illustrate the trade volume using the graphic shown in Figure 52.5. To keep the diagram
simple, we constrain our discussion to a three-dimensional model representing the convolution of
technical, cost, and schedule factors. Let’s explore each dimension represented by the trade volume.
      • Performance–Schedule Trade Space The graphic in the upper left-hand corner of the
        diagram represents the performance vs. schedule trade space. Identiﬁer 1 marks the location
        of the selected performance versus schedule solution.
      • Performance–Cost Trade Space The graphic in the upper right-hand corner includes
        represents the performance–cost trade space. Identiﬁer 2 marks the location of the selected
        performance versus cost solution.
      • Cost–Schedule Trade Space The graphic in the lower right-hand corner of the diagram rep-
        resents the Cost–Schedule trade space. Identiﬁer 3 marks the location of the selected cost
        versus schedule solution.
                                                                                   52.6 The Trade Study Process                      679

                 Maximum Acceptable
                      Schedule
                                                                                                         Maximum Acceptable
                                                                                                               Cost
   Performance



                   1




                                                                                    Performance
                                                        Performance                                        2
                                    Minimum
                                   Acceptable
                                  Performance                                                                            Minimum
                                                                                                                        Acceptable
                                                                                                                       Performance
                 Schedule
                                                                       2
                                                    5                                                     Cost

       Schedule-
        Schedule-
      Performance                                                                                              Cost-
                                                                                                                Cost-
       Performance                              1            4                                             Performance
       TradeSpace
      Trade  Space                                  8                                                       Performance
                                                                       7          Cost                      TradeSpace
                                                                                                           Trade  Space

                                                                                                  Maximum Acceptable
                                                6            3                                         Schedule
   Trade Space
     Volume                                                                Cost
                                                                                                    3

                   Schedule
                                                                                                                  Maximum
                                                                                                                  Acceptable
                                                                                                                     Cost
                                                            Cost-
                                                             Cost-
                                                          Schedule
                                                           Schedule                      Schedule
                                                         TradeSpace
                                                        Trade  Space

Figure 52.5 Trade Space Interdependencies




If we convolve these trade spaces and their boundary constraints into a three-dimensional model,
the cube in the center of the diagram results.
     The optimal solution selected is represented by the intersection of orthogonal lines in their
respective planes. Conceptually, the optimal solution would lie on a curve that represents the con-
volution of the performance–schedule, performance–cost, and cost–schedule curves. Since each
plane includes a restricted trade space, the integration of these planes into a three-dimensional
model results in a trade space volume.


52.6 THE TRADE STUDY PROCESS

Trade studies consist of highly iterative steps to analyze the issues to be resolved into a set pri-
oritized recommendations. Figure 52.6 represents a basic Trade Study Process and its process steps.
Let’s brieﬂy examine the process through each of its steps.
Process Step 1:               Deﬁne the trade study objective(s).
Process Step 2:               Identify decision stakeholders.
Process Step 3:               Identify trade study individual or team.
Process Step 4:               Deﬁne the trade study decision factors/criteria.
Process Step 5:               Charter the trade study team.
Process Step 6:               Review the Trade Study Report (TSR)
Process Step 7:               Select the preferred approach.
Process Step 8:               Document the decision.
680     Chapter 52      Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives


         1                          2
                DefineTrade
               Define  Trade             IdentifyDecision
                                        Identify  Decision
              StudyObjective(s)
             Study  Objective(s)          Stakeholders
                                           Stakeholders
Start
                                    3
                                          IdentifyTrade
                                         Identify  Trade
                                           StudyTeam
                                          Study   Team

                                    4
                                        Identify Decision
                                         Identify Decision
                                                                         Trade Study Team
                                        Factors/Criteria
                                         Factors/Criteria                   (If applicable)

                                    5                          Charter
                                         Charter Trade
                                          Charter Trade
 Trade Study                               StudyTeam
                                          Study  Team
Decision Maker                                                             Conduct Trade
                                                                            Conduct Trade
                                    6                                          Study
                                                                                Study
                                         Review Trade
                                          Review Trade
                                          StudyResults
                                         Study  Results
                                                                             Trade
                                    7
                                                                             Study
                                        Select Approach
                                         Select Approach                     Report
                                                                             (TSR)
                                    8
                     Stop                  Document
                                            Document
                                            Decision
                                             Decision

Figure 52.6 Trade Study Process


Guidepost 52.1 Our discussion has identiﬁed the overall Trade Study Process. Now let’s focus
our attention on understanding the basic methodology that will be employed to conduct the trade
study.


52.7 ESTABLISHING THE TRADE STUDY METHODOLOGY

Objective technical and scientiﬁc investigations require a methodology for making decisions. The
methodology facilitates the development of strategy, course of action, or “roadmap” of the planned
technical approach to investigate, analyze, and evaluate the candidate solution approaches or
options. Methodologies, especially proven ones, keep the study effort on track and prevent unnec-
essary excursions that consume resources and yield no productive results.
     There are numerous ways of establishing the trade study methodology. Figure 52.7 provides
an illustrative example:
Step 1:       Understand the problem statement.
Step 2:       Deﬁne the evaluation decision factors and criteria.
Step 3:       Weight decision factors and criteria.
Step 4:       Prepare utility function proﬁles.
Step 5:       Identify candidate solutions.
Step 6:       Analyze, evaluate, and score the candidate options.
Step 7:       Perform sensitivity analysis.
Step 8:       Prepare the Trade Study Report (TSR).
Step 9:       Conduct peer/subject matter expert (SME) reviews.
Step 10:      Present the TSR for approval.
                                                                                52.8 Trade Study Utility Functions           681

          Figure 52.6         1
                                   Understand                     2                                   3
            Trade                                                       Formulate
                                                                         Formulate                        WeightDecision
                                                                                                          Weight  Decision
                                  Problem/ Issue                      Decision
            Study
                                    Statement                          DecisionFactors
                                                                                Factors                     Factorsand
                                                                                                           Factors  and
           Process                                                      &&Critieria                          Criteria
                                                                            Critieria                         Criteria


                                                                               Highly Iterative       4
                                                                                                           PrepareUtility
                                                                                                          Prepare  Utility
     10                                                                                                     Functions
                                                                                                             Functions
         FINAL
       Trade Study
         Report                                                                                           5
          (TSR)                                                                                                Identify
                                                                                                                Identify
                                                                                                              Candidate
                                                                                                               Candidate
                                                                                                              Solutions
                                                                                                               Solutions
                              Highly Iterative                                     Highly Iterative

 9
     Conduct SME                                                           7
     Peer Review(s)                              8                                                        6
                         DRAFT                                                  Perform
                                                                                 Perform
                                                      PrepareTrade
                                                     Prepare  Trade                                           Evaluate
                                                                                                               Evaluate
                        Trade Study                                            Sensitivity
                                                                                Sensitivity
                                                      StudyReport
                                                     Study  Report                                            Candidate
                                                                                                               Candidate
                          Report                                                Analysis
                                                                                 Analysis
                                                         (TSR)
                                                          (TSR)                                               Solutions
                                                                                                               Solutions
                           (TSR)                                                Checks
                                                                                 Checks


Figure 52.7 Trade Study Methodology




Guidepost 52.2 At this point we have established the basic trade study methodology. On the
surface the methodology is straightforward. However, HOW do we evaluate alternatives that have
degrees of utility to the stakeholder? This brings us to a special topic, trade study functions.


52.8 TRADE STUDY UTILITY FUNCTIONS

When scoring some decision factors and criteria, the natural tendency is to do so on a linear scale
such as 1–5 or 1–10. This method assumes that the User’s value scale is linear; in many cases it
is nonlinear. In fact, some candidate options data have levels of utility. One way of addressing this
issue is to employ utility functions.

Understanding the Utility Function and Space
The trade space allows us to sort out acceptable solutions that fall within the boundary constraints
of the trade space. Note we used the term acceptable as in the context of satisfying a minimum/
maximum threshold. The reality is some solutions are, by a ﬁgure of merit (FOM), better than
others. We need a means to express the degree of utility mathematically. Figure 52.8 provides exam-
ples of HOW Users might establish utility function proﬁles. To see this point better, consider the
following example:


 EXAMPLE 52.4
A User requires a vehicle with a minimum speed within a mission area of 50 miles per hour (mph) under spec-
iﬁed operating environment conditions. Mission analysis, as validated by the User, indicates that 64.0 mph is
the maximum speed required. Thus, we can state that the minimum utility to the User is 50 mph and the
maximum utility is 64.0 mph.
682        Chapter 52         Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives


Utility             A                                  Utility                 B                        Utility                 C

    10                                                     10                                                10


      5                                                     5                                                    5


      0                                                     0                                                    0
                                             MPG                 5                  10       Time                    175             200    Feet
          15   20       25       30
          Average Fuel Economy                                  Acceleration (0 to 60 mph)                       Braking (70 to 0 mph), feet



                             Utility               D                                    Utility              E

                                10                                                          10


                                 5                                                           5


                                 0                                                           0
                                       0.9         0.8           0.7
                                                                           g                      15                  20 K Dollars

                                             Road Handling                                              Cost

Figure 52.8 Examples of Utility Function Proﬁles
Source: Adapted from NASA System Engineering “Toolbox” for Design-Oriented Engineers, Figure 2-1 “Example
utility functions”; p. 2-7.




                                              Minimum Performance                             Maximum Relative Utility
                                                                                             Based on Maximum Level of
               Relative                         Based on Minimum
                                                                                               Performance Required
                                             Specification Requirement
                Utility
                                                            Utility = 1.0                                    4
                              1.0

                              0.8
                                                                 Utility Space                                           Maximum Level of
                              0.6                                                                                      Performance Required
  Degree or                                              Utility = 0.5                                                 Determined by Analysis
Range of Utility                                                               3
                              0.4

                              0.2
                                                                                                                       Minimum Relative Utility
                                                           Utility = 0.0                                                  Based on Minimum
                              0.0                  2                                                                   Specification Requirement

                                             1
                                     46 48         50     52         54   56       58      60      62   64       66
                                                                 Speed (mph)
Figure 52.9 Utility Space Illustration



Assigning the Relative Utility Value Range. Since utility represents the value proﬁle a User
places on an attribute, we assign the minimum utility a value of 0.0 to represent the minimum per-
formance requirement—which is 50 mph. We assign a utility value of 1.0 to represent the maximum
requirement—which is 64.0 mph. The net result is the establishment of the utility space as indi-
cated by the shaded area in Figure 52.9.
                                                               52.8 Trade Study Utility Functions   683

Determining Candidate Solution Utility. Once the utility range and space are established,
the relative utility of candidate options can be evaluated. Suppose that we have four candidate
vehicle solutions—1, 2, 3, and 4—to consider.
    • Vehicle 1 has a minimum speed of 48 mph.
    • Vehicle 2’s minimum speed is 50 mph—the threshold speciﬁcation requirement.
    • Vehicle 3’s minimum speed is 57 mph.
    • Vehicle 4’s minimum speed is 65 mph.
So we assign to each vehicle the following utility values relative to the minimum speciﬁcation
requirement:
    1. Vehicle 1 = unacceptable and noncompliant
    2. Vehicle 2 at 50 mph = utility value of 0, the minimum threshold
    3. Vehicle 3 at 57 mph = utility value of 0.5
    4. Vehicle 4 = exceeds the maximum threshold and therefore has a utility value of 1.0.
This approach creates several issues:
      First, if Vehicle 1 has a minimum speed of 48 mph, does this mean that it has a utility value
of <0.0 (i.e., disutility) or 0? The answer is no, because we assigned 0.0 to be the minimum spec-
iﬁcation requirement of 50 mph which vehicle 2 meets.
      Second, if Vehicle 4 exceeds the maximum speed requirement, do we assign it a utility value
of 1.0+ (i.e., >1.0), or do we maximized its utility at 1.0? The answer depends on whether vehicle
4 already exists or will be developed. You generally are not paid to overdevelop a system beyond
its required capabilities—in this case, 64 mph.
      Third, if we apply the utility value to the trade study scoring criteria (decision factor ¥ weight
¥ utility value), HOW do we deal with a system such as Vehicle 4 that has a utility value of 0.0
but meets the minimum speciﬁcation requirement?

Utility Value Correction Approach 1
In the preceding example we started with good intentions—to ﬁnd value-based decision factors via
utility functions—but have created another problem. How do we solve it? There are a couple of
solutions to correct this situation.
      One approach is to simply establish a utility value of 1.0 to represent the minimum speciﬁca-
tion requirement. This presents an issue. In the example Vehicle 1 has a minimum speed of 48 mph
under speciﬁed operating conditions. If a utility value of 1.0 represents the minimum performance
requirement, Vehicle 1 will have a utility value of -0.2.
      Simply applying this utility value infers acceptance as a viable option and allows it to con-
tinue to be evaluated in a trade study evaluation matrix. Our intention is to eliminate noncompli-
ant solutions—which is to remove Vehicle 1 from consideration. Thus, if a solution is unacceptable,
it should have a utility value of 0.0. This brings us to Approach 2.

Utility Value Correction Approach 2
Another utility correction approach that overcomes the problems of Correction Approach 1 involves
a hybrid digital and an analog solution. Rather than IMMERSING ourselves in the mathematical
concepts, let’s simply THINK about what we are attempting to accomplish.
    The reality is that either a candidate option satisﬁes a minimum/maximum require-
ment or it doesn’t. The result is digital: 1 = meets requirement, and 0 = does not meet requirement.
684    Chapter 52   Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives

This then leads to the question: If an option meets the requirement, how well does it meet the require-
ment—meaning an analog result? We can state that more concisely as:
                                Utility value = Digital utility + Analog utility                (52.3)
where:
   Digital utility (DU) = 1 or 0
   Analog utility (AU) = 0.0 to 1.0 (variable scale)
     In summary, should you use utility functions in your trade studies? The decision depends on
a case-by-case basis. In general, the preceding discussion simply provides a means of reﬁning and
delineating the degree of utility for speciﬁc capabilities relative to a User’s mission application.


52.9 SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS

Although trade studies are intended to yield THE best answer that stands out for a given set of
decision criteria, many times they do not. Often the data for competing alternatives are clustered
together. How do you decluster the data to resolve this dilemma?
     Theoretically, we perform a sensitivity analysis of the data. The sensitivity analysis enables us
to vary any one decision factor weight by some quantity such as 10% to observe the effects on the
decision. However, this may or may not decluster the data. So, let’s take another approach.

Better Sensitivity Analysis Approach
A better approach to differentiating clustered trade study data resides in selection of the decision
factors and criteria. When we initially identiﬁed decision factors/criteria with the stakeholders,
chances are there was a board range of factors. To keep things simple, assume we arbitrarily selected
6 criteria from a set of 10. Weight each criterion. As a result, the competing solutions became
clustered.
     The next logical step is to factor in the n + 1 criterion and renormalize the weights based on
earlier ranking. Then, you continue to factor in additional criteria until the data decluster. Recog-
nize that if the n + 1 has a relative weight of 1%, it may not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the results. This
leaves two options:
Option A: Make a judgmental decision and pick a solution.
Option B: Establish a ground rule that the initial selection of decision criteria should not con-
          stitute more than 90% or 95% of the total points and scale the list to 100%. This effec-
          tively leaves 5% to 10% for the n + 1 or higher terms that may have a level of
          signiﬁcance on the outcome. As each new item is added back, rescale the weights rel-
          ative to their initial weights within the total set.


52.10 TRADE STUDY REPORTS (TSRs)

On completion of the trade study analysis, the next challenge is being able to articulate the results
in the Trade Study Report (TSR). The TSR serves as a quality record that documents accomplish-
ment of the chartered or assigned task.

Why Document the Trade Study?
A common question is WHY document a trade study? There are several reasons:
                                                             52.10 Trade Study Reports (TSRs)    685

     First, your Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) or organization command media may
require that you to document trade studies.
     Second, trade studies formally document key decision criteria, assumptions, and constraints
of the trade study environment for posterity. Since SE, as a highly iterative process, requires deci-
sion making based on given conditions and constraints, those same conditions and constraints can
change quickly or over time. Therefore, you or others could have to revisit previous trade study
decisions to investigate HOW the changing conditions or constraints could have impacted the deci-
sion or course of action such that corrective actions should be initiated.
     Third, as a professional, document key decisions and rationale as a matter of disciplinary
practice.

Trade Study Documentation Formality
Trade studies are documented at various levels of formality. The level of formality ranges from
simply recording the considerations and deliberations in a SE’s engineering notebook to formally
approved and published reports intended for wide distribution. ALWAYS check your contract, local
organization command media, and/or program’s Technical Management Plan (TMP) for explicit
direction concerning the level of formality required. At a minimum, document the key facts of the
trade study in a personal engineering notebook.


Preparing the TSR
There are numerous ways of preparing the TSR. First and foremost, ALWAYS consult your con-
tract or organizational command media for guidance. If there are no speciﬁc outline requirements,
consider using or tailoring the outline provided below:
    1.0 INTRODUCTION
        1.1 Scope
        1.2 Authority
        1.3 Trade Study Team Members
        1.4 Acronyms and Abbreviations
        1.5 Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    2.0 APPLICBLE DOCUMENTS
        2.1 Acquirer (role) Documents
        2.2 System Developer (role) Documents
        2.3 Vendor Documents
    3.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
        3.1 Trade Study Objective(s)
        3.2 Trade Study Purpose
        3.3 Trade Space Boundaries
        3.4 Findings
        3.5 Conclusions
        3.6 Recommendations
        3.7 Other Viewpoints
        3.8 Selection Risks and Impacts
686     Chapter 52   Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives

      4.0 TRADE STUDY METHODOLOGY
          4.1 Step 1
          4.2 Step 2
        ...



          4.z Step z
      5.0 DECISION CRITERIA, FACTORS, AND WEIGHTS
          5.1 Selection of Decision Factors and Criteria
          5.2 Selection of Weights for Decision Factors or Criteria
      7.0 EVALUTION AND ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
          7.1 Option A
          7.2 Option B
        ...




          7.x Option x
      8.0 FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS (optional)
      9.0 RECOMMENDATIONS (optional)
      APPENDIXES SUPPORTING DATA
          A Data Item 1
          B Data Item 2
        ...




Warning: Proprietary, Copyrighted, and Export Controlled Information Most vendor
literature is copyrighted or deemed proprietary. So avoid reproducing and/or posting any copy-
righted information unless you have the expressed, written permission from the owner/vendor to
reproduce and distribute the material. ALWAYS establish proprietary data exchange agreements
before accepting any proprietary vendor data.
     As stated previously, some vendor data may be EXPORT controlled and subject to the US Inter-
national Trafﬁc and Arms Regulations (ITAR). So ALWAYS consult with your program, Contracts,
legal, and Export Control organizations before disseminating technical information that may be
subject to this constraint.

Proof Check the TSR Prior to Delivery
Some Trade Study Teams develop powerful and compelling trade studies only to have the effort
falter due to poor writing and communications skills. When the TSR is prepared, thoroughly edit
it to ensure completeness and consistency. Perform a spell check on the document. Then, have peers
review the document to see that it is self-explanatory, consistent, and does not contain errors. Make
sure the deliverable TSR reﬂects the professionalism, effort, and quality of effort contributed to the
trade study.

Presenting the Trade Study Results
Once team members prepare and approve the Trade Study Report (TSR), present the trade study
results. There are a number of approaches for presenting TSR results. The approaches generally
include delivery of the TSR as a document, brieﬁngs, or combination.
                                                                 52.11 Trade Study Risk Areas    687

Trade Study Report (TSR) Submittal. For review, approval, and implementation, deliver the
TSR directly to the chartering decision authority that commissioned the study. The TSR should
always include a cover letter prepared by the Trade Study Team lead and reviewed for concurrence
by the team.
     TSRs can be delivered via the mail or by personal contact. It is advisable that the Trade Study
Team lead or team, if applicable, personally deliver the TSR to the decision authority. This pro-
vides an opportunity to brieﬂy discuss the contents and recommendations.
     During the meeting the decision authority may solicit team recommendations for
disseminating the TSR to stakeholders. If a meeting forum is selected to present a TSR brieﬁng,
the date, time, and location should be coordinated through notiﬁcation to the stakeholders and Trade
Study Team members.

Advance Review of the Trade Study Report. The Trade Study decision authority—such as
the Technical Director, Project Engineer, or System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT)—
may request an advance review of the TSR by stakeholders prior to the TSR presentation and
discussion. If a decision is expected at the meeting, advance review of the TSR enables the
stakeholders to come prepared to:
    1. Address any open questions or concerns
    2. Make a decision concerning the recommendations.

TSR Brieﬁngs. TSR brieﬁngs to stakeholders can be helpful or a hindrance. They are helpful if
additional clariﬁcation is required. Conversely, if the presenter does a poor job with presentation,
the level of conﬁdence in the TSR may be questioned. Therefore, BE PREPARED.


52.11 TRADE STUDY RISK AREAS

Trade studies, like most decisions, have a number of risk areas: let’s explore a few examples.

Risk Area 1: Test Article Data Collection Failures
When test articles are on loan for technical evaluation, failures may occur and PRECLUDE com-
pletion of data collection within the allowable time frame. Because of the limited time for the trade
study, replacement of the test article(s) may not be practical or feasible. Plan for contingencies
and mitigate their risks!

Risk Area 2: Poor or Incorrect Assumptions
Formulation of candidate solutions often requires a set of dependencies and assumptions—such as
availability of funding or technology. Stakeholders often challenge trade study results because poor
or incorrect assumptions were made by the trade study team. Where appropriate and necessary,
discuss and validate assumptions with the decision authority to preclude consuming resources
developing a decision that was ﬂawed due to poor or incorrect assumptions from the start.

Risk Area 3: Data Validity
Technical decision making must be accomplished with the latest most complete, accurate, and
precise data available. Authenticate the currency, accuracy, and precision of all data as well as
vendor commitment to stand behind the integrity of the data.
688   Chapter 52   Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives

Risk Area 4: Selection Criteria Relevancy
Occasionally selection criteria that have little or no contribution to the selection focus and objec-
tive get onto the list of Decision Factors or Criteria. Scrutinize the validity of factors and selec-
tion criteria. Document the supporting rationale.

Risk Area 5: Overlooked Selection Criteria
Sometimes there are critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs) attributes that do not make
the Selection Criteria List. Selection criteria checks and balances should include veriﬁcation of
traceability of selection criteria to the COIs/CTIs to be resolved.

Risk Area 6: Failure to Get the User “Buy In”
Contrary to popular opinion, customer satisfaction does not begin at delivery of the system. The
process begins at Contract Award. Toward this end, keep the User involved as much as practical
in the technical decision-making process to provide the foundation for positive delivery satisfac-
tion. When high-level trade studies are performed that have an impact on system capabilities, inter-
faces, and performance, solicit User validation of Selection Decision Factors and Criteria and their
respective weights. Give the User some level of ownership of the system/product, starting at Con-
tract Award.

Risk Area 7: Unproven or Invalid Methodology
Trade study success begins with a strong, robust strategy and methodology that will withstand pro-
fessional scrutiny. Flaws in the methodology inﬂuence and reduce the integrity and effectiveness
of the trade study. Solicit peer reviews by trusted colleagues to ensure that the trade study begins
on the RIGHT track and yields results that will withstand professional scrutiny by the organiza-
tion, Acquirer, User, and professional community, as applicable.

Risk 8: Scaling the Trade Study Task Activities to
Resource Constraints
As with most SE tasks, you may not always have an adequate amount of time to perform trade
studies. Yet, the results are expected to be professionally and competently accomplished.
    Whatever time frame you have available, assuming it is reasonable and practical, the key
results and ﬁndings, in general, need to be comparable whether you have one day or one week. If
you have one day, the decision authority gets a one-day trade study and data; one month gets a
month’s level of analysis and data. So, HOW do you deal with the time constraints? The level of
detail, research, analysis, and reporting may have to be scaled to the available time.

52.12 TRADE STUDY SUGGESTIONS

Although trade studies are intended to resolve critical operational or technical (COI/CTI) issues,
one of their ironies is they sometimes create their own set of issues related to scope, context,
conduct, and reporting. Here are a few suggestions to consider based on issues common to many
trade studies:
Suggestion 1:      Select the right methodology.
Suggestion 2:      Adhere to the methodology.
Suggestion 3:      Select the right decision factors, criteria, and weights.
                                                                                    52.14 Summary      689

Suggestion 4:      Avoid predetermined trade study decisions.
Suggestion 5:      Establish acceptable data collection methods.
Suggestion 6:      Ensure data source integrity and credibility.
Suggestion 7:      Reconcile inter-COI/CTI dependencies.
Suggestion 8:      Accept/reject trade study report recommendations.
Suggestion 9:      Document the trade study decision.
Suggestion 10:     Create trade study report credibility and integrity.
Suggestion 11:     Respect trade study dissenting technical opinions.
Suggestion 12:     Maintain trade study reports.

Concluding Point
The perception of clear-cut options available for selection is sometimes deceiving. The reality is
none of the options may be acceptable. There may even be instances where the trade study may
lead to yet another option that is based on combinations of the options considered or options not
considered. Remember, the trade study process is NOT intended to answer: Is it A, B, or C. The
objective is to determine the best solution given a set of prescribed decision criteria. That includes
other options that may not have been identiﬁed prior to the start of the trade study.


52.13 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern trade study practices.

Principle 52.1 An undocumented trade study is nothing more than personal opinion.

Principle 52.2 Trade studies are only as valid as their task constraints and underlying assump-
tions, methodology, and data collection. Document and preserve the integrity of each.

Principle 52.3 A trade study team without a methodology is prone to wander aimlessly.

Principle 52.4 Analyses investigate a speciﬁc condition, state, circumstances, or “cause-and-
effect” relationships; trade studies analyze alternatives and propose prioritized recommendations.

Principle 52.5 (Wasson’s Task Signiﬁcance Principle) The amount of time allowed for task per-
formance and completion is often inversely proportional to the task’s level of signiﬁcance to the
deliverable system, User, Acquirer, or organization.


52.14 SUMMARY

During our discussion of trade study practices, we deﬁned what a trade study is, discussed why trade studies
are important and should be documented, and outlined the basic trade study process and methodology. We
also addressed methods for documenting and presenting the TSR results.
690    Chapter 52     Trade Study Analysis of Alternatives

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system, selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs) that had to be resolved.
   (b) Based on your own needs, what decision factors and criteria would you establish for each COI/CTI?
       How would you weight them?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Your management has decided to procure a speciﬁc computer for an application and wants you to develop
   a trade study justifying the selection and present the results to corporate headquarters. How would you
   approach the situation?
2. Contact two or three contract programs within you organization. Interview the Technical Director or Project
   Engineer and SEs regarding what approaches were used to perform trade studies. Identify the following
   for each program, report and discuss your ﬁndings with peers:
   (a) What methodology steps were used?
   (b) How were decision criteria determined?
   (c) How were decision criteria weights established?
   (d) How many candidates were evaluated?
   (e) Was a detailed analysis performed on each candidate or only on the ﬁnal set of candidates?
   (f) What type of sensitivity analysis was employed to decluster candidates, if applicable?
   (g) What lessons did the program learn from the trade studies? What worked/didn’t work?


REFERENCES

Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.         National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
  Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:     1994. Systems Engineering “Toolbox” for Design-
  Wiley-InterScience.                                        Oriented Engineers. NASA Reference Publication 1358.
MIL-STD-499B. 1994. (canceled draft). Systems Engineer-      Washington, DC.
  ing. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASD-100 Architecture and System Engineering. 2003. National Airspace
  System—Systems Engineering Manual. Washington, DC: FAA.
Chapter              53

     System Veriﬁcation and Validation

53.1 INTRODUCTION

For most non–research and development (R&D) programs, there are two options to engineering
and developing systems:
     • Option 1 Employ the hobbyist approach based on the BUILD, TEST, FIX paradigm “until
       we get it right” philosophy.
     • Option 2 Do the job RIGHT the ﬁrst time.
Stockholders, corporations, and Acquirers, among many others, want to know “up front” that their
money is going to be applied efﬁciently and effectively within cost and schedule constraints. From
the corporation’s perspective, this means winning contracts, surviving, growing its business,
increasing shareholder value, and achieving a return on the investment (ROI).
     In a highly competitive marketplace, organizations wrestle over every contract to answer many
key questions. Consider the following examples:
     1. How do we assess and maintain the technical integrity of the evolving system design
        solution?
     2. How do we avoid expensive “ﬁxes” and “retroﬁts” in the ﬁeld after system delivery due to
        latent defects?
     3. How can we reduce the cost of maintenance due to correct latent defects?
     4. How do we institute controls to protect our investment in the system development through
        reduction of defects and errors?
     5. How can we reduce development cost, schedule, technical, technology, and support risks?
     6. How do we validate that the speciﬁed system will meet the User’s intended operational
        needs?
So, HOW do SEs get system development RIGHT the ﬁrst time while satisfying these questions?
You institute a series of ongoing veriﬁcation and validation activities throughout the System Devel-
opment Phase. These activities are deployed at staging or control points—the major milestones and
reviews. Why is this necessary? To ensure that the evolving Developmental Conﬁguration pro-
gresses toward maturity with an acceptable level of risk to the stakeholders and is compliant with
the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS), contract cost and schedule constraints, and ultimately
satisﬁes the User’s validated operational needs.




System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                691
692     Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms

      • Analysis (Veriﬁcation Method) “Use of analytical data or simulations under deﬁned condi-
        tions to show theoretical compliance. Used where testing to realistic conditions cannot be
        achieved or is not cost-effective.” (Source: INCOSE SE Handbook Version 2.0, July 2000,
        para. 4.5.18 Veriﬁcation Analysis, p. 275)
      • Certiﬁcation “Refers to veriﬁcation against legal and/or industrial standards by an outside
        authority without direction to that authority as to how the requirements are to be veriﬁed.
        Typically used in commercial programs. For example, this method is used for CE certiﬁca-
        tion in Europe, and UL certiﬁcation in the US and Canada. Note that any requirement with
        a veriﬁcation method of “certiﬁcation” is eventually assigned one or more of the four veri-
        ﬁcation methods (inspection, analysis, demonstration, or test).” (Source: INCOSE SE Hand-
        book Version 2.0, July 2000, para. 4.5.18 Veriﬁcation Analysis, p. 275)
      • Classiﬁcation of Defects “The enumeration of possible defects of the unit or product, clas-
        siﬁed according to their seriousness. Defects will normally be grouped into the classes of
        critical, major or minor: however, they may be grouped into other classes, or into subclasses
        within these classes.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-973, para. 3.7)
      • Deﬁciency “1. Operational need minus existing and planned capability. The degree of inabil-
        ity to successfully accomplish one or more mission tasks or functions required to accom-
        plish a mission or its objectives. Deﬁciencies might arise from changing mission objectives,
        opposing threat systems, changes in the environment, obsolescence, or depreciation in
        current military assets. 2. In contract management—any part of a proposal that fails to satisfy
        the government’s requirements.” (Source: DSMC Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms,
        10th edition, 2001.)
             Deﬁciencies consist of two types:
        1. “Conditions or characteristics in any item which are not in accordance with the item’s
            current approved conﬁguration documentation.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-973 para.
            3.28)
        2. “Inadequate (or erroneous) item conﬁguration documentation, which has resulted, or may
            result, in units of the item that do not meet the requirements for the item.” (Source: Former
            MIL-STD-973 para. 3.28)

      • Demonstration (Veriﬁcation Method) “A qualitative exhibition of functional performance,
        usually accomplished with no or minimal instrumentation.” (Source: INCOSE SE Handbook
        Version 2.0, July 2000, para. 4.5.18 Veriﬁcation Analysis, p. 275)
      • Deviation Refer to the deﬁnition in Chapter 28 on System Speciﬁcation Practices.
      • Discrepancy A statement highlighting the variance between what exists and minimum
        requirements for standard process, documentation, or practice performance compliance.
      • Independent Veriﬁcation and Validation (IV&V) “Veriﬁcation and validation performed
        by an organization that is technically, managerially, and ﬁnancially independent of the devel-
        opment organization.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990 Standard Glossary of Software Engi-
        neering Terminology)
      • Inspection (Veriﬁcation Method) “Visual examination of the item (hardware and software)
        and associated descriptive documentation which compares appropriate characteristics with
        predetermined standards to determine conformance to requirements without the use of
        special laboratory equipment or procedures.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC Glossary:
        Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
                                                             53.3 System Veriﬁcation Practices   693

    • Similarity (Veriﬁcation Method) The process of demonstrating, by traceability to source
      documentation, that a previously developed and veriﬁed SE design or item applied to a new
      program complies with the same requirements thereby eliminating the need for design level
      reveriﬁcation.
    • Test (Veriﬁcation Method) The act of executing a formal or informal scripted procedure,
      measuring and recording the data and observations, and comparing to expected results for
      purposes of evaluating a system’s response to a speciﬁed stimuli in a prescribed environ-
      ment with a set of constraints and initial conditions.
    • Validation The act of assessing the requirements, design, and development of a work
      product to assure that it will meet the User’s operational needs and expectations at delivery.
    • Veriﬁcation “The process of evaluating a system or component to determine whether the
      products of a given development phase satisfy the conditions imposed at the start of that
      phase. Formal proof of program correctness.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990 Standard Glos-
      sary of Software Engineering Terminology)
    • Veriﬁcation and Validation (V&V) “The process of determining whether the requirements
      for a system or component are complete and correct, the products of each development phase
      fulﬁll the requirements or conditions imposed by the previous phase, and the ﬁnal system or
      component complies with speciﬁed requirements.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990 Standard
      Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology)
    • Waiver Refer to the deﬁnition in Chapter 28 on System Speciﬁcation Practices.

53.2 SYSTEM VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION OVERVIEW

Veriﬁcation and validation are intended to satisfy some very critical program needs and questions
that serve as the basis for V&V objectives as illustrated in Table 53.1.
     Based on this introduction, let’s begin our ﬁrst discussion topic by correcting the V&V myth.

Correcting the V&V Myth
The ﬁrst thing you should understand is that V&V activities are performed throughout the
system/product life cycle. V&V activities begin at Contract Award and follow through contract
delivery system acceptance at the end of the System Development Phase.
     Many people erroneously believe that V&V activities are only performed at the end of a
program as part of system acceptance. Although formal V&V activities include acceptance tests
and ﬁeld trials, System Developers initiate V&V activities at the time of Contract Award and con-
tinue throughout all segments of the System Development Phase as shown in Figure 24.3. V&V is
performed at all system levels of abstraction and on each entity within a level.
     Under ISO 9000, technical plans state how multi-disciplined system engineering and devel-
opment are to be accomplished, tasks to be performed, schedule, and work products to be produced.
V & V activities employ these work products at various stages of completion to assess compliance
of the evolving system design solution to technical plans, tasks, and speciﬁcations.

53.3 SYSTEM VERIFICATION PRACTICES

Veriﬁcation encompasses all of the System Development Phase activities from Contract Award
through system acceptance. This includes Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) activities
such as technology validation, manufacturing process prooﬁng, quality assurance and acceptance,
as well as the Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E).
694   Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

Table 53.1 V&V solutions to program challenges

Challenge            Program Challenge                              V&V Objective

1           How do we preserve the technical           Conduct periodic Requirements Traceability Audits
            integrity of the evolving system design    (RTAs).
            solution?
2           How do we avoid expensive “ﬁxes”           Identify and correct deﬁciencies and defects
            and “retroﬁts” in the ﬁeld after           “early” to avoid increased “downstream”
            system delivery?                           development and operational costs and risks.
3           How do we ensure the speciﬁed              Coordinate and communicate with the User to
            system will meet the User’s validated      ensure that expected system outcomes,
            operational needs?                         requirements, and assumptions are valid.
4           How can we reduce technical,               Institute crosschecks of analyses, trade studies,
            technology, and support risks?             demonstrations, models, and simulation results.
5           How do we protect our investment           Conduct technical reviews and audits. Require
            in the system development?                 periodic risk assessments. Conduct proof of
                                                       concept or technology demonstrations




Importance of System Veriﬁcation
System veriﬁcation provides incremental, OBJECTIVE evidence that the evolving, multi-level
system design solution, as captured by the Developmental Conﬁguration, is progressing to matu-
rity. COMPLIANCE veriﬁcation, in turn, provides a level of conﬁdence in meeting the planned
capabilities and levels of performance.

Veriﬁcation Tasks, Actions, and Activities
Veriﬁcation tasks and actions, which apply to all facets of system development, include: 1) analy-
ses, 2) design, 3) technical reviews, 4) procurement, 5) modeling and simulation, 6) technology
demonstrations, 7) tests, 8) deployment, 9) operations, 10) support, and 11) disposal. Veriﬁcation
tasks enable technical programs to evaluate: risk assessments; people, product, and process capa-
bilities; compliance with requirements; proof of concept, and so forth.

53.4 WHAT DO PROGRAMS VERIFY?

Most engineers use the term verify casually and interchangeably with validation without under-
standing the scope of its context. The key question is: WHAT is being veriﬁed? The answer resides
in the System Development Phase segments of the system/product life cycle.
     The key segments of the System Development Phase are illustrated in Figure 24.3 and include
System Engineering Design, Component Procurement and Development, System Integration and
Test, System Veriﬁcation, Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E), and Authentication of System
Baselines. Let’s investigate WHAT is being veriﬁed during the System Development Phase of the
system/product life cycle.
                                                             53.4 What Do Programs Verify?    695

System Design Segment Veriﬁcation
During the SE Design Segment, multiple levels of the SE design solution are veriﬁed—via document
reviews, technical reviews, prototypes and technology demonstrations, models and simulations, and
requirements traceability—for compliance with the contract and speciﬁcation requirements.

Component Procurement and Development
Segment Veriﬁcation
Component procurement and development veriﬁcation occurs in two forms:
    1. Receiving inspection of external vendor products such as components and raw materials
       based on procurement “ﬁtness-for-use” criteria.
    2. Internally produced or modiﬁed components.
Externally procured components and materials undergo receiving inspection veriﬁcation that the
item(s) comply with the procurement speciﬁcations. The veriﬁcation may be accomplished by:
    1. Random samples selected for analysis and test.
    2. Inspection of Certiﬁcates of Certiﬁcation (CofCs) certiﬁed by the vendor’s quality assur-
       ance organization.
    3. By 100% testing of each component.
Internally developed or modiﬁed components are subjected to INSPECTION, ANALYSIS,
DEMONSTRATION, or TEST to verify that each component fully complies with its design require-
ments—technical drawings, and so forth.
     In all cases, component or material deﬁciencies such as design ﬂaws and substandard
work quality are recorded as discrepancy reports (DRs) and dispositioned for corrective action, as
appropriate.

System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE)
Segment Veriﬁcation
During the System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE) segment, each integrated system entity
is veriﬁed for compliance to its respective performance or item development speciﬁcation using
pre-approved test procedures. If noncompliances are identiﬁed, a DR is documented and disposi-
tioned for corrective action.

Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) Segment Veriﬁcation
The Operational Test & Evaluation (OT&E) segment focuses on validating that the User’s docu-
mented operational needs, as stated in the Operational Requirements Document (ORD), have been
met. However, system veriﬁcation occurs during this segment to ensure that all system elements
are in a state of readiness to perform system validation.

Authenticate System Baselines Segment Veriﬁcation
When a system completes its System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT) and Operational Test and Evaluation
(OT&E), performance results from the As Built, As Veriﬁed, and As Validated system conﬁgura-
tions are veriﬁed via a functional conﬁguration audit (FCA) and a physical conﬁguration audit
(PCA), as applicable. The results of the FCA and PCA are formally authenticated in a System Ver-
iﬁcation Review (SVR).
696     Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

53.5 MULTI-LEVEL APPLICATION OF VERIFICATION

Veriﬁcation is performed at all levels of the system and every item within each level. This includes
SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, SUBASSEMBLY, and PART levels.
     If a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) item, a nondevelopmental item (NDI), or a conﬁgura-
tion item (CI) is procured according to design requirements—such as procurement speciﬁcations,
control drawings, or vendor product speciﬁcations—you must verify, via some form of objective
evidence or quality record, that the item fully complies with its requirements.
     For internal and subcontracted conﬁguration item (CI) development efforts, formal acceptance
test procedures (ATPs) must be successfully completed, witnessed, and documented. COTS/NDI
items generally include a Certiﬁcate of Compliance (CofC) from the vendor unless prior arrange-
ments have been made.

System Veriﬁcation Responsibilitys
System veriﬁcation is performed formally and informally every day on every task for both internal
and external customers. You should recall our discussion in Figure 13.3 about the internal and
external customer “supply chains.” So, WHO is responsible for veriﬁcation? Anyone who produces
a work product regardless of whether the “customer is internal or external in the workﬂow process.”

Informal Veriﬁcation Responsibilities. From the moment a new contract is signed until the
system is delivered to the ﬁeld, every task:
      1. Accepts outputs from at least one or more predecessor tasks.
      2. Performs value-added processing in accordance with established standards and practices.
      3. Delivers the resulting work product to meet the needs and expectations of the next “down-
         stream” task.
As each task is performed, the accountable individual or team veriﬁes that:
      1. The task inputs comply with “ﬁtness-for-use” criteria.
      2. Their personal work products meet speciﬁc requirements.
Therefore, veriﬁcation activities incrementally build integrity into the value chain to ultimately
deliver physical components and work products that comply with organizational and contract
requirements.

Formal Veriﬁcation Responsibilities. We noted in our Introduction to system V&V that ver-
iﬁcation activities occur throughout the system/product life cycle at strategic staging or control
points. System Development Phase critical staging or control points are documented in the
Integrated Master Plan (IMP) as events, accomplishments that support events, and criteria that
support accomplishments. These include major technical reviews, technology demonstrations,
document reviews, component inspections, and multi-level system acceptance tests. Each of
these events is assigned to a responsible individual or IPT for completion accountability including
V&V.

Veriﬁcation Control Points
Veriﬁcation is performed at various staging or control points in the System Development Process.
These control points, which are both work product and contract event based, include document
                                                                    53.6 Veriﬁcation Methods   697

reviews, technical reviews, modeling and simulation, and prototyping and technology demonstra-
tions. Let’s explore each of these brieﬂy.

Document Reviews. Document reviews serve as one of the earliest opportunities for veriﬁca-
tion tasks. Reviewers assess the completeness, consistency, and traceability of documentation rel-
ative to source requirements, risk, soundness of strategy, logic, and engineering approach. Work
product examples include plans, speciﬁcations, Concept of Operation (ConOps), analyses and trade
studies.

Technical Reviews. Technical reviews are conducted informally and formally. Reviews, which
typically include the Acquirer and User, provide a forum to address, resolve, and verify any criti-
cal operational or technical issue (COI/CTI) resolution relative to contract requirements and
direction.

Referral For more information about technical reviews, refer to Chapter 54 on Technical Review
Practices.

Models and Simulations. During the early phases of the program, candidate architectures are
evaluated for performance trade-offs, requirements allocation decisions are made, and system
timing is determined. Models and simulations provide early veriﬁcation insight into critical oper-
ational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs), and reveal some unknowns as well as how the proposed
system solution may perform in a simulated operating environment.

Referral For more information about System Modeling and Simulation Practices, refer to
Chapter 51.

Prototypes and Technology Demonstrations. Critical operational and technical issues
(COIs/CTIs) that cannot be resolved via models and simulations can often be investigated using
prototypes and demonstrations as a risk reduction method of how a proposed solution might
perform. Work product examples include test ﬂights and test beds. During these demonstrations,
the System Developer and Users should verify and validate system performance and risk prior to
committing to a larger scale program.

Requirements Traceability. Developing a system with integrity requires that each system com-
ponent at every system level of abstraction is interoperable and traceable back to a set of source
requirements. Developers employ tools such as spreadsheets or requirements management tools to
document traceability links.

Referral For more information about requirements traceability, refer to Chapter 31 on Require-
ments Derivation, Allocation, Flow Down, and Traceability Practices.


53.6 VERIFICATION METHODS

The process of verifying multi-level SE design compliance to the System Performance Speciﬁca-
tion (SPS) or item development speciﬁcation (IDS) requires standard veriﬁcation methods that are
well deﬁned and understood. Veriﬁcation includes ﬁve commonly recognized methods: 1) INSPEC-
TION, 2) ANALYSIS, 3) DEMONSTRATION, 4) TEST, and 5) CERTIFICATION. A sixth
698   Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

method, SIMILARITY, is permitted as a veriﬁcation method in some business domains. The NASA
SE Handbook (para. 6.6.1, p. 118) further suggests two additional veriﬁcation methods: SIMU-
LATION and VALIDATION OF RECORDS.
    Let’s explore each of these types of veriﬁcation methods.

Veriﬁcation by TEST
Test is used as a veriﬁcation method to prove by measurement and results that a system or product
complies with its speciﬁcation or design requirements. Testing employs a prescribed set of OPER-
ATING ENVIRONMENT conditions using test procedures approved by the Acquirer (role). Testing
occurs in two forms: functional testing and environmental testing.
     Testing can be very expensive and should only be used if inspection, analysis, and demon-
stration do not individually or collectively provide the objective evidence required to prove
compliance.

Veriﬁcation by ANALYSIS
Speciﬁc aspects of system performance that call for veriﬁcation by ANALYSIS are documented in
a formal technical report. In general, these analyses are placed under conﬁguration control.

Veriﬁcation by DEMONSTRATION
Veriﬁcation by DEMONSTRATION is typically performed without instrumentation. The system
or product is presented in various facets of operation for witnesses to OBSERVE and document
the results. DEMONSTRATION is often used in ﬁeld-based applications and operational scenar-
ios involving, reliability, maintainability, human engineering, and ﬁnal on-site acceptance follow-
ing formal veriﬁcation.

Veriﬁcation by SIMILARITY
The NASA SE Handbook (para. 6.6.1, p. 119) describes veriﬁcation by SIMILARITY as: “[T]he
process of assessing by review of prior acceptance data or hardware conﬁguration and applica-
tions that the article is similar or identical in design and manufacturing process to another article
that has previously been qualiﬁed to equivalent or more stringent speciﬁcations.”

Author’s Note 53.1 Remember, there are two contexts of system development: design veriﬁca-
tion and product veriﬁcation. “Design veriﬁcation” is a rigorous process that proves an SE design
meets speciﬁcation and design requirements. You ONLY verify a design once, unless you make
changes to the As Designed, As Veriﬁed, and As Validated Product Baseline. Once the design is
committed to production, “product veriﬁcation”—physical realization of the design—is applied to
prove that the physical instance of a product—the model and serial number—performs intended
capabilities without errors or defects. Therefore, veriﬁcation by similarity requires that you present
quality records of the design veriﬁcation previously accomplished.

Veriﬁcation by INSPECTION
The NASA SE Handbook (para. 6.6.1, p. 119) deﬁnes veriﬁcation by INSPECTION as the
“[P]hysical evaluation of equipment and/or documentation to verify design features. Inspection is
used to verify construction features, workmanship, and physical dimensions and condition (such
as cleanliness, surface ﬁnish, and locking hardware).” Some organization use veriﬁcation by
EXAMINATION instead of INSPECTION.
                                                               53.7 System Validation Practices   699

Veriﬁcation by Simulation
The NASA SE Handbook (para. 6.6.1, p. 119) states veriﬁcation by SIMULATION is “[E]mployed
when analytical methods may be impractical and physical EQUIPMENT System Element hardware
and software have not been produced to provide actual data.”

Veriﬁcation by Validation of Records
The NASA SE Handbook (para. 6.6.1, p. 119) deﬁnes veriﬁcation by VALIDATION of RECORDS
as “[T]he process of using manufacturing records at end-item acceptance to verify construction
features and processes for ﬂight hardware.”

Veriﬁcation Method Cost Factors
In general, the cost to perform these veriﬁcation methods varies signiﬁcantly. Relative costs by ver-
iﬁcation method are:
    • Inspection (low cost)
    • Similarity (low cost)
    • Analysis (low to moderate cost)
    • Demonstration (moderate cost)
    • Test (moderate to high cost)
    • Certiﬁcation (moderate to high cost)
When proposing a new system, you should strive to identify the method with the lowest cost and
risk that will provide compelling, objective evidence that a requirement has been satisfactorily
accomplished. If you have a requirement that you can verify by ANALYSIS (low to moderate cost),
WHY would you want to commit to TEST (moderate to high cost) as the veriﬁcation method and
drive up your proposal price and potentially risk losing the contract?

Referral For additional information about selection of speciﬁcation requirements veriﬁcation
methods, refer to Chapter 33 on Requirements Statement Development Practices.


53.7 SYSTEM VALIDATION PRACTICES

Whereas system veriﬁcation asks if we built the work product RIGHT, system validation answers
the Acquirer question “Did we acquire the RIGHT system to meet the User’s validated operational
needs?”

Validation Methods
Validation is performed with a number of methods such as User interviews, prototyping, demon-
stration, qualiﬁcation tests, test markets, and ﬁeld trials. In general, validation consists of any
method that enables the System Developer of a system, product, or service to establish a level of
conﬁdence that the evolving work product satisﬁes the User’s documented operational need(s).

Author’s Note 53.2 Note the use of the term “documented”; this is very good practice. People
tend to change their minds about WHAT they said or intended to say. To avoid any misinterpreta-
tion by either party, document the mutual understanding of User needs, including what criterion
represent mission success at acceptance.
700     Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

Importance System Validation Responsibility
Validation employs User feedback mechanisms to keep the activities that produce work products
focused on the key factors critical to User satisfaction.
    The scope of validation encompasses more than a User function. Remember, the System Per-
formance Speciﬁcation (SPS) provides a basis to decompose a high-level problem space into lower
levels of solution spaces, even within the System Developer’s program organization. In this context
the User (role) is the higher level team assigned the PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, and
SUBASSEMBLY problem space. As the lower level solution space “designs” evolve, higher level
users must validate that the evolving item will satisfy needs.


 EXAMPLE 53.1
A Control Station Integrated Product Team (IPT), which is assigned implementation responsibility for the
Control Station Performance Speciﬁcation, has a problem space to resolve. The problem space is decomposed
into several solution spaces. Requirements for Computer Software Conﬁguration Item (CSCI) 1 are allocated
and documented in the CSCI 1’s Software Requirements Speciﬁcation and assigned to the CSCI 1’s IPT. As
CSCI 1’s design is formulated, the IPT employs iterative rapid prototyping methods to generate sample oper-
ator displays and transitions for evaluation and feedback (i.e., validation). The Control Station IPT invites the
Users, via Acquirer contract protocol, to participate in a demonstration to review and provide feedback as val-
idation that the evolving display designs and transitions satisfy the User’s needs. Results of the demonstra-
tion are documented as a quality record and used to support developer decision making.

Validation Responsibility
Everyone on the program on every task performs validation by making sure that each work product
or stage of a work product’s completion meets the expected needs of each task and customer in the
supply chain.


 EXAMPLE 53.2
An SE is tasked to produce an analysis. The SE performs validation by talking with the task source to:
1. Fully understand the critical operational or technical issue (COI/CTI) to be resolved.
2. Scope areas for investigation, objectives, and constraints.
3. Understand how the results are to be documented to ensure the work product will meet the task source’s
   needs.

Validation continues after the work product (PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, etc.) is delivered until the
User’s intended operational need is satisﬁed.


53.8 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE VERIFICATION
AND VALIDATION

Our discussion of system veriﬁcation and validation up to this point has focused on the process
and mechanisms of V&V implementation. Here, we explore some approaches that focus on system
performance veriﬁcation and validation. These approaches include:
      • Acceptance tests
      • Technical demonstrations
                                             53.8 System Performance Veriﬁcation and Validation    701

    • Qualiﬁcation tests
    • System veriﬁcation tests (SVTs)
    • Field trails and test markets

Acceptance Tests
Acceptance tests are formal tests that establish the technical and legal criteria for acceptance
of the system or product by the Acquirer for the User based on compliance with speciﬁcation
requirements. Compliance results provide a prerequisite for the Acquirer to formally accept the
system.
     In general, acceptance tests are conducted with a set of formally approved and released accept-
ance test procedures (ATPs) that have been agreed to by the Acquirer and User as applicable, and
by the System Developer. System level acceptance tests:
    1. Are derived from the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) Section 3.0 Requirements.
    2. Apply veriﬁcation methods identiﬁed in the Section 4.0 Qualiﬁcation Provisions to verify
       accomplishment of each Section 3.0 Requirement(s).
     For some programs, the term acceptance test (AT) is synonymous with the System Veriﬁca-
tion Test (SVT). In other cases, an AT may utilize a subset of the SVT ATPs after system installa-
tion at a User site as a ﬁnal veriﬁcation prior to formal system acceptance. Acceptance tests, as a
generic term, are also used by IPTs to demonstrate entity compliance to a higher level team such
as a System Engineering and Integration Team (SEIT).
     Acceptance tests may be procedure-based or scenario-based.

Procedure-Based ATPs. Procedure-based ATPs provide detailed, scripted instructions. Test
operators are required to follow prescribed scripts to establish a speciﬁc test conﬁguration, switch
positions, and inputs to stimulate or enter into the system. Each test procedure identiﬁes the expected
results for veriﬁcation against speciﬁcation requirements.

Scenario-Based ATPs. Scenario-based ATPs provide general guidance in the form of opera-
tional scenarios. Detail actions such as switch settings and conﬁguring the software required to
operate the system are left to the system/test operator. ATP data sheets generally include a ﬁeld for
recording the actual measurements and observations. Relevant witnesses from the System Devel-
oper, Acquirer, and User organizations to the System Developer and Quality Assurance (QA) rep-
resentatives authenticate the ATP results as quality records.

Technical Demonstrations
Technical demonstrations are sometimes performed as part of the Developmental Test and Eval-
uation (DT&E) procedures through the use of prototypes, technology demonstrations, and proof of
concept demonstrations. These activities provide an excellent opportunity to assess and evaluate
system performance and obtain more insight into system requirements and their reﬁnements. The
results of technology demonstrations sometimes ARE NOT the actual test articles but the set of
requirements and data derived from the technical demonstration.

System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT)
System Veriﬁcation Tests (SVTs) are formal tests performed on systems and products at a
designated facility and witnessed by the Acquirer and System Developer QA. A User representa-
702     Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

tive(s) is typically invited by the Acquirer to participate. The purpose of the SVT is to prove that
the system or product fully complies with and meets its System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
requirements.
     In preparation for the SVT, formal acceptance test procedures (ATPs) are developed, reviewed,
and approved. Prior to the SVT, a test readiness review (TRR) may be conducted to determine the
state of readiness of the test article(s) and supporting test environment—including EQUIPMENT,
FACILITIES, and PERSONNEL Elements as well as processes, methods, and tools used prior to
the test.

Referral For more information about the test readiness review and system veriﬁcation tests, refer
to Chapter 54 on Technical Review Practices.

Qualiﬁcation Tests
When a system completes its formal SVT, system validation may be performed as a qualiﬁcation
test, depending on contract requirements. Qualiﬁcation tests, or Formal Qualiﬁcation Tests (FQTs),
consist of two types:
      1. Tests conducted under actual or realistic ﬁeld conditions to demonstrate that the system
         design and its development (components, workmanship, etc.) meet contract requirements.
      2. Scenario-driven tests conducted by an Independent Test Agency (ITA) for the User organ-
         ization as part of the Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) activity.
During the OT&E qualiﬁcation test, the System Developer is normally precluded from participat-
ing in the test. Generally, the System Developer is kept informed about the evolving results of
OT&E. Qualiﬁcation tests should be conducted by the User personnel to assess not only the system
(e.g., EQUIPMENT Element performance) but also overall Human Systems Integration (HSI)
effectiveness. Environmental or qualiﬁcation tests are often followed by a Formal Qualiﬁcation
Review (FQR), which assesses the results of the qualiﬁcation tests.


 EXAMPLE 53.3
Qualiﬁcation tests subject system and component test article(s) to HARSH environmental test conditions in
a NATURAL ENVIRONMENT or controlled laboratory or ﬁeld test environments. Conditions may include
shock, vibration, electromagnetic interference (EMI), temperature, humidity, and salt spray to qualify the
design for its intended application (in space, air, sea, land, etc.).

Field Trails and Test Markets
Commercial System Developers conduct formal system, product, and service veriﬁcation testing
via ﬁeld trials in the marketplace. Systems, products, and services evolve through a series of design
iterations based on feedback from Users in ﬁeld trials or test markets. Ultimately, marketplace
supply and demand determine the public’s response in terms of system ACCEPTABILITY.


53.9 INDEPENDENT VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION (IV&V)

Due to technical issues such as risk, interoperability, safety, and health related to large complex,
expensive systems, government organizations such as DoD and NASA may issue IV&V contracts
to assess the work of System Developers during the System Development Phase. In this context,
                                                53.9 Independent Veriﬁcation and Validation (IV&V)       703

the IV&V contractor provides an independent assessment to the Acquirer that the provisions of the
system development contract are being implemented properly. A key objective is to ensure that
systems or products will have acceptable risk and proper considerations for the safety and health
of the system operators and the general public.

Need for Independence
Potential hardware and software design ﬂaws, deﬁciencies, or errors are sometimes missed due to
limited personnel availability and skills, incorrect requirements, or changes in hardware or soft-
ware platforms. Critical ﬂaws can result in cost overruns, or even catastrophic failure that poses
safety risks to the public and the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. An independent observer can be
an important ally to the Acquirer in preventing these problems.

Degree of Independence
A common question is: How “independent” must an IV&V organization be? IEEE 610-1990
describes an IV&V organization as “technically, managerially, and ﬁnancially independent of the
development organization.”

Beneﬁts of IV&V
People often ask, “Why should we go to the expense of performing IV&V, either by contract or by
internal assessments? What’s the return on investment (ROI)?” There are several reasons; some are
objective and others subjective. In general, IV&V:
    1. Improves system or product safety.
    2. Provides increased visibility into the System Development Process.
    3. Identiﬁes nonessential requirements and design features.
    4. Assesses compliance between speciﬁcation and performance.
    5. Identiﬁes potential risks areas.
    6. Reduces the quantity of latent defects such as design ﬂaws, errors, defective materials or
       components, and workmanship problems.
    7. Reduces development, operations, and support costs.
When performed constructively and competently, IV&V can be of beneﬁt to both the Acquirer and
the System Developer. Depending on the role assigned by the Acquirer to the IV&V contractor,
adding another player into the System Development Process may require the System Developer to
plan for and obtain supplemental resources. The challenge for the System Developer may be dealing
in an environment whereby the Acquirer believes the IV&V contractor is not “earning their keep”
unless they FIND a lot of microscopic deﬁciencies, even if the work products are more than ade-
quate technically, professionally, and contractually.


 EXAMPLE 53.4
As an example, software is playing an increasing role in day to day. For each NASA mission or project to
execute successfully, it is imperative that the software operates safely and within its designed parameters.
Failure of a single piece of mission critical software within a NASA mission can potentially result in loss of
life, dollars, and/or data. IV&V serves as a mechanism to underscore the importance of software safety and
helps ensure safe and successful NASA missions.
704     Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

53.10 COMMON SYSTEM V&V CHALLENGES AND ISSUES

System veriﬁcation and validation, in general, involve a number of issues that SEs must be pre-
pared to address. Let’s examine a few of the challenges and issues.
Challenge 1:     Acquirer need for V&V.
Challenge 2:     Establishing the scope of V&V activities.
Challenge 3:     Developing conﬁdence in the evolving work product.
Challenge 4:     System developer need for V&V.
Challenge 5:     V&V impacts on cost and schedule.
Challenge 6:     Degree of V&V team independence.
Challenge 7:     Incorporation of IV&V ﬁndings and recommendations.
Challenge 8:     Program personnel V&V skills and knowledge levels.
Challenge 9:     Model and simulation certiﬁcation.
Challenge 10: Veriﬁed systems that fail system validation.

Challenge 1: Acquirer Need for V&V
From an Acquirer’s perspective, you need a technical basis to determine if the deliverable system
and all other aspects of the contract are progressing in accordance with the performance standards
established by the contract. V&V activities provide a mechanism to the degree funding constraints
allow. The questions is: Do you allocate funding for V&V or target those funds to adding more
system capabilities?
     Large, complex systems require disciplined approaches to ensuring that the system or product
will satisfy its requirements. Accomplishment of this objective is achieveable without performing
V&V during Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) and Operational Test and Evaluation
(OT&E). The question is: Depending on the system application, are you willing to assume the risk
of not performing V&V?

Challenge 2: Establishing the Scope of V&V
The scope, breadth, and depth of the V&V effort are often critical issues. Since cost CONSTRAINS
the extent of V&V, do you:
      • Perform V&V at high levels across the whole program?
      • Focus V&V resources in speciﬁc areas that may be high risk? In any case, the program
        should make an assessment on a case-by-case basis.
Contracts typically specify some form of V&V activities such as technical reviews and acceptance
tests to demonstrate accomplishment of the SPS requirements. IV&V may be a different matter. If
IV&V is not required, here’s the challenge: Are you prepared to deal with the consequences from
the lack of V&V such as the cost-to-correct latent defects and design ﬂaws. The answer requires
consideration of the size and complexity of system development and operational risks.

Challenge 3: Developing Conﬁdence in
the Evolving Work Product
As an Acquirer or System Developer, you must establish a system of checks and balances through-
out the System Development Phase to build a level of conﬁdence that the evolving Developmental
                                             53.10 Common System V&V Challenges and Issues        705

Conﬁguration will satisfy the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements and the User’s
validated operational needs.

Challenge 4: System Developer Need for V&V
From a System Developer’s perspective, whether or not the contract requires V&V activities, you
need a mechanism to demonstrate satisfactory achievement of the SPS requirements, accomplish-
ment and closure of the contract requirements, and so forth. If V&V activities are not part of the
contract, consider conducting some level of internal V&V activities.

Challenge 5: V&V Impacts on Cost and Schedule
Cost and schedule impacts are the critical issues in V&V implementation. If the V&V activity has
been planned and scheduled into the Master Program Schedule (MPS), Integrated Master Plan
(IMP), and Integrated Master Schedule (IMS), cost and schedule impacts should not necessarily be
a problem, assuming they were properly estimated, allocated, and managed.
    The challenge here is to overcome perceptions that V&V, or its results, typically place pro-
grams behind schedule. Conducting a V&V activity, which is often viewed by SE Design Team
members as unnecessary and non–value added, identiﬁes potential risk areas that can become
ROOT CAUSES for late program delivery. This translates into increased costs, impacts contract
performance incentives, and subsequently impacts proﬁt, depending on the type of contract.

Challenge 6: Degree of V&V Team Independence
One of the critical issues in V&V is WHO performs the V&V activity. Ideally, an independent ver-
iﬁcation and validation (IV&V) organization or contractor performs V&V. If this is impractical, an
in-house team independent of the program may be a candidate to perform veriﬁcation, depending
on the application. The Acquirer, however, may offer a few comments about the credibility of this
effort because of a potential organizational conﬂict of interest.
     The criticality of team independence is driven by the fact that an IPT is too close to the evolv-
ing Developmental Conﬁguration and may not be objective. You could say that the IPT has a con-
ﬂict of interest (COI); designers SHOULD NOT evaluate their own work. Capable personnel from
other IPTs can provide a comparable V&V function though the degree of independence organiza-
tionally may still be questionable. But, it may your only choice.

Challenge 7: Incorporation of IV&V
Findings and Recommendations
If we assume the V&V activity produces substantive and meaningful results, consideration should
be given to implementing the ﬁndings and recommendations. If you are going to spend the money,
you should be prepared to seriously consider implementing the results. The underlying assumption
here is that the IV&V ﬁndings are within the scope of your contract. If not, the System Developer
should discuss and negotiate the issue with the Acquirer.
    Granted, there are sometimes circumstances where the V&V Audit Team may not have knowl-
edge of all the factors affecting a decision. So, the team should investigate and discuss question-
able areas with the SEIT or IPT to validate any evidence that may lead to a ﬁnding. Likewise, the
IPT should ensure that the V&V Audit Team has all the information they require to make well-
founded assessments.
706     Chapter 53   System Veriﬁcation and Validation

Challenge 8: Program Personnel V&V Skills and
Knowledge Levels
One of the issues with V&V is that program personnel may lack common skills, experience, and
insights into conducting V&V activities. As an SE, you need to be the “leveling” agent and make
sure everyone is trained and skilled in V&V practices, especially from a decision-making per-
spective. The realities are you have to devise a way to build in a minimum set of V&V activities
to ensure that the system meets the minimizing costs requirements and remains competitive. Good
practices consist of establishing key V&V objectives, soliciting proposed solutions, and selecting
a preferred approach.

Author’s Note 53.3 A worst-case program scenario becomes reality when executives with
limited experience exploit their position and authority by making command decisions that jeop-
ardize program success. Examples are shortcutting or eliminating the review process to save
dollars, eliminating critical documents, and conﬁguration management and quality assurance.
Executives who perceive themselves, by virtue of power and authority, as subject matter experts
(SMEs) don’t necessarily place their careers on the line by doing this. They ALWAYS have a way
of ﬁnding scapegoats in the technical ranks to place blame for poor contract performance result-
ing from their innovative cost-cutting shortcuts. Then, continue to be promoted to higher positions
because of their “outstanding” leadership.

Challenge 9: Model and Simulation Certiﬁcation
Development of credible models and simulations may require veriﬁcation by SMEs or SME
organizations. Certiﬁcation brings a level of accountability for maintaining and controlling the
models and simulations in the form of expenses, distribution, licensing, proprietary issues, and
documentation.

Referral For more information about modeling and simulation, refer to Chapter 51 on System
Modeling and Simulation Practices.

Challenge 10: Veriﬁed Systems That Fail System Validation
One of the most critical points of SE is the integrity of the “value chain” from the identiﬁcation
and validation of User operational needs through system delivery. You can incorrectly:
      1. And inaccurately identify, bound, and specify the problem space(s) and the solution
         space(s).
      2. Prepare the Operational Requirements Document (ORD), RFP System Requirements Doc-
         ument (SRD), System Performance Speciﬁcations (SPS), item development speciﬁcations
         (IDS), and design speciﬁcation requirements.
      3. Select the wrong COTS/NDI products.
Errors, omissions, and defects in the ORD to SRD to SPS decision-making process can result in a
system that fully complies with its SPS but fails to meet the User-validated operational needs doc-
umented in the ORD. Therefore, system speciﬁcation, design, and development process decisions
and integrity are critical issues to the User, Acquirer, and System Developer.
                                                                                    53.13 Summary      707

53.11 IS V&V A HELP OR HINDRANCE?

People typically view V&V activities as unnecessary tasks that consume critical skills, cost, and
schedule resources and do not produce a new product. Contrary to this shortsighted mindset, V&V
activities result in a higher quality product and AVOID costly rework. In the end the program direc-
tors, technical directors, project engineers, SEs, and others who are accountable for technical
program performance and customer acceptance must live with the consequences of their decisions.
     Some people apply V&V and view it as a pathway leading to success; others view it as an
unnecessary hindrance. Program performance tends to correlate with these two perspectives. The
bottom line is: invest in correcting design ﬂaws, errors, discrepancies, and deﬁciencies “up front”
OR pay signiﬁcantly more at higher levels of integration.
     If you are serious about your reputation and career, you should ensure that some form of checks
and balances are in place to verify that the system development effort will produce systems, prod-
ucts, and services that comply with contract requirements. V&V activities provide a means to
accomplish this. Does V&V guarantee success? Absolutely not! Like most human activities, the
quality of the V&V effort is only as good as the people who perform the work, methods and tools
used, and the resources allocated to the activity.


53.12 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system veriﬁcation and validation practices.

Principle 53.1 Veriﬁcation assesses compliance by asking the question: Did we develop the work
product RIGHT—in accordance with speciﬁcation, design, or task requirements?

Principle 53.2 Validation asks the question: Did we acquire the RIGHT work product to satisfy
the User’s intended operational need?

Principle 53.3 To avoid or minimize legal issues, ALWAYS perform system veriﬁcation, prefer-
ably with an Acquirer representative as a witness.

Principle 53.4 ALWAYS have an Independent Test Agency (ITA) or organization perform val-
idation System Developers have a conﬂict of interest.

Principle 53.5 Every SYSTEM/entity failure during system veriﬁcation and validation has a
cost. Explicitly document Acquirer and System Developer cost accountability before the contract
is signed.


53.13 SUMMARY

During our discussion of system V&V practices, we deﬁned V&V; its objectives; HOW, WHEN, and WHERE
V&V is accomplished; who is accountable; and methods for conducting V&V activities. In support of this
overview, chapter 54 on Technical Review practices address speciﬁc veriﬁcation activities that support key
decision control points.
     We described the various veriﬁcation methods: 1) inspection, 2) analysis, 3) demonstration, 4) test, 5)
certiﬁcation, and 6) similarity, if permissible. Each of the veriﬁcation methods is supported by veriﬁcation
708     Chapter 53      System Veriﬁcation and Validation

activities such as design reviews, prototypes, and audits. We also discussed independent veriﬁcation and val-
idation (IV&V) concepts, their implementation, and their beneﬁts.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) How would you approach veriﬁcation and validation for the system, product, or service?
   (b) Do you believe there is a need for IV&V. Provide your rationale?
   (c) What aspects of the design and development must be veriﬁed by inspection, analysis, demonstration,
       and test?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for guidance and direction for performing veriﬁcation and
   validation (V&V) activities.
   (a) Identify speciﬁc requirements for V&V.
   (b) When are V&V activities to be performed?
   (c) How are V&V results to be documented, briefed, and implemented?
   (d) Is IV&V required?
2. Contact a small, a medium, and a large contract program within your organization.
   (a) Do their respective contracts require any V&V activities?
   (b) How are the results to be documented?
   (c) Does the contract include an IV&V contractor?
   (d) What lessons learned from previous programs has the contract program learned, and how are the results
       being implemented?
3. For your business domain, which veriﬁcation methods are typically required for most contracts or tasks?


REFERENCES

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.                MIL-STD-973 (canceled). 1992. Conﬁguration Manage-
   Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th         ment. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
   ed. Defense Acquisition University Press. Ft. Belvoir, VA.     (DoD).
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of           DSMC. 1998. Simulation Based Acquisition: A New
   Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-        Approach. Defense System Management College
   trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), New York, NY.          (DSMC) Press. Ft. Belvoir, VA.
International Council on System Engineering (INCOSE).           National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
   2000. INCOSE System Engineering Handbook, Version 2.0.         1995. SP-610S NASA Systems Engineering Handbook.
   Seattle, WA.                                                   Washington, DC.
                                                                                      Additional Reading     709

ADDITIONAL READING

Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.           Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASD-100 Archi-
  Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:      tecture and System Engineering. 2004. National Air
  Wiley-InterScience.                                         Space System—Systems Engineering Manual. Washing-
MIL-STD-490A (canceled). 1985. Military Standard:             ton, DC: FAA.
  Speciﬁcation Practices. Washington, DC: Department of      Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998. Test
  Defense (DoD).                                              and Evaluation Management Guide, 3rd ed. Defense
MIL-STD-961D. 1995. DoD Standard Practice for Defense         Acquisition Press. Ft. Belvoir, VA.
  Speciﬁcations. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  (DoD).
Lewis, Robert O. 1992. Independent Veriﬁcation and
  Validation: A Life Cycle Engineering Process for Quality
  Software. New York: Wiley.
Chapter              54

      Technical Reviews

54.1 INTRODUCTION

Successful system development requires periodic assessments of the status, progress, maturity, and
risk of the evolving system design solution at critical staging or control points. These critical
staging or control points serve as gating mechanisms and are intended to answer the following
questions:
      1. Is there agreement between the key stakeholders—the User, Acquirer, System Developer—
         concerning the requirements for the system, product, or service? Do the stakeholders share
         a common understanding and interpretation of the requirements? Have all requirements
         issues been resolved? Are the requirements in balance with the planned technical, technol-
         ogy cost, and schedule constraints and risks?
      2. Does the System Developer have a SYSTEM level design solution selected from a set of
         viable candidate solutions that represent the best balance of technical technology, cost,
         schedule, and support performance and risks?
      3. Have System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements been allocated via multi-level
         item development speciﬁcations to PRODUCTs, SUBSYSTEMs, hardware conﬁguration
         items (HWCIs), computer software conﬁguration items (CSCIs), and so forth?
      4. Do we have a multi-level, preliminary design solution that is sufﬁcient to commit to detailed
         design with minimal risk in terms of meeting technical, cost, and schedule performance
         requirements?
      5. Do we have a multi-level, detailed design solution that is sufﬁcient to commit to component
         procurement and development with minimal risk in terms of meeting technical, cost, and
         schedule performance requirements?
      6. Are the procured and developed components ready for system integration, test, and evalu-
         ation (SITE) veriﬁcation and validation?
      7. Is the system or product ready to undergo formal system veriﬁcation and acceptance by the
         Acquirer, as the User’s contractual and technical?
      8. Does the system meet the User’s validated operational needs—its operational utility, suit-
         ability, and effectiveness?
As the questions above evolve with the system development, technical reviews enable the Acquirer
to verify that the evolving Developmental Conﬁguration complies with speciﬁcation requirements
and is progressing with acceptable risk toward delivery on-schedule and within budget.


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

710
                                                                           54.1 Introduction   711

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
   1. What is a technical review?
   2. Why should you conduct a technical review?
   3. Who is responsible for conducting technical reviews?
   4. How are technical reviews documented?
   5. What is the relationship between a technical review and contract phase?
   6. What is an Integrated Baseline Review (IBR) and what is it intended to accomplish?
   7. What is a System Requirements Review (SRR) and what is it intended to accomplish?
   8. What is a System Design Review (SDR) and what is it intended to accomplish?
   9. What is a Hardware Speciﬁcation Review (HSR) and Software Speciﬁcation Review (SSR)
      and what is it intended to accomplish?
  10. What is a Software Speciﬁcation Review (SSR) and what is it intended to accomplish?
  11. What is a Preliminary Design Review (PDR) and what is it intended to accomplish?
  12. What is a Critical Design Review (CDR) and what is it intended to accomplish?
  13. What is a Test Readiness Review (TRR) and what is it intended to accomplish?
  14. What is a Production Readiness Review (PRR) and what is it intended to accomplish?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
  • Conference Minutes A quality record that serves as a written summary of a formal program
    event and documents the attendees, agenda, discussion topics, decisions, actions items, and
    handouts.
  • Critical Design Review (CDR) A major technical program event conducted by a System
    Developer with the Acquirer and User to assess the progress, status, maturity, plans, and risks
    of each conﬁguration item’s (CI) detailed design solution. The event serves as a critical
    staging point for authorizing and committing resources for the Component Procurement and
    Development Segment of the System Development Phase.
  • Hardware/Software Speciﬁcation Review (SSR) An assessment of each unique HWCI
    or CSCI requirements speciﬁcations to determine their adequacy to authorize preliminary
    hardware design or preliminary software design and commit resources to support those
    activities.
  • In-Process Review (IPR) An interim or incremental assessment of a document or design
    solution during its development to provide “early” stakeholder feedback for purposes of
    ensuring that the work product is progressing to maturity with acceptable risk within cost,
    schedule, and technical constraints. IPRs may be conducted internally or with the external
    participants and should result in a documented set of conference minutes.
  • Peer Review A formal or informal review of an SE’s or IPT’s work products by knowl-
    edgeable subject matter experts (SMEs).
  • Preliminary Design Review (PDR) A major technical program event conducted by a
    System Developer with the Acquirer and User to review a SYSTEM’s HWCI or CSCI
    designs with intent to authorize and commit resources to detailed design.
  • Production Readiness Review (PRR) “A formal assessment by system stakeholders to
    authenticate the current Product Baseline and the readiness of the Technical Data Package
    (TDP) for production.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-1521)
712     Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

      • Ready-to-Ship Review (RTSR) A formal assessment by system stakeholders to determine
        the readiness of the system to be disassembled and shipped to a User’s designated location.
      • System Design Review (SDR) An assessment of the evolving system design solution to
        evaluate the completeness and maturity of the system architecture and its interfaces, identi-
        ﬁcation of PRODUCTS/SUBSYSTEMS, allocation of SPS requirements to PRODUCTS/
        SUBSYSTEMS, and risks.
      • System Requirements Review (SRR) An assessment of the conciseness, completeness,
        accuracy, reasonableness, and risk of the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) require-
        ments to permit the development of a system with an intent to AVOID misinterpretations,
        inconsistencies, and errors, especially during system veriﬁcation, validation, and acceptance.
      • System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR) A formal assessment by system stakeholders to authen-
        ticate the results of the functional conﬁguration audit (FCA) and physical conﬁguration audits
        (PCA) relative to System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements and veriﬁcation
        methods.
      • Technical Reviews A series of system engineering activities by which the technical progress
        on a project is assessed relative to its technical or contractual requirements. The reviews are
        conducted at logical transition points in the development effort to identify and correct prob-
        lems resulting from the work completed thus far before the problems can disrupt or delay
        the technical progress. The reviews provide a method for the contractor and the Acquirer to
        determine that the development of a conﬁguration item and its documentation have met con-
        tract requirements. (Source: Adapted from Former MIL-STD-973, para. 3.89)
      • Test Readiness Review (TRR) An assessment of the maturity of all aspects of a multi-
        item/conﬁguration item (CI) to determine: 1) its state of readiness to proceed with testing
        with a critical focus on environmental, safety, and health (ES&H) concerns and 2) author-
        ize initiation of the tests.


54.2 TECHNICAL REVIEWS OVERVIEW

System development is highly dependent on progressive, efﬁcient, technical decision making
throughout the System Development Phase that involve the Acquirer and User. The timing of con-
structive technical assessment and feedback by stakeholders at critical control or staging points
enables the System Development Team to evolve the system design solution to maturity. The mech-
anism for staging these assessments and making key technical decisions consist of a series of tech-
nical reviews.

Technical Review Objective
The objective of a technical review is to enable key stakeholders to assess the evolving
system design solution at critical staging or control points to determine the progress, status,
maturity, integrity, plans, and risk as a condition of a SYSTEM, conﬁguration item (CI), or non-
developmental item (NDI) for committing resources for the next segment or phase of program
activities.

Categories of Technical Reviews
Technical reviews consist of major reviews conducted formally and internal reviews that tend to
be less formal. In general, the major reviews are typically required by contract and involve the
Acquirer and User stakeholder representatives as participants.
                                                             54.2 Technical Reviews Overview     713

Formal Contract Technical Reviews
Contract reviews, which are referred to as program events, are formally conducted in accordance
with the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract. Generally, the contract identiﬁes the reviews
to be conducted and speciﬁes guidance for preparing, conducting, and completing the review. In
addition to the contract guidance that deﬁnes HOW the reviews are to be conducted, there is also
a protocol associated with providing directions and guidance during the review, attendees to be
invited and by whom, and so forth.

Traditional Contract Technical Reviews
Years ago contracts used technical reviews as a limited, but important, window for the customer
(Acquirer) to look into the contractor’s operations and assess HOW WELL the effort was pro-
gressing. Depending on contract size, complexity, and priority, the customer assigned an on-site
representative at the contractor’s facility. This individual’s task was to monitor day-to-day opera-
tions and communicate to the “home organization” views on HOW WELL the contractor efforts
were progressing. In general, the reviews enable customer project managers to ask themselves
“Does the System Developer’s design solution review materials correlate with the progress depicted
in prior phone conversations with the contractor—‘glowing’ contractor status and progress reports,
and so forth?”
     Several weeks prior to a technical review, the System Developer prepared large documenta-
tion packages for distribution to the customer and User for review. During this review the contents
of the documentation package were discussed over a period of several days in agonizing detail. As
a result, technical reviews consumed large amounts of time, were costly, and provided “feedback”
too late, which caused rework and impacted customer schedules. These issues, in conjunction with
escalating contract costs and process inefﬁciencies, prompted the need for better status information
faster and cost of rework by the US government under Acquisition Reform policies in the early
1990s.

Acquisition Reform and Integrated Process and
Product Development (IPPD)
The need for acquisition reform, streamlining, process improvement, and reduced rework inﬂu-
enced a move toward Integrated Process and Product Development (IPPD) environments. IPPD
environments, which include Acquirer as an integral part of the “team,” provide on-site access to
the details and nuances of the product development effort.
     As a result of the Acquisition Reform initiatives in the DoD, for example, the technical reviews
paradigm began to shift. Whereas technical reviews consumed several days agonizing over docu-
mentation details, the paradigm shifted to simply spending a few hours resolving critical opera-
tional and technical issue (COI/CTI) decisions. Why? If the User and Acquirer are participants in
the IPPD team processes, either on-site or virtually, they should be intimately familiar with the
design details. The only agenda topics remaining focused on resolution of issues between the
acquirer and System Developer.
     Finally, another aspect was the shift from date-driven to event-driven contract reviews.

Date-Driven versus Event-Driven Reviews
Technical reviews, speciﬁed by contract, are of two types: date driven or event driven.
    • Date-driven reviews MANDATE that a review to be conducted X days after Contract Award
      (ACA)—at a speciﬁc calendar date.
714     Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

      • Event-driven reviews are conducted when the development efforts reach speciﬁc maturity
        levels, usually within a general time frame. The time frame may be speciﬁed as “within XX
        days/months After Contract Award (ACA).

Guidepost 54.1 Given this historical background to today’s technical reviews, we now shift our
focus to investigating the general conduct of technical reviews.


54.3 TECHNICAL REVIEWS—GENERAL

Technical reviews are accomplished in accordance with the terms of the contract, subcontract, or
associated agreements. Every contract should specify the WHO, WHAT, WHEN, WHERE, HOW,
and WHY technical and programmatic reviews are to be accomplished. If not, DO NOT sign until
all of the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the technical reviews are clearly delineated, mutually
understood, and agreed to by all parties.
     Technical reviews are more than simply forums to make nice and orderly presentations. The
reviews are an opportunity to brief the Acquirer and User “for the record” on WHAT progress has
been made in maturing the system design solution since the last review. Reviews provide an oppor-
tunity for the Acquirer to validate what is documented in the monthly contract progress reports.

Checks and Balances Beneﬁts
Technical reviews provide checks and balances for the System Developer, Acquirer, and User with
inherent beneﬁts for all. For the Acquirer and User, technical reviews provide the opportunity to:
      1. Assess progress, maturity, and risks of the product development efforts.
      2. Factor the results into Acquirer delivery schedules.
      3. Express preferences and priorities.
      4. Provide legal technical direction for the contract, depending on type.
For the System Developer or Service Provider, the technical reviews provide the opportunity to:
      1. Clearly demonstrate product development maturity and progress.
      2. Address and resolve critical operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs).
      3. Assess Acquirer priorities.
      4. Obtain Acquirer agreement, if appropriate for the type of contract, to baseline system doc-
         umentation to scope and bound future discussion and scoping of technical direction.

Type of Contract
In general, the type of contract determines HOW a review is accomplished and the degree of inﬂu-
ence or approval the customer has over the information presented. In the case of ﬁrm, ﬁxed price
(FFPs) contracts, the System Developer conducts technical reviews to inform the Acquirer and
User about progress to date, current status, and risks.
    Depending on the type of the contract, the Acquirer may be limited in the degree to which they
can approve/reject the System Developer’s solution without contract modiﬁcation. In contrast, cost
plus ﬁxed fee (CPFF) contracts typically enable the Acquirer to exert a large amount of control
over the contractor’s decision making and make adjustments in cost and schedule to accommodate
changes in the contract’s technical direction.
                                                                54.4 Contract Review Requirements   715

     As is ALWAYS the case, understand your contract’s T&Cs, and consult with your organiza-
tion’s Program Management Team, contracts, and legal organizations for speciﬁc guidance and
expertise in these areas.

Review Entry Criteria
Contracts often establish entry and exit criteria for reviews. Because of space restrictions entry
criteria are not shown for the review descriptions that follow. Entry criteria should be derived based
on the checklist items. Refer to Tables 54.1 through 54.10.

Standard Review Work Products and Quality Records
The preceding discussions highlighted WHAT is to be accomplished at reviews. In a decision-
making event it is important to document the review materials and results for historical and refer-
ence purposes. The following is a list of example work products and quality records that, at a
minimum, should be produced for each of the major technical reviews.


 EXAMPLE 54.1
• Conference agenda
• Attendees list
• Presentation materials
• Handouts (analyses, trade studies, modeling and simulation results, etc.)
• Conference notes
• Conference minutes
• Action items CLOSED/OPEN
• Other supporting documentation, as required


54.4 CONTRACT REVIEW REQUIREMENTS

Major technical reviews are conducted by the System Developer as a contract event in accordance
with the Master Program Schedule (MPS), Integrated Master Plan (IMP), or Integrated Master
Schedule (IMS), as appropriate.

Technical Reviews Location
Technical reviews are conducted at locations speciﬁed in accordance with the terms and conditions
(Ts&Cs) of the contract. Generally, the reviews are performed at the item’s System Developer’s
facility due to close proximity to the documentation and actual hardware and software for
demonstrations.

Author’s Note 54.1 Remember, “item” in the context above represents a SYSTEM, PRODUCT,
SUBSYSTEM, and so forth. For example, if a subcontractor is developing a SUBSYSTEM, reviews
are conducted at the subcontractor’s facility and include invitations to the prime System Develop-
ment contractor, who may elect to invite their customer, the Acquirer. Under contract protocols the
Acquirer ALWAYS invites the User unless prior arrangements have been made with the System
Developer.
716     Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

Orchestrating the Review
Major technical reviews are often referred to as conferences. Each conference consists of three
phases of activities to ensure successful completion of the review: Pre-conference, Conference, and
Postconference.
      • Preconference Phase activities include coordination between the System Developer and
        Acquirer to set the date, time, and location of the review, as well as to set the agenda, invi-
        tees, special facility access, and arrangements such as security, parking, and protocols.
      • Conference Phase activities include conducting the conference in accordance with the
        planned agenda, classiﬁcation level, rules of conduct/engagement, recording of conference
        notes, and action items.
      • Postconference Phase activities include resolving conference action items, preparing and
        approving the conference minutes, incorporating corrections into documentation, and estab-
        lishing baselines, where applicable.

Contract Review Completion Exit Criteria
Some contracts require completion of technical events, such as reviews, as a prerequisite for obtain-
ing contract progress payments. Exit criteria are employed to explicitly identify WHAT must be
accomplished as a contract condition for Acquirer acceptance.
     Some formal solicitations such as Request for Proposals (RFPs) require identiﬁcation of exit
criteria as a requirement. Where this is the case, the Offeror’s proposal may become part of the
contract. If contract progress payments to the System Developer are linked to program events, such
as reviews, make sure that exit criteria are explicitly stated in language that DOES NOT require
interpretation when time comes to contractually CLOSE the review and pay the contractor.

A Word of Caution
Review entry and exit criteria may appear simple on initial inspection. However, they can easily
become MAJOR SHOWSTOPPERS due to misinterpretation(s), especially where contract progress
payments are “on the line.”
     When you state that the software design is complete, be very explicit as to WHAT you mean
by “software design complete.” It bears emphasizing that the Acquirer interprets “software design
complete” as EVERYTHING. THINK about these statements. Recognize the scope of your intent
BEFORE you write them into a proposal and sign a contract, especially if progress payments are
at risk. This includes the Integrated Master Plan (IMP) and associated dictionaries. Why? Simply
stated, if you DO NOT follow the contract words, you don’t get PAID! And guess who negotiated
the contract words? Your organization did!

Posting and Distribution of Technical Review Materials
Today’s contracting environment often involves contractor teams across the country and around
globe to integrate their efforts via collaborative development and review environments. For tech-
nical reviews, World Wide Web (WWW) based reviews provide opportunities to perform IPRs
without the expense of travel or disruption of work. However, keep in mind that this media also
presents major data security issues related to proprietary data, copyright law, security classiﬁca-
tion, and export control.

Warning! The US International Trafﬁc and Arms Regulations (ITAR) govern the EXPORT of
critical technologies and data by any media including the Internet. ALWAYS refer to your Legal
and Contracts organizations as well as the EXPORT CONTROL Ofﬁcer for guidance in these areas.
                                                           54.4 Contract Review Requirements    717

Technical Review Contract Direction
The conduct of contract technical reviews is often viewed as a causal event. Beware! Despite the
suave coolness of the System Developer’s “we’re glad you are here” and Acquirer’s “we’re glad
to be here” rhetoric, the activity carries some very SERIOUS political and legal implications that
demand your full attention and awareness.
     Remember, ONLY the Acquirer’s Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO) is ofﬁcially authorized to provide
contract direction to the System Developer regarding the technical review. The Acquirer’s Program
Manager provides the program and technical guidance to the ACO. As a result, you will often hear
an Acquirer Program Manager make introductory remarks at the beginning of the review and begin
with a disclaimer: “We are here to listen . . . anything we say or ask does not infer or should
be construed as technical direction . . . only the Contracting Ofﬁcer can provide contractual
direction.”

Technical Issue Resolution
One of the greatest challenges of technical reviews is making sure all SHOWSTOPPER critical
operational and technical issues (COIs/CTIs) are resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the Acquirer
and System Developer organizations.
     COIs/CTIs often have far-reaching impacts that range from achieving the mission objectives
to simply printing out a report. COIs impact one of more of the integrated set of System Elements—
EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL, FACILITIES, and so forth. COI impacts span the spectrum from
System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements to PART level design requirements, and vice
versa. Therefore, it is imperative that these issues be recognized and resolved at the technical
reviews to avoid schedule impacts.
     Programs often refuse to acknowledge or publicize COIs/CTIs. Ironically, these issues are often
ignored until the program ﬁnally has to confront them. Humans have a natural propensity to pretend
and believe that problems—such as COIs/CTIs—will simply “just go away.”
     Sometimes this happens; however, in most cases this is a panacea. Although there are rea-
sonable and practical bounds to issue resolution, sooner or later you will learn to confront these
issues “early on.” Historically, you either pay the price now or pay an even GREATER price farther
downstream to resolve an outstanding issue, assuming the set of potential solutions are viable at
that point in time in terms of cost and schedule performance.
     The realities are Users, Acquirers, and System Developers procrastinate on resolving critical
operational and technical issues. Organizations spend millions of dollars every year publicizing
how they have cut back expenses by reducing the number of pencils and paper people use. Yet,
these expenses are often insigniﬁcant when compared to the dollars wasted procrastinating to
resolve critical technical issues and inefﬁciencies. There ARE NO easy solutions or “quick ﬁxes”
other than to say that all parties—Users, Acquirers, System Developers, subcontractors among
these—collectively need to do a better job confronting these challenges. So, how does resolution
of critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs) relate to technical reviews?
     Technical reviews, in a generic sense, provide the forum for time constrained “open technical
debate” to resolve any outstanding or lingering critical technical issues. Granted, some people
“debate” just to hear themselves talk. The context here is an environment in which the participants
remove their organizational “hats and badges” and focus all energies on alternative paths to bring
an issue to consensual closure to the mutual satisfaction of all parties. Tough to do? You bet! Are
there alternatives? Yes, there is the “programmatic approach” whereby the program managers for
the Acquirer or System Developer may dictate a solution to meet schedule. This is not a desired
path technically or programmatically. If you don’t like the “programmatic direction approach,”
ENSURE the “technical approach” works.
718     Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

     Obviously, you do not want to consume valuable time and resources in a technical review
“debating” COIs and CTIs, unless they surface unexpectedly from the unknown. If COIs/CTIs are
known prior to a review, special arrangements should be made before a review to schedule some
form of “working group” meeting of all parties. The session must be constrained with the under-
standing that group must bring the issue to closure and present the recommendations at the major
review.

Final Point
One of the most overlooked aspects of technical reviews is the psychology of managing customer
PERCEPTIONS. From a System Developer’s perspective, the reviews are opportunities to manage
customer expectations. Likewise, Acquirers and Users formulate perceptions during the review as
well as throughout contract performance. Perceptions of System Developer contract performance
inﬂuence future interactions, whether it be future business, follow-on business, or negotiable items
of the contract. While the primary focus on a technical review is the current contract or task, the
User and Acquirer may be subconsciously asking themselves, “Do we want to do business with this
System Developer again?”
     Although not discussed openly, the reviews enable Acquirers to validate levels of conﬁdence
in their mind that they made the RIGHT choice in selecting your organization to perform on this
contract as opposed to your competition. Remember, successful contract performance reﬂects on
Acquirers and HOW their customers, the User and executive management, view your organization.


54.5 MAJOR TECHNICAL REVIEWS

Technical review agendas consist of two types of discussion topics:
      1. Programmatic topics
      2. Technical topics unique to the type of review
In general, more than 90% of the review time should be devoted to technical agenda items.

Standard Technical Review Items
Standard technical review topics include the following examples:


 EXAMPLE 54.2
• Review updates to technical plans, approaches, or procedures.
• Review risk mitigation plans and approaches.
• Review of current schedule status and progress.
• Review Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) item status.
• Review Contract Line Item Number (CLIN) status.
• Review results of the requirements traceability audit (RTA).
• Provide authority, if applicable to the contract, to proceed and commit resources to the next system devel-
  opment segment—the preliminary design, detailed design, and so forth.

These topics serve as standard agenda topics for every review and are presented in summary form
as part of the introductory remarks. In addition to the standard review topics, review unique topics
are provided in the discussions of each review that follow.
                                                                                                           54.5 Major Technical Reviews          719

Common Types of Technical Reviews
Common types of major SYSTEM level technical reviews include:
           • Integrated Baseline Review (IBR)
           • System Requirements Review (SRR)
           • System Design Review (SDR)
           • Software Speciﬁcation Reviews (SSRs)
           • Hardware Speciﬁcation Reviews (HSRs)
           • Preliminary Design Review (PDR)
           • Critical Design Review (CDR)
           • Test Readiness Reviews (TRRs)
           • System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR)
           • Production Readiness Review (PRR)
The sequencing of these reviews is illustrated in Figure 54.1.

Author’s Note 54.2 For programs that employ the “Waterfall” development strategy, these
reviews occur only once. For other types of development strategies—such as the Incremental or
Spiral Model—these reviews may be repeated for each instance and iteration of the system or
product development cycle.

Referral For more information concerning development strategies, please refer to Chapter 24 on
System Development Workﬂow Strategy Practices.

Each of the SYSTEM level technical reviews is supported by PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, and
ASSEMBLY level assessments that culminate in a baseline for each item or conﬁguration item (CI).
Because of the expense of travel, some reviews may be conducted virtually via audio teleconfer-
ences, video teleconferences (VTCs), or on site, depending on item maturity. In some instances,


      Contract Award (CA)

            System Requirements Review (SRR)                             Test Readiness Reviews (TRRs)

                                                                                         System Verification Test (SVT)
                System Design Review (SDR)
                                                                                               Functional Configuration Audit (FCA)
                   HW/SW Specification Reviews
                                                                                                      Physical Configuration Audit (PCA)
                        Preliminary Design Review (PDR)                                                    System Verification Review (SVR)

                              Critical Design Review (CDR)                                                        Ready-to-Ship Review (RTSR)

               HSR/
     SRR                                                                                 FCA         SVR
CA         SDR SSR PDR CDR                                        TRRs            SVT          PCA         RTSR


                                                    System Development Phase
                                Component                                                                        System     Operational Test &
                                                                                       Authenticate
                              Procurement &         System Integration, Test, &                               Deployment    Evaluation (OT&E)
      SE Design Segment                                                              System Baselines
                               Development          Evaluation (SITE) Segment                                   Segment          Segment
                                                                                         Segment
                                 Segment                                                                       (Optional)       (Optional)


                                     RTAs

                                               Requirements Traccability Audits (RTAs)

Figure 54.1 Technical Review Sequencing
720     Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

several PRODUCT, SUBYSTEM, or ASSEMBLY level reviews may be conducted sequentially
during the same time frame at a location, typically the System Developer’s facility. Consider the
following example:


 EXAMPLE 54.3
Successful completion of SUBSYSTEM CDRs serve as entry criteria to a system level CDR, which then deter-
mines if the system design is mature enough to proceed with the Component Procurement and Development
Segment of the System Development Phase.

Integrated Baseline Review (IBR)
The Integrated Baseline Review (IBR) is typically the ﬁrst review conducted for a program. The
objective of an IBR is “to conduct a joint review by Acquirer and contractor program managers
and their technical staff personnel, following Contract Award, to conﬁrm that:
      1. The contractor’s Performance Measurement Baseline (PMB)—technical requirements and
         cost/schedule constraints—covers the entire scope of work.
      2. The work is realistically and accurately scheduled, that the proper amount and mix of
         resources have been assigned to tasks.
      3. Proper objective indicators have been selected for measurement of task accomplishment.”
         (Source: Adapted from the BMDO 5004-H IBR Glossary)
The IBR consists of an integrated assessment of all key contract technical, cost, and schedule ele-
ments. As such, the IBR seeks to assess:
      1. WHAT work is to be performed—for example, Contract Statement of Work (CSOW), Con-
         tract Work Breakdown Structure (CWBS), Integrated Master Plan (IMP), System Perfor-
         mance Speciﬁcation (SPS), Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL), Contract Line Item
         Numbers (CLINs), and organizational command media.
      2. WHEN the work is to be performed—for example, Master Program Schedule (MPS) and
         Integrated Master Schedule (IMS).
      3. WHO is accountable for performing the work—for example, program organization and IPT
         charters.
      4. HOW the work will be resourced and controlled—for example, control accounts and work
         packages linked to the Contract Work Breakdown Statement (CWBS).
The primary IBR objectives are accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit
criteria. Table 54.1 provides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and
expected decisions.
     On successful completion of the IBR, control accounts and work packages are activated, and
work is initiated for the SE Design Segment of the System Development Phase.

System Requirements Review (SRR)
The System Requirements Review (SRR) is typically the ﬁrst opportunity for technical represen-
tatives from the User, Acquirer, and System Developer organizations to get together in a common
forum to review, interpret, clarify, and correct, if appropriate, the system requirements.
     The primary objectives of the SRR are to:
                                                                      54.5 Major Technical Reviews   721

Table 54.1 Example IBR supporting objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions

Item                       Example IBR Objectives/Exit Criteria                      Decision Expected

1             Assess the adequacy, completeness, consistency, and risk of the     • Action item(s) or
              System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).                              • Concurrence/approval
2             Assess the adequacy, completeness, consistency, and risk of the     • Action item(s) or
              contract and program schedule elements:                             • Concurrence/approval
              • Master Program Schedule (MPS)
              • Integrated Master Plan (IMP)
              • Integrated Master Schedule (IMS)
3             Assess the adequacy, completeness, consistency, and risk of the     • Action item(s) or
              contract and program cost elements:                                 • Concurrence/approval
              • Contract Statement of Work (CSOW)
              • Contract Work Breakdown Structure (CWBS)
              • Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) items
              • Contract Line Item Numbers (CLINs)
              • Control accounts
              • Work packages
4             Establish the Performance Measurement Baseline (PMB):               • Action item(s) or
              • Technical performance baseline elements                           • Concurrence/approval
              • Schedule performance baseline elements
              • Cost performance baseline elements




       1. Review, clarify, correct, and baseline the set of SPS requirements to ensure a common inter-
          pretation and understanding among decision makers.
       2. Establish the System Requirements Baseline.
The primary SRR objectives are accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit
criteria. Table 54.2 provides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and
expected decisions.

System Design Review (SDR)
The System Design Review (SDR) follows the SRR and is conducted in accordance with the Ts&Cs
of the contract CSOW, SDR entry criteria, and program schedule. Following the SRR, the System
Developer matures the system design solution derived from the System Requirements Baseline. At
a minimum, the solution includes development and maturation of the system architecture, system
interface requirements, Concept of Operations (ConOps), and preliminary allocations of SPS
requirements to the PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM levels of abstraction.
     The primary objective of the SDR is to establish the SYSTEM level design solution and Allo-
cated Baseline as part of the evolving Developmental Conﬁguration. The primary SDR objective
is accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit criteria. Table 54.3 provides a listing
of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions.
     On successful completion of the SDR, emphasis shifts to formulating and maturing HWCI
unique and CSCI unique requirements speciﬁcations (HRS/SRS).
722    Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

Table 54.2 Example SRR supporting objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions

Item                   Example SRR Objectives/Exit Criteria                         Decision Expected

1        Verify that the User’s problem space and solution(s) space(s) are      • Action item(s) or
         properly UNDERSTOOD and BOUNDED—as what IS/IS NOT                      • Concurrence/approval
         part of the solution space.
2        Verify that the requirements completely, consistently, accurately,     • Action item(s) or
         and concisely articulate and bound the User’s solution space(s) for    • Concurrence/approval
         the SYSTEM in a manner that AVOIDS misinterpretation by
         multiple reviewers.
3        Verify that any ambiguous, overlapping, incomplete, inconsistent,      • Action item(s) or
         or unbounded requirements are ELIMINATED.                              • Concurrence/approval
4        Evaluate the quality—as bounded, measurable, testable, and             • Action item(s) or
         veriﬁable—of the requirements in terms of required capabilities and    • Concurrence/approval
         performance.
5        Determine if all stakeholder requirements have been adequately         • Action item(s) or
         addressed subject to contract cost schedule constraints.               • Concurrence/approval
6        Verify that each SPS Section 3.X requirement has at least one or       • Action item(s) or
         more Section 4.X veriﬁcation methods.                                  • Concurrence/approval
7        Verify that the Section 4.0 Qualiﬁcation Provision veriﬁcation         • Action item(s) or
         methods represent the least cost, schedule, and technical risk         • Concurrence/approval
         approach to proving each requirement’s compliance?
8        Where appropriate, obtain consensus for System Performance             • Action item(s) or
         Speciﬁcation (SPS) requirements, interpretations and clariﬁcations,    • Concurrence/approval
         modiﬁcations, etc. subject to Acquirer’s Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO)
         approval.
9        Where applicable, obtain authorization to establish the System         • Action item(s) or
         Requirements Baseline.                                                 • Concurrence/approval



Hardware/Software Speciﬁcation Reviews (HSRs/SSRs)
Once the PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM Level requirements allocations have been established as
the Allocated Baseline at the PDR, the architectures for PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM level solu-
tions are developed and matured. Each solution evolves from analyses of allocated requirements.
     Trade studies are conducted to select a preferred PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM architecture
consisting of items, HWCIs, and CSCIs from a set of viable candidate solutions. PRODUCT or
SUBSYSTEM development speciﬁcation requirements are next allocated to the items, HWCIs, and
CSCIs, as applicable. HWCI and CSCI allocated and derived requirements are documented respec-
tively in HWCI unique PRELIMINARY Hardware Requirements Speciﬁcations (HRSs) and CSCI
unique PRELIMINARY Software Requirements Speciﬁcations (SRSs). The culmination of this
activity results is an HSR or SSR, as applicable.
     In addition to the standard review items, the primary objective of the HSR/SSR is to establish
an HWCI’s or CSCI’s requirements speciﬁcation (HRS/SRS) baseline for its Developmental Con-
ﬁguration to provide a basis for peer level and lower level decision making. The primary HSR/SSR
objective is accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit criteria. Table 54.4 pro-
vides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions.
                                                                      54.5 Major Technical Reviews      723

Table 54.3 Example SDR supporting objectives/exit criteria and decisions expected

Item                    Example SDR Objectives/Exit Criteria                         Decision Expected

1         Assess the progress, status, maturity, and risk of the SYSTEM           • Action item(s) or
          level design solution—architecture, interfaces, etc.                    • Concurrence/approval
2         Review the preliminary Concept of Operations (ConOps).                  • Action item(s) or
                                                                                  • Concurrence/approval
3         Review Mission Event Timeline (MET) allocations.                        • Action item(s) or
                                                                                  • Concurrence/approval
4         Review and approve, if appropriate, SPS requirements allocations        • Action item(s) or
          to PRODUCTs or SUBSYSTEMS and other components.                         • Concurrence/approval
5         Review any supporting analyses and trade studies relevant to            • Action item(s) or
          SDR decision making.                                                    • Concurrence/approval
6         Review preliminary PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM level item                      • Action item(s) or
          development speciﬁcations.                                              • Concurrence/approval
7         Resolve any critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs)        • Mutual resolution
          related to system capabilities, performance, interfaces, safety, and    • Closure
          design criteria—the data.
8         Review the system life cycle cost analysis.                             • Action item(s) or
                                                                                  • Concurrence/approval
9         Establish the Allocated Baseline plus any corrective actions            • Action item(s) or
          required as criteria for acceptance.                                    • Concurrence/approval




     On successful completion of each HSR and SSR for their respective HWCI or CSCI, empha-
sis shifts to formulating and maturing the PRELIMINARY SYSTEM design. This includes devel-
opment of HWCI and CSCI level designs that respond to their respective HRS and SRS.

Preliminary Design Review (PDR)
The Preliminary Design Review (PDR) represents the fourth major technical review in the design
of a SYSTEM, PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, and so forth. The review is conducted
as a program event to assess the adequacy, completeness, and risk of the evolving system design
solution down to the HWCI and CSCI design levels.
     Following the HSR/SSR, the architectural solution of each HWCI and CSCI evolves. Analy-
ses and trade studies are performed to select a preferred HWCI or CSCI architecture that repre-
sents the best solution as determined by a set of pre-deﬁned evaluation criteria. As each HWCI and
CSCI solution reaches a level of maturity, a PDR is conducted for each one and culminates in a
SYSTEM Level PDR.
     In addition to the standard review objectives, the primary objective of the PDR is to review
and concur/approve the PRELIMINARY SYSTEM/item design solution down to HWCI/CSCI
architecture levels. The primary PDR objective is accomplished by completion of supporting objec-
tives or exit criteria. Table 54.5 provides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit cri-
teria and expected decisions.
     On successful completion of the PDR, emphasis shifts to formulating and maturing HWCI-
unique and CSCI-unique detailed designs for presentation at the Critical Design Review (CDR).
724    Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

Table 54.4 Example HSR/SSR objectives/exit criteria and decisions expected

Item                  Example HSR/SSR Objectives/Exit Criteria                          Decision Expected

 1       Assess the adequacy and completeness of requirements allocations             • Action items or
         and traceability of an HWCI or CSCI to its higher level item                 • Concurrence/approval
         development speciﬁcation.
 2       Resolve any critical operational or technical issues (COIs/CTIs)             • Action items or
         related to HWCI or CSCI capabilities, performance, interfaces, and           • Concurrence/approval
         design criteria—the data.
 3       Establish the criteria and corrective actions required to baseline the       • Action items or
         HWCI or CSCI requirements.                                                   • Concurrence/approval
 4       Review each HWCI/CSCI, including use cases, inputs, processing               • Action items or
         capabilities, and outputs.                                                   • Concurrence/approval
 5       Review HWCI/CSCI performance requirements, including those for               • Action items or
         execution time, storage requirements, and similar constraints.               • Concurrence/approval
 6       Review control ﬂow and data ﬂow interactions between each of the             • Action items or
         hardware and software capabilities that comprise the HWCI/CSCI.              • Concurrence/approval
 7       Review interface requirements between the HWCI/CSCI and all                  • Action items or
         other conﬁguration items both internal and external to the                   • Concurrence/approval
         HWCI/CSCI.
 8       Review qualiﬁcation or veriﬁcation requirements that identify                • Action items or
         applicable levels and methods of testing for the software                    • Concurrence/approval
         requirements that comprise the HWCI/CSCI.
 9       Review any special delivery requirements for the HWCI/CSCI.                  • Action items or
                                                                                      • Concurrence/approval
10       Review quality factor requirements: correctness, reliability,                • Action items or
         efﬁciency, integrity, usability, maintainability, testability, ﬂexibility,   • Concurrence/approval
         portability, reusability, safety and interoperability.
11       Review mission requirements of the system and its associated                 • Action items or
         operational and support environments related to the HWCI/CSCI.               • Concurrence/approval
12       Review HWCI/CSCI functions and characteristics within the overall            • Action items or
         system.                                                                      • Concurrence/approval
13       Identify any HSR/SSR corrective actions required to establish the            • Action items or
         HWCI/CSCI Requirements baseline.                                             • Concurrence/approval




Critical Design Review (CDR)
The Critical Design Review (CDR) is the ﬁfth major technical review in the design of a SYSTEM,
PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, ASSEMBLY, and so forth. The review is conducted as a program event
to assess the adequacy, completeness, and risk of the evolving system design solution down to the
HWCI, ASSEMBLY, and PART levels and CSCI computer software component (CSC) and unit
(CSU) levels.
     In addition to the standard review objectives, the primary objectives of the system level CDR
are to:
                                                                  54.5 Major Technical Reviews   725

Table 54.5 Example PDR objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions

Item                     Example PDR Objectives/Exit Criteria                    Decision Expected

1        Brieﬂy review any updates to the SYSTEM level architecture.          None
2        Brieﬂy review any updates to the PRODUCT or SUBSYSTEM                None
         architecture.
3        Review HWCI design solutions:                                        • Action items or
         • HWCI requirements allocations                                      • Concurrence/approval
         • HWCI speciﬁcation requirements and traceability
         • HWCI use cases
         • HWCI theory of operations
         • HWCI architecture
         • HWCI support of system phases, modes, and states of operation
         • HWCI performance budgets and margins
         • HWCI technical performance measures (TPMs)
         • HWCI analyses and trade studies
         • HWCI-to-HWCI interoperability
         • HWCI critical technical issues (CTIs)
         • HWCI critical technology issues
         • HWCI-to-CSCI(s) integration
4        Review CSCI design solutions.                                        • Action items or
         • CSCI requirements allocations                                      • Concurrence/approval
         • CSCI speciﬁcation requirements and traceability
         • CSCI use cases
         • CSCI theory of operations
         • CSCI architecture
         • CSCI support of SYSTEM level phases, modes, and states of
           operation
         • CSCI analyses and trade studies
         • CSCI performance budgets and margins
         • CSCI-to-CSCI interoperability
         • CSCI-to-HWCI integration
         • CSCI critical technical issues (CTIs)
         • CSCI critical technology issues
5        Review specialty engineering considerations such as:                 • Action items or
         • Human factors engineering (HFE)                                    • Concurrence/approval
         • Logistics
         • Reliability
         • Availability
         • Maintainability
         • Supportability
         • Producibility
         • Environmental
         • Training
         • Vulnerability
         • Safety
         • Survivability
         • Susceptibility
6        Review hardware/software/operator integration issues                 • Action items or
                                                                              • Concurrence/approval
726      Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

       1. Review and concur/approve the SYSTEM/CI design solution.
       2. Make a decision to authorize and commit resources to the Component Procurement and
          Development Segment of the System Development Phase.
The primary CDR objectives are accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit cri-
teria. Table 54.6 provides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and
expected decisions.
     On successful completion of the CDR, emphasis shifts to procurement and development of
physical components that implement the detailed design requirements. This includes new
development and acquisition of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) and nondevelopmental items
(NDIs).

Table 54.6 Example CDR objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions

Item                   Example CDR Objectives/Exit Criteria                             Decision Expected

1         Determine if the detailed design satisﬁes the performance and               • Action items or
          engineering requirements speciﬁed in an item’s development                  • Concurrence/approval
          speciﬁcation.
2         Assess the detailed design compatibility and interoperability internal to   • Action items or
          the item and externally to other system elements:                           • Concurrence/approval
          • EQUIPMENT (hardware and software)
          • FACILITIES
          • PERSONNEL
          • MISSION RESOURCES
          • PROCEDURAL DATA
          • SYSTEM RESPONSES—behavior, products, by-products, or
            services.
3         Assess item compliance with allocated technical performance budgets         • Action items or
          and safety margins.                                                         • Concurrence/approval
4         Assess specialty engineering considerations such as:                        • Action items or
          • Reliability, availability, and maintainability (RAM)                      • Concurrence/approval
          • Producibility
          • Logistics
          • Survivability
          • Vulnerability
          • Producibility
          • Survivability
          • Safety
          • Environmental
          • Susceptibility
          • Human factors engineering (HFE)
5         Assess any detailed analyses, trade studies, modeling and simulation,       • Action items or
          or demonstration results that support decision making.                      • Concurrence/approval
6         Assess the adequacy of veriﬁcation test plans for each “item.”              • Action items or
                                                                                      • Concurrence/approval
7         Review preliminary test procedures.                                         • Action items or
                                                                                      • Concurrence/approval
8         Freeze the Developmental Conﬁguration.                                      • Action items or
                                                                                      • Concurrence/approval
                                                                            54.5 Major Technical Reviews   727

Author’s Note 54.3 The timing of the CDR may be incompatible with long lead item procure-
ment required to meet contract deliveries. Where this is the case, the System Developer may have
to assume a risk by procuring long lead items early recognizing the Acquirer has not approved the
CDR design.

Test Readiness Reviews (TRRs)
At each level of abstraction—PART, SUBASSEMBLY, ASSEMBLY, or SUBSYSTEM—some
systems require Test Readiness Reviews (TRRs) to be conducted. TRRs range from major program
events for large complex systems to simple team coordination meetings among development team
members.
     The primary objectives of a TRR are to:
       1. Assess the readiness and risks of the test article, environment, and team to conduct a test
          or series of tests.
       2. Ensure that all test roles are identiﬁed, assigned to personnel, and allocated responsibilities.
       3. Authorize initiation of test activities.
The primary TRR objectives are accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit cri-
teria. Table 54.7 provides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and
expected decisions.
     On successful completion of a TRR, an authority to proceed with speciﬁc tests is granted.
Table 54.7 Example TRR objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions

Item                        Example TRR Objectives/Exit Criteria                           Decision Expected

 1           Assess the readiness of the test article to undergo testing—               • Action item(s) or
             destructive or nondestructive.                                             • Concurrence/approval
 2           Coordinate and assess the readiness of all test article interfaces         • Action item(s) or
             and resources.                                                             • Concurrence/approval
 3           Verify test plans and procedures are approved and communicated.            • Action item(s) or
                                                                                        • Concurrence/approval
 4           Identify and resolve all critical technical, test, statutory, and          • Action item(s) or
             regulatory issues are resolved.                                            • Concurrence/approval
 5           Assess the readiness of the test environment to support the test.
 6           Verify all safety, health, and environmental concerns are resolved         • Action item(s) or
             and adequate EMERGENCY processes, services, and equipment                  • Concurrence/approval
             are in place to support all aspects of the test.
 7           Verify all lower level Discrepancy Report (DR) corrective actions          • Action item(s) or
             have been completed and veriﬁed for HWCIs and CSCIs.                       • Concurrence/approval
 8           Verify that the “As Built” test article identically matches its “As        • Action item(s) or
             Designed” documentation.                                                   • Concurrence/approval
 9           Coordinate responsibilities for test conduct, measurement, and             • Action item(s) or
             reporting                                                                  • Concurrence/approval
10           Designate range safety ofﬁcers (RSOs) and security personnel, at           • Action item(s) or
             appropriate.                                                               • Concurrence/approval
11           Obtain authority-to-proceed with speciﬁc tests.                            • Action item(s) or
                                                                                        • Concurrence/approval
728     Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR)
When system veriﬁcation testing is completed, a System Veriﬁcation Review (SVR) is conducted.
The primary objectives of the SVR are:
      1. Authenticate the results of System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT), including the FCA and PCA
         results.
      2. Establish the Product Baseline. Accomplishment of the primary SVR objectives is supported
         by secondary objectives and exit criteria that culminate in key decisions. Table 54.8 pro-
         vides example objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions.
The primary SVR objectives are accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit cri-
teria. Table 54.8 provides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and
expected decisions.
     On successful completion of the SVR, the workﬂow progresses to a Ready-to-Ship Review
(RTSR) decision.

Ready to Ship Review (RTSR)
Following the SVR, a Ready to Ship Review (RTSR) is conducted. The primary objective of the
RTSR is to determine the system’s state of readiness for disassembly and deployment to the des-
ignated delivery site.
     The primary RTSR objectives are accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit
criteria. Table 54.9 provides an example listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and
expected decisions.
     On successful completion of the RTSR, the system is disassembled, packaged, crated, and
shipped to the designated deployment or job site in accordance with the contract or direction from
the ACO.

Production Readiness Review (PRR)
For systems planned for production, a Production Readiness Review (PRR) is conducted shortly
after production contract award. The primary objectives of the PRR are to:



Table 54.8 Example SVR objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions

Objective                 Example SVR Objective/Exit Criteria                     Decision Expected

1            Audit and certify the results of the Functional Conﬁguration       • Action item(s) or
             Audit (FCA).                                                       • Concurrence/approval
2            Audit and certify the results of the Physical Conﬁguration Audit   • Action item(s) or
             (PCA).                                                             • Concurrence/approval
3            Identify any outstanding inconsistencies, latent defects such as   • Action item(s) or
             design errors, deﬁciencies, and ﬂaws.                              • Concurrence/approval
4            Verify that all approved engineering change proposals (ECPs)       • Action item(s) or
             and discrepancy reports (DRs) have been incorporated and           • Concurrence/approval
             veriﬁed.
5            Authorization to establish the Product Baseline for the As         • Action item(s) or
             Speciﬁed, As Designed, As Built, and “As Veriﬁed” conﬁgurations.   • Concurrence/approval
                                                                       54.6 In-Process Reviews (IPRs)   729

Table 54.9 Example RTSR objectives/exit criteria and expected decisions

Item                      Example RTSR Objectives/Exit Criteria                         Decision Expected

1          Verify that all compliance test data have been collected, documented,     • Action item(s) or
           and certiﬁed.                                                             • Concurrence/approval
2          Verify that all cabling and equipment items are inventoried and           • Action item(s) or
           properly identiﬁed.                                                       • Concurrence/approval
3          Verify that anything related to the conﬁguration installation is          • Action item(s) or
           documented.                                                               • Concurrence/approval
4          Assess veriﬁcation data completeness prior to system                      • Action item(s) or
           disassembly, packing, and shipping.                                       • Concurrence/approval
5          Assess storage or deployment site facility readiness to accept            • Action item(s) or
           system delivery for installation and integration:                         • Concurrence/approval
           • Environmental conditions
           • Interfaces
           • “Gate keeper” decision authority approvals
6          Verify coordination of enroute system transportation support              • Action item(s) or
           including:                                                                • Concurrence/approval
           • Licenses and permits
           • Route selection
           • Security
           • Resources



       1. Authenticate the production baseline conﬁguration.
       2. Make a production “go-ahead” decision to commit to Low-Rate Initial Production (LRIP)
          or Full-Scale Production (FSP).

Author’s Note 54.4 A critical issue for any production contract concerns the currency of the
“As-Maintained” conﬁguration documentation. That is, does the documentation identically match
the ﬁelded system conﬁguration(s)? This question MUST be resolved before committing to
production.

The primary TRR objectives are accomplished by completion of supporting objectives or exit
criteria. Table 54.10 provides a listing of these supporting objectives/exit criteria and expected
decisions.
     On successful completion of the PRR, emphasis shifts to Low-Rate Initial Production (LRIP).
Subsequent PRRs address readiness for full-scale production (FSP).

54.6 IN-PROCESS REVIEWS (IPRs)

In-Process Reviews (IPRs), which represent another class of technical reviews, occur in two forms:
       1. As a System Developer’s internal assessment of its evolving work products.
       2. As an Acquirer’s readiness assessment for conducting a major technical review for a
          contract.
Let’s describe each of these types.
730    Chapter 54   Technical Reviews

Table 54.10 Example PRR review objectives/exit criteria and decisions expected

Item                    Example PRR Objectives/Exit Criteria                       Decision Expected

1       Authenticate the integrity, adequacy, and completeness of the current    • Action item(s) or
        Product Baseline and place it under conﬁguration control.                • Concurrence/approval
2       Verify that design improvements—the approved engineering change          • Action item(s) or
        proposals (ECPs)—to facilitate production have been incorporated,        • Concurrence/approval
        veriﬁed, and validated.
3       Resolve any vendor, production, materials, or process issues.            • Action item(s) or
                                                                                 • Concurrence/approval
4       Make a production “go-ahead” decision and determine the scope of         • Action item(s) or
        production.                                                              • Concurrence/approval
5       Establish the production baseline.                                       • Action item(s) or
                                                                                 • Concurrence/approval




System Developer IPRs
System Developer personnel conduct IPRs for their evolving work products with internal stake-
holders. IPRs review plans, speciﬁcations, designs, and test procedures. Where program organiza-
tions are based on Integrated Product Teams (IPTs), the Acquirer and User may have standing
invitations to participate in the reviews.
     Although IPRs can be formal, they tend to be less structured and informal. Regardless of the
level of formality, IPRs should be documented via conference minutes and action item assignments.

Contract IPRs
Major technical reviews can be very costly, especially if conducted prematurely. Some contracts
require the System Developer to conduct a Contract IPR as a readiness assessment for conducting
the formal technical review. Contract IPRs are conducted 30 to 60 days prior to a major technical
review to assess the readiness to “go ahead” with SDR, PDR, CDR, and so forth.


54.7 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern technical review practices.

Principle 54.1 (Under contract protocol) Only the Acquirer’s Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO) is
ofﬁcially authorized to issue technical direction to the System Developer in response to technical
review comments, conference minutes, action items, contract modiﬁcations, and acceptance of
contract documents.

Principle 54.2 Conduct technical reviews at critical control or staging points in system design
maturity; no sooner, no later.

Principle 54.3 In most contract environments, interpret Acquirer personnel comments as
personal opinion, NOT formal contract technical direction.
                                                                       Organization Centric Exercises     731

Principle 54.4 (Under contract protocol) System Developers invite the Acquirer to program
events; the Acquirer extends invitations to the User unless the Acquirer has made other arrange-
ments with the System Developer.

Principle 54.5 Technical reviews assess the status, progress, maturity, compliance, and risk of
the evolving system design solution in meeting its contract and speciﬁcation requirements.

Principle 54.6 Technical review agendas, attendees, discussions, decisions, and action items are
documented via conference minutes, and reviewed, approved, and released via contract protocol.

Principle 54.7 Contract clauses are sometimes open to multiple interpretations by different
organizations. THINK smartly about and AVOID ambiguous contract technical review entry and
exit criteria language.

Principle 54.8 Conference minutes document attendees, agenda, discussion topics, meeting, and
action items. Perform the task well and obtain Acquirer/User acceptance via the ACO.


54.8 SUMMARY

In our discussion of technical reviews we introduced the various types of reviews and their occurrence as crit-
ical control or staging points in a system’s development. For each review we identiﬁed the key objectives and
referenced checklists for conducting the review. We also highlighted the importance of conducting maturity-
based event reviews for each stage of development. Finally, we provided guiding principles to consider when
conducting the review.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.


ORGANIZATION CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media.
   (a) What requirements and guidance is established for conducting formal technical reviews?
   (b) What guidance is provided concerning In-Process Reviews (IPRs)?
   (c) What requirements are levied for documenting the review conference minutes and action items?
   (d) What requirements are levied for disciplinary participants in the reviews?
2. Contact several contract programs in your organization ranging in size from small to large.
   (a) What type of contract—ﬁrm-ﬁxed price (FFP) or cost plus incentive fee (CPIF)—does the program
       have?
   (b) Based on contract type, what degree of approvals or concurrence does the Acquirer have oversight of
       technical review decisions and baselines?
   (c) What technical review requirements are imposed by the contract?
   (d) How do the reviews differ from those speciﬁed in this section?
   (e) Where were the technical review requirements speciﬁed?
   (f) How are results of the reviews to be documented?
   (g) What criteria are established as entry and exit criteria for the reviews?
732     Chapter 54     Technical Reviews

   (h) Are PDRs, CDRs, and TRRs at the PRODUCT, SUBSYSTEM, and other levels sequenced relative to
       the SYSTEM level PDRs, CDRs, and TRRs?
3. Contact an organization that develops commercial products.
   (a) Research how the organization conducts commercial technical reviews.
   (b) Develop a mapping between the two types of approaches to technical reviews.
   (c) Contrast the two approaches and document your views about the advantages and disadvantages of
       each?


REFERENCES

BMDO 5004-H. 1998. Integrated Baseline Review (IBR)           MIL-STD-973 (canceled). 1992. Military Standard: Conﬁg-
  Team Handbook, Version 2.0. Ballistic Missile Defense        uration Management. Washington, DC: Department of
  Organization (BMDO). Washington, DC.                         Defense (DoD).
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998.              MIL-STD-1521B (canceled). 1992. Military Standard:
  DSMC Test and Evaluation Management Guide,                   Technical Reviews and audits for Systems, Equipments,
  3rd ed. Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir,    and Computer Software. Washington, DC: Department of
  VA.                                                          Defense (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ASD-100 Architecture and System Engineering. 2004. National Air Space System—
  Systems Engineering Manual. Washington, DC: FAA.
Chapter              55

     System Integration,
     Test, and Evaluation

55.1 INTRODUCTION

As each system component completes the Component Procurement and Development Segment of
the System Development Process, it is ready for System Integration, Test, and Evaluation (SITE).
Planning for SITE begins during the SE Design Segment and continues through system delivery
and acceptance.
     This chapter introduces SITE practices for implementing the right side of the V-Model illus-
trated in Figure 25.5. Our discussions address WHAT SITE is and HOW it is conducted. We begin
with a discussion of the fundamentals of SITE. Next, we explore HOW SITE planning is performed
and describe the test organization.
     Given a basic understanding of SITE, we introduce key tasks that capture HOW developers
incrementally test and verify compliance of multi-level test articles in accordance with their per-
formance or development speciﬁcations. We also explore some of the challenges of test data col-
lection and management. We conclude with a discussion of common integration and test issues.

What You Should Learn in This Chapter
      1. What is system integration, test, and evaluation (SITE)?
      2. When is SITE conducted?
      3. What is the relationship of SITE to DT&E and OT&E?
      4. What is SITE the expected to accomplish SITE?
      5. What are the work products of SITE?
      6. What are the roles and responsibilities for SITE accountability?
      7. What are the types of test plans?
      8. What is a Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP)?
      9. Who owns and prepares the TEMP?
     10. What is a System Integration and Veriﬁcation Plan (SIVP)?
     11. Who owns and prepares the SIVP?
     12. Differentiate the contexts of the TEMP versus the SIVP.
     13. What is a Test and Evaluation Working Group (TEWG)?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                               733
734     Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

      14. Why do you need test logs?
      15. What is regression testing?
      16. What is a discrepancy report (DR)?
      17. When is a DR prepared?
      18. How to prioritize SITE activities and record SITE deﬁciencies and issues?
      19. What are Test Readiness Reviews (TRRs)?
      20. What are the SITE phases and supporting tasks for an item?
      21. What are SITE observations, defects, deﬁciencies, and anomalies?
      22. How do you prepare veriﬁcation test reports (TRs)?
      23. What is the importance of approving and archiving test data?
      24. How do you certify test data?
      25. What are some common SITE challenges and issues?
SITE discussions employ several terms that require deﬁnitions. Let’s begin by deﬁning these
terms.


Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Acceptance Testing “Formal testing conducted to determine whether or not a system sat-
        isﬁes its acceptance criteria and to enable the customer to determine whether or not to accept
        the system.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Acceptance Test Procedures (ATPs) Formal procedures that verify the successful achieve-
        ment of one or more speciﬁcation requirements in accordance with the veriﬁcation method(s)
        stated for the requirement(s).
      • Alpha Testing “System testing performed at the developer’s site, often by employees of the
        customer.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering, p. 445)
      • Anomaly An unexplainable event or observation that cannot be replicated based on current
        knowledge or facts.
      • Automatic Test Equipment (ATE) “Equipment that is designed to automatically conduct
        analysis of functional or static parameters and to evaluate the degree of UUT (Unit Under
        Test) performance degradation; and may be used to perform fault isolation of UUT mal-
        functions. The decision making, control, or evaluative functions are conducted with
        minimum reliance on human intervention and usually done under computer control.”
        (Source: MIL-HDBK-470A, Appendix G—Glossary, p. G-2)
      • Beta Testing “System testing performed at a customer’s site without the developer’s pres-
        ence, and reported to the developer.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering,
        p. 445)
                                                                                 55.1 Introduction   735

    • Destructive Tests Tests that result in stressing a test article to failure beyond repair via
      destruction or loss. Destructive tests usually destroy, damage, or impair a test article’s form,
      structure, capabilities, or performance beyond refurbishment at a practical and economically
      feasible level.
    • Formal Testing “Testing conducted in accordance with test plans and procedures that have
      been reviewed and approved by a customer, user, or designated level of management.”
      (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990 Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology)
    • Nondestructive Tests Tests that subject a test article to a prescribed set of input conditions
      and operating environment to demonstrate compliance to requirements. Nondestructive tests
      do not destroy, damage, or impair a test article’s appearance, form, structure, capabilities, or
      performance other than minor refurbishment.


 EXAMPLE 55.1
Nondestructive tests include qualiﬁcation tests concerning temperature, humidity, shock, vibration, and so
forth.


    • Qualiﬁcation Test “Simulates deﬁned operational environmental conditions with a pre-
      determined safety factor, the results indicating whether a given design can perform its func-
      tion within the simulated operational environment of a system.” (Source: DSMC Simulation
      Based Acquisition: A New Approach, Dec. 1998)
    • Regression Testing “A selected set of previously conducted tests after a system change to
      reconﬁrm their validity.” (Source: Kossiakoff and Sweet, System Engineering, p. 452)
    • Test The act of subjecting, measuring, and evaluating a SYSTEM or entity’s responses to
      a prescribed and controlled set of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions, veriﬁcation
      methods, and stimuli and comparing the results to a set of speciﬁed capability and perform-
      ance requirements.
    • Test and Evaluation (T&E) The informal or semiformal act of evaluating the behavioral
      response and reaction time performance of a system entity within a prescribed OPERATING
      ENVIRONMENT to a controlled set of stimuli for purposes of assessing entity functional-
      ity and eliminate defects. T&E establishes that an article is free of latent defects or deﬁ-
      ciencies, as allowed, and is ready for formal veriﬁcation. T&E should include a “dry run”
      of the formal veriﬁcation acceptance test procedures (ATPs) prior to formal veriﬁcation.
      T&E activities are generally informal contractor activities and may or may not be observed
      by the Acquirer.
    • Test and Evaluation Working Group (TEWG) A team consisting of User, Acquirer,
      System Developer, Subcontractor, and vendor personnel stakeholders formed to plan, co-
      ordinate, implement, monitor, analyze, and evaluate test results.
    • Test Article An initial unit of a SYSTEM or PRODUCT or one randomly extracted from
      a production lot to be used for conducting nondestructive or destructive tests.
    • Test Case One instance of a series of use case scenario-based tests that employ combina-
      tions of test inputs and conditions to verify an item’s ability to ACCEPT/REJECT ranges of
      inputs, perform value-added processing and to produce only ACCEPTABLE performance-
      based outcomes or results.
    • Test Conﬁguration A controlled architectural framework capable of representing an item’s
      OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions—NATURAL, INDUCED, or HUMAN-MADE
736     Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

        SYSTEMS—via simulation, stimulation, or emulation to verify that the test article satisﬁes
        a speciﬁc requirement or set of requirements.
      • Test Coverage “The degree to which a given test or set of tests addresses all speciﬁed
        requirements for a given system or component.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Test Criteria “Standards by which test results and outcome are judged.” (Source: DSMC,
        Test & Evaluation Management Guide, Appendix B—Glossary of Test Terminology)
      • Test Environment The set of System Elements (EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL,
        FACILITIES, PROCEDURAL DATA, MISSION RESOURCES, simulated NATURAL and
        INDUCED ENVIRONMENTs, etc.) conﬁgured to represent a test article’s OPERATING
        ENVIRONMENT conditions.
      • Test and Measurement Equipment “The peculiar or unique testing and measurement
        equipment which allows an operator or maintenance function to evaluate operational condi-
        tions of a system or equipment by performing speciﬁc diagnostics, screening or quality assur-
        ance effort at an organizational, intermediate, or depot level of equipment support.” (Source:
        MIL-HDBK-881, Appendix H, para. H.3.6.1)


 EXAMPLE 55.2
Examples include: “. . . test measurement and diagnostic equipment, precision measuring equipment, auto-
matic test equipment, manual test equipment, automatic test systems, test program sets, appropriate intercon-
nect devices, automated load modules, taps, and related software, ﬁrmware and support hardware (power
supply equipment, etc.) used at all levels of maintenance.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-881, Appendix H, para.
H.3.6.1)


      • Test Incident Report “A document that describes an event that occurred during testing
        which requires further investigation.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Test Instrumentation “Test instrumentation is scientiﬁc, automated data processing equip-
        ment (ADPE), or technical equipment used to measure, sense, record, transmit, process or
        display data during tests, evaluations or examination of materiel, training concepts or tacti-
        cal doctrine. Audio-visual is included as instrumentation when used to support Acquirer
        testing.” (Source: Adapted from DSMC, Test & Evaluation Management Guide, Appendix
        B, Glossary of Test Terminology)
      • Test Range An indoor or outdoor FACILITY that provides a safe and secure area for eval-
        uating a SYSTEM or entity’s capabilities and performance under near NATURAL ENVI-
        RONMENT or simulated conditions.
      • Test Repeatability “An attribute of a test, indicating that the same results are produced each
        time the test is conducted.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Test Resources “A collective term that encompasses all elements necessary to plan, conduct
        and collect/analyze data from a test event or program.” (Source: DSMC, Glossary: Defense
        Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
      • Testing “The process of operating a system or component under speciﬁed conditions,
        observing or recording the results, and making an evaluation of some aspect of the system
        or component.” (Source: IEEE 610.12-1990)
      • Transient Error An “Error that occurs once, or at unpredictable intervals.” (Source: IEEE
        610.12-1990)
                                                                       55.2 SITE Fundamentals     737

55.2 SITE FUNDAMENTALS

To better understand the SITE tasks discussed in this section, let’s introduce some of the funda-
mentals of that provide the foundation for SITE.

What Is SITE?
System integration, test, and evaluation (SITE) is the sequential, bottoms-up process of:
    1. Incremtially interfacing previously veriﬁed system items and conﬁguration items (CIs)—
       consisting of PARTS, SUBASSEMBLIES, ASSEMBLIES, SUBSYSTEMS and PROD-
       UCTS—at Integration Points (IPs), beginning with the lowest level.
    2. Conducting functional and qualiﬁcation tests of the integrated test article to verify all capa-
       bilities comply with speciﬁcation and design requirements.
    3. Evaluating the test results for compliance and optimizing test article performance.
Completion of SITE at each Integration Point (IP) is marked by a formal veriﬁcation test, which
may or may not be performed formal acceptance test procedures (ATPs). On completion of each
test, we conduct compliance assessments based on performance or development speciﬁcation ver-
iﬁcation requirements and methods. Each test proves the test article’s capability to perform over
the prescribed operating range of inputs and environmental conditions. For some programs, lower
level SITE veriﬁcation tests may be semiformal, informal, and unwitnessed. In other cases, the
tests:
    1. Are formal.
    2. Employ approved acceptance test procedures (ATPs) derived from speciﬁcation require-
       ments and veriﬁcation methods.
    3. Are witnessed by all stakeholders including the Acquirer and User.
Depending on the contract, the Acquirer and User, at the request of the Acquirer, are invited to
“witness” the SITE and veriﬁcation activities.

Author’s Note 55.1 As a reminder, the System Developer is accountable for notifying the
Acquirer regarding SITE in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. Under con-
ventional contracting protocol, the Acquirer notiﬁes the User unless the Acquirer has made special
arrangements with the System Developer. Conversely, when the Acquirer and User have open invi-
tations to observe and witness SITE activities, as a professional courtesy to the System Developer,
the Acquirer should inform the System Developer’s Program Director in advance WHO, HOW
MANY people, and WHAT organization(s) will participate.

SITE Objective
The objective of SITE is to subject a test article of a SYSTEM, item, or conﬁguration item (CI)
to a range of test cases, input stimuli and/or cues, and conditions representative of a prescribed
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT so that the achievement of each capability requirement and its per-
formance can be veriﬁed.
     Engineers often have misperceptions of WHAT is to be accomplished by SITE. The ERRO-
NEOUS view is that a system or entity is subjected to a set of conditions bounded by minimum/
maximum performance requirement thresholds. The fallacy in this view is: HOW does the item
perform when subjected to conditions BEYOND these limits? Obviously, you could test an item
738         Chapter 55          System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

beyond its physical limits such as environmental conditions, electrical overload, or shorts, but what
about improper data formats, magnitudes that are under/over range? If the item is designed prop-
erly, it should accommodate these conditions without failure.
     The objective should be to exercise and assess the item’s capability to cope with acceptable
and unacceptable input conditions. Likewise, for those input conditions, produce only acceptable
SYSTEM RESPONSES such as behavior, products, by-products, and services.

SITE Conduct Sequencing
SITE, which is part of Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E), is conducted following the
Component Procurement and Development Segment of the System Development Phase as illus-
trated in Figure 55.1. Throughout the SITE Segment, the System Developer conducts Test Readi-
ness Reviews (TRRs) as entry criteria for various tests. SITE activities culminate in a System
Veriﬁcation Review (SVR).

What Do SITE Activities Prove?
We can create nice words about SITE such as verify compliance with speciﬁcation requirements,
but WHAT do SITE activities really accomplish. In very simple terms, SITE answers ﬁve key
questions:
       1. Can the SYSTEM/entity design interoperate with external systems in its OPERATING
          ENVIRONMENT?
       2. Does the SYSTEM/entity predictably and responsively function as planned?
       3. Can the SYSTEM/entity materials and components survive the stresses of the prescribed
          OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions for the duration of the mission/operating cycle
          limits?
       4. Is the quality of workmanship and construction sufﬁcient to ensure the integrity of compo-
          nent interfaces?
       5. As applicable, can the SYSTEM/entity be easily maintained?

     Contract Award (CA)                                              Test Readiness Reviews (TRRs)
            System Requirements Review (SDR)                                             System VerificationTest
                                                                                          SystemVerification Test(SVT)
                                                                                                                  (SVT)
                System Design Review (SDR)
                                                                                         Functional Configuration Audit (FCA)
                    HW/SW Specification Reviews (HSRs/SSRs)
                                                                                                Physical Configuration Audit (PCA)
                         Preliminary Design Review (PDR)
                                                                                                      System Verification Review (SVR)
                                Critical Design Review (CDR)
                                                                                                            Ready-to-Ship Review (RTSR)
               HSR/
     SRR                                                                           FCA         SVR
CA         SDR SSR PDR    CDR                                  TRRs          SVT         PCA         RTSR


                                            System Development Phase
                               Component
                                Component                                                           System
                                                                                                      System     System
                                                                                                                  System
                                                                                   Authenticate
                             Procurement &       System                             Authenticate Deployment Validation
     SE Design Segment        Procurement &              Integration,Test,
                                                  SystemIntegration,  Test,&&    System Baselines  Deployment Validation
      SE Design Segment       Development        Evaluation                       System Baselines Segment
                                                             (SITE)Segment
                                                  Evaluation(SITE)
                                                                                                                Segment
                               Development                           Segment         Segment         Segment     Segment
                                Segment                                               Segment      (Optional)
                                 Segment                                                            (Optional) (Optional)
                                                                                                                (Optional)


                   Developmental Test & Evaluation (DT&E)                                                            OT&E


                                      Where: OT&E = Operational Test & Evaluation
Figure 55.1 System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT)
                                                                       55.2 SITE Fundamentals     739

Engineering Model, First Article, Test Article,
and Unit-Under-Test (UUT) Semantics
SITE terminology includes terms such as engineering model, ﬁrst article, test article, and unit under
test (UUT). Let’s explore each term brieﬂy.

Engineering Model(s). An engineering model, which may or may not be a contract deliverable,
serves as an initial prototype. The model is used in collecting data to validate system models and
simulations or in demonstrating technologies or proofs of concept. From a spiral development
perspective, one or more engineering models may be developed in iterative sequences as risk
mitigation devices over a period of time to identify requirements from which the Developmental
Conﬁguration design will be used to produce the initial First Article(s).

First Article(s). By the term ﬁrst article we mean the initial units of the approved Developmen-
tal Conﬁguration that are available for veriﬁcation testing and subsequent delivery in accordance
with the terms and conditions (Ts&Cs) of the contract. The term is sometimes a misnomer since
several ﬁrst articles may be produced from the Developmental Conﬁguration. Collectively, the set
of devices are referred to as ﬁrst articles. Each initial set of ﬁrst articles is subjected to various
nondestructive and destructive tests. On successful completion of system veriﬁcation testing of the
ﬁrst article(s), the resulting Developmental Conﬁguration is used to establish the Product Baseline.

Test Article and UUTs. The term test article is actually a generic term that represents any item
used for test purposes. So, a ﬁrst-article system progressing through its development is referred to
as a test article during SITE and as a unit under test (UUT) when integrated into the test conﬁgu-
ration for veriﬁcation testing. Production articles may be test articles in the sense that only func-
tional tests are performed.

Key Elements of SITE
Planning and implementation of SITE requires an understanding of its key elements—the PER-
SONNEL, EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES, and other system elements—and HOW to orchestrate these
elements during the test. We represent these System Elements via the system block diagram (SBD)
shown in Figure 55.2.
     The test article serves as the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) for SITE. Surrounding the test
article is the test environment, which consists of the test operator, test procedures, test log, test
equipment and tools, controlled test environment and design documentation, all contained within
the test facility.

Author’s Note 55.2 Note how the Controlled Test Environment is abstracted as an entity rather
than shown as surrounding the test article. Analytically, both methods are acceptable. Abstracting
the Controlled Operating Environment as a box with interfaces explicitly reminds you of the need
to identify and specify the interfaces. If we encompassed the test article within the Controlled Oper-
ating Environment (i.e., a box within a box), the interface relationships would be less explicit and
more difﬁcult to identify.

Guiding Philosophy of SITE
The guiding philosophy of SITE can be summarized in a few words: KEEP IT SIMPLE! Simplic-
ity means establish an item compliant with its speciﬁcation and then incrementally integrate other
items one at a time.
740    Chapter 55      System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

                             Test Facility
                          Test Environment
                             Test                 Controlled
                                                   Controlled
                              Test
        TestLog
       Test  Log          Equipment              OPERATING
                                                  OPERATING
                           Equipment
                           &&Tools             ENVIRONMENT
                                                ENVIRONMENT
                              Tools
                                                                       External Test
                                                                      ENVIRONMENT
         Test
          Test               Test
                              Test                                       MAN-MADE
      Procedures
       Procedures                                  Hardware
                                                     Hardware             MAN-MADE
                           Operator
                            Operator                                      SYSTEMS
       • •Use Cases                              (As
           Use Cases                              (AsApplicable)
                                                      Applicable)          SYSTEMS
                                                                         Environment
                                                                          Environment


                                                    Software
                                                     Software
                                                  (AsApplicable)
                                                 (As  Applicable)         INDUCED
                                                                           INDUCED
                            Design                                       Environment
                                                                          Environment
                             Design             Test Article
                         Documentation
                          Documentation

                                                                          NATURAL
                                                                           NATURAL
                                                                         Environment
                                                                          Environment

                                                                                          2
Figure 55.2 SITE Entity Relationships SBD Example




     People often have the erroneous viewpoint that they can lash all PRODUCTs/SUBSYSTEMs
into a gigantic test conﬁguration and begin testing! If you do this, you may and probably will be
confronted with n items, each with scores of UNPROVEN capabilities interacting simultaneously!
If something does not work properly, HOW will you ever sort out WHAT is causing the problem?
You will soon discover that you need to disassemble everything and start with a simple proven and
veriﬁed item, integrate another item with it, and incrementally build a system. Remember, SITE
root wisdom says integrate one unproven and unveriﬁed item at a time! At least you will know
WHEN the problem entered the test article conﬁguration and thereby can simplify trouble shoot-
ing and fault isolation. For that item, disable as many capabilities as you can and incrementally
test and enable one new capability at a time.

Preparing Items for SITE
During the SE Design Segment of the System Development Phase, we partitioned and decomposed
the solution space into successively lower levels of detail down to the PART level item. During
Component Procurement and Development, each item is procured/fabricated, coded, assembled,
and tested. Incrementally, we subject the item to inspections and veriﬁcation to ensure that it com-
plies with its design requirements—drawings, source codes, and so forth. Since each item serves
as a “building block” for constructing or assembling the SYSTEM, item veriﬁcation evaluates its
form, ﬁt, and function.
     Once you understand the importance of the form, ﬁt, function at the PART level, SITE is simply
testing the form, ﬁt, and function of physical items at higher levels of Integration Points (IPs) as a
functioning system with a given set of capabilities. System integration is actually a veriﬁcation
exercise whereby: 1) components are integrated, 2) interfaces are veriﬁed, and 3) interoperability
is demonstrated or tested.
                                                                         55.2 SITE Fundamentals      741

Types of Testing
When organizations discuss SITE activities, you will often hear terms such as functional, environ-
mental/qualiﬁcation, destructive, and nondestructive testing. Let’s clarify the context of each of
these terms.

Functional and Environmental/Qualiﬁcation Testing. In general, SITE activities perform
two categories of testing: functional testing and environmental/qualiﬁcation testing.
    • Functional testing simply means that the components, when interconnected and integrated,
      perform actions and interoperate as planned with no errors under ambient conditions.
    • Environmental/qualiﬁcation testing is the next higher level and focuses on HOW WELL the
      item performs in its PRESCRIBED OPERATING ENVIRONMENT conditions. Qualiﬁca-
      tion testing includes tests performed as part of Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E)
      veriﬁcation activities and, if applicable, during Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E)
      validation activities. Environmental/qualiﬁcation testing involves environmental condi-
      tions such as temperature, humidity, shock, vibration, and Electromagnetic Interference
      (EMI).

Nondestructive and Destructive Testing. During functional and environmental/qualiﬁcation
testing, test articles may be subjected to a wide range of tests that may destroy, blemish, or alter
the test article’s appearance, structural integrity, capability, or performance. We refer to these as
destructive tests. In contrast, nondestructive tests may not harm the item, which may be refurbished
for delivery, assuming it is permissible by contract and safety practices.
     During the System Production Phase of a program, production sample test articles may be ran-
domly selected for a test program to assess the quality of materials, workquality, system capabili-
ties and performance, shelf-life degradation, and so forth.

Author’s Note 55.3 ALWAYS consult your contract and program, contracts, and legal organ-
izations for guidance concerning test article delivery, recovery, or refurbishment.

Creating the Test Article’s OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
When we perform SITE, we subject the test article to scenarios and conditions that represent
its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. This requires creating the HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS
and PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT Elements, among these HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS, the
INDUCED ENVIRONMENT, and the NATURAL ENVIRONMENT. How do we do this?
    There are several options for creating the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT as illustrated in
Figure 51.5. We can simulate, stimulate or emulate entities within the environment or employ com-
binations of these options.
    • Simulate To create a virtual model interface that represents the performance-based behav-
      ioral responses and characteristics of an external entity.
    • Stimulate To create an interface using actual EQUIPMENT or a test set that has identical
      physical performance characteristics of the external entity.
    • Emulate To create an interface that identically mimics the actual operations, processing
      sequences, and performance characteristics of an external system entity.
In each of these cases, the objective is to create an interface that is so representative or realistic of
the external system that the test article is unable to discern its difference from reality.
742    Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

SITE Conduct Procedures
Two types of procedures govern SITE conduct: standard operating practices and procedures
(SOPPs) and acceptance test procedures (ATPs).

Standard Operating Practices and Procedures (SOPPs). Standard operating practices and
procedures (SOPPs) are organizational command media that apply to test conduct in test facilities
and ranges. SOPPs focus on the safe and proper handling of EQUIPMENT, human and environ-
mental safety, laboratory/test range procedures, security procedures, emergency procedures, as well
as the prevention of hazards.

Acceptance Test Procedures (ATPs). Acceptance test procedures are derived from each
Section 3.0 System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or item developmental speciﬁcation (IDS)
requirement using the prescribed Section 4.0 Veriﬁcation Methods. Since a key objective is to min-
imize test costs, some Section 3.0 requirements may be veriﬁed simultaneously with a single test.
ATPs should reﬂect this approach and note the requirements being veriﬁed.

Who Performs Tests?
Questions often emerge regarding WHO should perform the PART, SUBASSEMBLY, ASSEM-
BLY, SUBSYSTEM, PRODUCT, and SYSTEM level tests. This question has two aspects: testing
personal work products and qualifying test personnel.

Testing Personal Work Products. Testing ranges from informal to highly formal. As a matter
of practice, system designers SHOULD NOT test their own designs, provided that someone else
is capable. The underlying philosophy of this principle is that it this represents a potential conﬂict
of interest in objectively checking off your own work. In most organizations SE designers develop
and perform informal testing of their work products, typically with peer level review scrutiny. Some
organizations create independent test teams and assign them to perform testing at all levels of inte-
gration. Some contracts employ IV&V teams to perform testing, especially of software.

Qualifying Test Personnel. Testing requires knowledge, discipline, observational skills, adher-
ence to safety practices, integrity, accuracy, and precision in reporting test results. In general, CON-
TRACT testing is not for amateurs; it requires training and experience, and often certiﬁcation.
Therefore, organizations should establish in-house command media policies that only testers who
have been trained and certiﬁed for a deﬁned period of time perform tests.

Simultaneous Testing of Multiple Requirements
Testing can rapidly become very expensive and consume valuable schedule resources. Remember,
you only employ TEST where INSPECTION, ANALYSIS, and DEMONSTRATION veriﬁcation
methods are insufﬁcient to demonstrate full compliance with a requirement.
     There are ways to efﬁciently and effectively perform TESTs to reduce costs and schedule. Some
people believe that you conduct one test for each requirement. In general, analyze a performance or
development speciﬁcation to identify dependencies and sets of requirements that can be tested simul-
taneously where TEST is the required veriﬁcation method.

What Is Regression Testing?
SITE can be very expensive. As a result, you want to minimize the amount of rework and retest.
The question is: WHEN you discover a latent defect, design ﬂaw, deﬁciency, or error that requires
                                                                          55.2 SITE Fundamentals          743

corrective action, WHAT tests impacted by the failure must be repeated before you can resume
testing at the test sequence where the failure occurred? The answer resides in regression testing.
     During regression testing only those aspects of the component design that have been impacted
by a corrective action are re-veriﬁed. Form, ﬁt, and function checks of the UUT that were suc-
cessfully completed and not affected by any corrective actions are not re-veriﬁed.

Discrepancy Reports (DRs)
Inevitably, discrepancies will appear between actual test data and bounded expected results spec-
iﬁed in the SPS or item development speciﬁcation. We refer to the occurrence of a discrepancy as
a test event.
     When test events such as failures occur, a Discrepancy Report (DR) is recorded. The Test Direc-
tor should deﬁne WHAT constitutes a test event in the SIVP and event criteria for recording a DR.
     At a minimum, DRs document:
     1. The test event, date, time.
     2. Conditions and prior sequence of steps preceding a test event.
     3. Test article identiﬁcation.
     4. Test conﬁguration.
     5. Reference documents and versions.
     6. Speciﬁc document item requirement and expected results.
     7. Results observed and recorded.
     8. DR author and witnesses or observers.
     9. Degree of signiﬁcance requiring a level of urgency for corrective action.
DRs have levels of signiﬁcance that affect the test schedule. They involve safety issues, data
integrity issues, isolated tests that may not affect other tests, and cosmetic blemishes in the test
article. As standard practice, establish a priority system to facilitate disposition of DRs. An example
is provided in Table 55.1.




Table 55.1 Example test event DR classiﬁcation system

Priority            Event                                          Description

1           Emergency condition        All testing must be TERMINATED IMMEDIATELY due to
                                       imminent DANGER to the Test Operators, test articles, or test
                                       facility.
2           Test component or          Testing must be HALTED until a corrective action is performed.
            conﬁguration failure       Corrective action may require redesign or replacement of a failed
                                       component.
3           Test failure               Testing can continue if the failure does not diminish the integrity
                                       of remaining tests; however, the test article requires corrective
                                       action reveriﬁcation prior to integration at the next higher level.
4           Cosmetic blemish           Testing is permitted to continue, but corrective, action must be
                                       performed prior to system acceptance.
744     Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

SITE Work Products
SITE work products that serve as objective evidence for a single item, regardless of level of abstrac-
tion, include:
      1. A set of dated and signed entries in the Test Log that identify and describe:
         a. Test Team—the name of the responsible engineering team and lead.
         b. Test Article—what “parent” test article was integrated from what version of lower level
            test articles.
         c. Test(s) conducted.
         d. Test results—where recorded and stored.
         e. Problems, conditions, or anomalies—encountered and identiﬁed.
      2. Discrepancy report (DR).
      3. Hardware trouble reports (HTRs) documented and logged.
      4. Software change requests (CRs) documented and logged.
      5. State of readiness of the test article for scheduling formal veriﬁcation.

Guidepost 55.1 This completes our overview of SITE fundamentals. We now shift our attention
to planning for SITE.


55.3 PLANNING FOR SITE

SITE success begins with insightful planning to identify the test objectives; roles; responsibilities,
and authorities; tasking, resources, facilities; and schedule. Testing, in general, involves two types
of test plans:
      1. The Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP).
      2. The System Integration and Veriﬁcation Plan (SIVP).

The Test and Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP)
In general, the TEMP is a User’s document that expresses HOW the User or an Independent Test
Agency (ITA) representing the User’s interests plans to validate the system, product, or service.
From a User’s perspective, development of a new system raises critical operational and technical
issues (COIs/CTIs) that may become SHOWSTOPPERS to validating satisfaction of an organiza-
tion’s operational need. So, the scope of the TEMP covers the Operational Test and Evaluation
(OT&E) period and establishes objectives to verify resolution of COIs/CTIs.
     The TEMP is structured to answer a basic question: Does the system, product, or services, as
delivered, satisfy the User’s validated operational needs—in terms of problem space and solution
space? Answering this question requires formulation of a set of scenario-driven test objectives—
namely use cases and scenarios.

The System Integration and Veriﬁcation Plan (SIVP)
The SIVP is written by the System Developer and expresses their approach for integrating and
testing the SYSTEM or PRODUCT. The scope of the SIVP, which is contract dependent, covers
the Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) period from Contract Award through the formal
System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT), typically at the System Developer’s facility.
                                                          55.4 Establishing the Test Organization   745

      The SIVP identiﬁes objectives, organizational roles and responsibilities, tasks, resource
requirements, strategy for sequencing testing activities, and schedules. Depending on contract
requirements, the SIVP may include delivery, installation, and checkout at a User’s designated job
site.

Developing the System Integration and Test Strategy
The strength of a system integration and test program requires “up front” THINKING to ensure
that the vertical integration occurs just in time (JIT) in the proper sequences. Therefore, the ﬁrst
step is to establish a strong system integration and test strategy.
     One method is to construct a System Integration and Test Concept graphically or by means of
an integration decision tree. The test concept should reﬂect:
    1. WHAT component integration dependencies are critical?
    2. WHO is responsible and accountable for the integration?
    3. WHEN and in WHAT sequence they will be integrated?
    4. WHERE is the integration to be performed?
    5. HOW the components will be integrated?
The SITE process may require a single facility such as a laboratory or multiple facilities within the
same geographic area, or integration across various geographical locations.

Destructive Test Sequence Planning
During the ﬁnal stages of SITE Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E), several test articles
may be required. The challenge for SEs is: HOW and in WHAT sequence do we conduct non-
destructive tests to collect data to verify design compliance prior to conducting destructive test
that may destroy or damage the test article? THINK through these sequences carefully.

Guidepost 55.2 Once the site plans are in place, the next step requires establishing the test
organization.


55.4 ESTABLISHING THE TEST ORGANIZATION

One of the ﬁrst steps following approval of the SIVP is establishing the test organization and assign-
ment of roles, responsibilities, and authorities. Key roles include Test Director, Lab Manager, Tester,
Test Safety Ofﬁcer or Range Safety Ofﬁcer (RSO), Quality Assurance (QA), Security Representa-
tive, and Acquirer/User Test Representative.

Test Director Role
The Test Director is a member of the System Developer’s program and serves as the key decision
authority for testing. Since SITE activities involve interpretation of speciﬁcation statement lan-
guage and the need to access test ports and test points to collect data for test article compliance
veriﬁcation, the Test Director role should be assigned EARLY and be a key participant in System
Design Segment reviews. At a minimum, the primary Test Director responsibilities are:
     1. Develop and implement the SIVP.
     2. Chair the Test and Evaluation Working Group (TEWG), if applicable.
746     Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

       3. Plan, coordinate, and synchronize test team task assignments, resources, and
          communications.
       4. Exercise authoritative control of the test conﬁguration and environment.
       5. Identify, assess, and mitigate test risks.
       6. Review and approve test conduct rules and test procedures.
       7. Account for personnel environmental, safety, and health (ES&H).
       8. Train test personnel.
       9. Prioritize and disposition of discrepancy reports (DRs).
      10. Verify DR corrective actions.
      11. Accomplish contract test requirements.
      12. Preserve test data and results.
      13. Conduct failure investigations.
      14. Coordinate with Acquirer/User test personnel regarding disposition of DRs and test issues.

Lab Manager Role
The Lab Manager is a member of the System Developer’s program and supports the Test Director.
At a minimum, the primary Lab Manager responsibilities are:
      1. Implement the test conﬁguration and environment.
      2. Acquire of test tools and equipment.
      3. Create the laboratory notebook.
      4. Support test operator training.

Test Safety Ofﬁcer or Range Safety Ofﬁcer Role
Since testing often involves unproven designs and test conﬁgurations, safety is a very critical issue,
not only for test personnel but also for the test article and facilities. Therefore, every program should
designate a Safety Ofﬁcer.
     In general, there are two types of test safety ofﬁcers: SITE Test Ofﬁcer and Range Safety
Ofﬁcer (RSO).
      • The Test Safety Ofﬁcer is a member of the System Developer’s organization and supports
        the Test Director and Lab Manager.
      • The Range Safety Ofﬁcer is a member of a test range.
In some cases, Range Safety Ofﬁcers (RSOs) have authority to destruct test articles should they
become unstable and uncontrollable during a test or mission and pose a threat to personnel, facil-
ities, and/or the public.

Tester Role
As a general rule, system, product, or service developers should not test their own designs; it is
simply a conﬂict of interest. However, at lower levels of abstraction, programs often lack the
resources to adequately train testers. So, System Developers often perform their own informal
testing. For some contracts Independent Veriﬁcation and Validation (IV&V) Teams, internal or
external to the program or organization, may perform the testing.
                                                                       55.5 Developing ATPs     747

    Regardless of WHO performs the tester role, test operators must be trained in HOW to safely
perform the test, record and document results, and deal with anomalies. Some organizations for-
mally train personnel and refer to them as certiﬁed test operators (CTOs).

Quality Assurance (QA) Representative
At a minimum, the System Developer’s Quality Assurance Representative (QAR) is responsible for
ensuring compliance with contract requirements, organizational and program command media, the
SIVP, and ATPs for software-intensive system development efforts, a Software Quality Assurance
(SQA) representative is assigned to the program.

Security Representative
At a minimum, the System Developer’s Security Representative, if applicable, is responsible for
the assuring compliance with contract security requirements, organizational and program command
media, the programs security plan and ATPs.

Acquirer Test Representative
Throughout SITE, test issues surface that require an Acquirer decision. Additionally, some
Acquirers represent several organizations, many with conﬂicting opinions. This presents a challenge
for System Developers. One solution is for the Acquirer Program Manager to designate an indi-
vidual to serve as an on-site representative at the System Developer’s facility and provide a single
voice representing all Acquirer viewpoints. Primary responsibilities are to:
    1. Serve as THE single point of contact for ALL Acquirer and User technical interests and
       communications.
    2. Work with the Test Director to resolve any critical operational or technical test issues
       (COIs/CTIs) that affect Acquirer-User interests.
    3. Where applicable by contract, collaborate with the Test Director to assign priorities to dis-
       crepancy reports (DRs).
    4. Where appropriate, review and coordinate approval of acceptance test procedures (ATPs).
    5. Where appropriate, provide a single set of ATP comments that represent a consensus of the
       Acquirer-User organizations.
    6. Witness and approve ATP results.


55.5 DEVELOPING ATPs

In general, ATPs provide the scripts to verify compliance with SPS or item development speciﬁca-
tion requirements. In Chapters 13 through 17 System Mission Concepts, we discussed that an SPS
or item’s development speciﬁcation (IDS) is derived from use cases and scenarios based on HOW
the User envisions using the system, product, or service. In general, the ATPs script HOW TO
demonstrate that the SYSTEM or item provides a speciﬁed set of capabilities for a given phase and
mode of operation. To a test strategy, we create test cases that verify these capabilities as shown
in Table 55.2.

Types of ATPs
ATPs are generally of two types: procedure-based and scenario-based (ATs).
748     Chapter 55    System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

Table 55.2 Derivation of test cases

 Phase of                    Mode of          Use Cases           Use Case           Required           Test Cases
 Operation                  Operation          (UCs)              Scenarios         Operational           (TCs)
                                                                                    Capability

 Pre-mission phase           Mode 1             UC 1.0                                 ROC 1.0             TC 1.0

                                                                Scenario 1.1           ROC 1.1             TC 1._

                                                                                          ...              TC 1._

                                                                Scenario 1.n           ROC 1.n             TC 1._

                                                                                          ...              TC 1._

                             Mode 2             UC 2.0                                 ROC 2.0             TC 2.0

                                                                Scenario 2.1           ROC 2.1             TC 2._

                                                                                          ...              TC 2._

                                                                Scenario 2.n           ROC 2.n             TC 2._

                                                                                          ...              TC 2._

                                                UC 3.0                                 ROC 3.0             TC 3.0

                                                                Scenario 3.1           ROC 3.1             TC 3._

                                                                                          ...              TC 3._

                                                                Scenario 3.n           ROC 3.n             TC 3._

                                                                                          ...              TC 3._

 Mission phase               (Modes)           (Fill-in)           (Fill-in)           (Fill-in)          (Fill-in)

 Post-mission phase          (Modes)           (Fill-in)           (Fill-in)           (Fill-in)          (Fill-in)

Note: A variety of TCs are used to test the SYSTEM/entity’s inputs/outputs over acceptable and unacceptable ranges.




Procedure-Based ATPs. Procedure-based ATPs are highly detailed test procedures that describe
test conﬁgurations, environmental controls, test input switchology, expected results and behavior,
among other details, with prescribed script of sequences and approvals. Consider the example
shown in Table 55.3 for a secure Web site log-on test by an authorized user.

Scenario-Based ATPs. Scenario-based ATPs are generally performed during system validation
either in a controlled facility or in a prescribed ﬁeld environment. Since system validation is
intended to evaluate a system’s capabilities to meet a User’s validated operational needs, those
needs are often scenario based.
     Scenario-based ATPs employ objectives or missions as key drivers for the test. Thus, the ATP
tends to involve very high level statements that describe the operational mission scenario to be
accomplished, objective(s), expected outcome(s), and performance. In general, scenario-based
ATPs defer to the Test Operator to determine which sequences of “switches and buttons” to use
based on operational familiarity with the test article.
                                                                        55.6 Performing SITE Tasks   749

Table 55.3 Example procedure-based acceptance test (AT) form

 Test       Test Operator          Expected         Measured,         Pass/Fail Operator       QA
 Step        Action to be           Results         Displayed,         Results   Initials
             Performed                             or Observed                  and Date
                                                      Results

 Step 1   Using the left        Web browser is     Web site appears     Pass       JD          QA
          mouse button,         launched to                                      4/18/XX      205
          click on the Web      selected Web                                                KW 4/18/XX
          site link.            site.

 Step 2   Using the left        Logon access       As expected          Pass       JD          QA
          mouse button, click   dialogue box                                     4/18/XX      205
          on the “Logon”        opens up.                                                   KW 4/18/XX
          button.

 Step 3   Position the cursor   Fixed cursor       As expected          Pass       JD          QA
          within the User       blinks in ﬁeld.                                  4/18/XX      205
          Name ﬁeld of the                                                                  KW 4/18/XX
          dialogue box.

 Step 4   Enter user ID (max.   Field displayed.   User ID entered      Pass       JD          QA
          of 10 characters)                                                      4/18/XX      205
          and click SUBMIT                                                                  KW 4/18/XX




55.6 PERFORMING SITE TASKS

SITE, as with any system, consists of three phases: pre-testing phase, testing phase, and a post-
testing phase. Each phase consists of a series of tasks for integrating, testing, evaluating, and ver-
ifying the design of an item’s or conﬁguration item (CI). Remember, every system is unique. The
discussions that follow represent generic test tasks that apply to every level of abstraction. These
tasks are highly interactive and may cycle numerous times, especially in the testing phase.

Task 1.0: Perform Pre-test Activities
    • Task 1.1 Conﬁgure the test environment.
    • Task 1.2 Prepare and instrument the test article(s) for SITE.
    • Task 1.3 Integrate the test article into the test environment.
    • Task 1.4 Perform a test readiness inspection and assessment.

Task 2.0: Test and Evaluate Test Article Performance
    • Task 2.1 Perform informal testing.
    • Task 2.2 Evaluate informal test results.
    • Task 2.3 Optimize design and test article performance.
    • Task 2.4 Prepare test article for formal veriﬁcation testing.
    • Task 2.5 Perform a “dry run” test to check out ATP.
750         Chapter 55         System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

Task 3.0: Verify Test Article Performance Compliance
         • Task 3.1 Conduct a test readiness review (TRR).
         • Task 3.2 Formally verify the test article.

Task 4.0: Perform Post-test Follow-up Actions
         • Task 4.1 Prepare item veriﬁcation test reports (VTRs).
         • Task 4.2 Archive test data.
         • Task 4.3 Implement all DR corrective actions.
         • Task 4.4 Refurbish/recondition test article(s) for delivery, if permissible.

Resolving Discrepancy Reports (DRs)
When a test failure occurs and a discrepancy report (DR) is documented, a determination has to be
made as to the signiﬁcance of the problem on the test article and test plan as well as isolation of
the problem source. While the general tendency is to focus on the test article due to its unproven
design, the source of the problem can originate from any one of the test environment elements
shown in Figure 55.2 such as a test operator or test procedure error; test conﬁguration or test envi-
ronment problem, or combinations of these. From these contributing elements we can construct
a fault isolation tree such as the one shown in Figure 55.3. Our purpose during an investigation
such as this is to assume everything is suspect and logically rule out elements by a process of
elimination.
     Once the DR and the conditions surrounding the failure are understood, our ﬁrst decision is to
determine if the problem originated external or internal to the test facility, as applicable. For those
problems originating within the facility, decide if this is a test operator, test article, test conﬁgura-
tion, Test environment, or test measurement problem.
     Since the test procedure is the orchestration mechanism, start with it and its test conﬁguration.
Is the test conﬁguration correct? Was the test environment controlled at all times without any dis-


  1                              3                                                           Problem Source
        LogTest
       Log   Test                    Investigate
                                      Investigate                                        External to Test Facility
                                                                         4
      Discrepancy
       Discrepancy                    TestFailure
                                     Test  Failure
                                                                                                                     5
     2                                                                                                                    ExternalTest
                                                                                                                         External  Test
         Discrepancy                                                         Problem Source
                                                                             Internal to Test
                                                                                                                         Environment
                                                                                                                          Environment
         Report (DR)
                                                                                 Facility                                  Problem
                                                                                                                            Problem
                                                     Observers

                            Test Environment Problem                                                    Test Article Problem
                                                           7             6               8


 9                     10                     11                 12                 13                    14                   15
         Test
          Test              Test
                             Test                 Test
                                                   Test                 Test
                                                                         Test             Test
                                                                                           Test                 Item
                                                                                                                 Item            Test
                                                                                                                                  TestArticle
                                                                                                                                       Article
     Environment
      Environment       Configuration
                         Configuration         Equipment
                                                Equipment             Operator
                                                                       Operator        Procedure
                                                                                        Procedure           Specification
                                                                                                             Specification        Problem
                                                                                                                                   Problem
       Problem
        Problem           Problem
                           Problem              Problem
                                                 Problem              Problem
                                                                       Problem          Problem
                                                                                         Problem              Problem
                                                                                                               Problem           • HW • SW




      16
                         ValidateOperating
                        Validate            Conditions,Sequences
                                  OperatingConditions,                Events,Observations,
                                                        SequencesofofEvents,  Observations,&&Findings
                                                                                              Findings

                                         17
                                               SubmitCorrective
                                              Submit             Action Recommendations
                                                      CorrectiveAction   Recommendations

Figure 55.3 Test Discrepancy Source Isolation Tree
                                        55.7 Common Integration and Test Challenges and Issues   751

continuities? Did the operator perform the steps correctly in the proper sequence without bypass-
ing any? Is the test procedure ﬂawed? Does it contain errors? Was a dry run conducted with the
test procedure prior to verify its logic and steps? If so, the test article may be suspect.
     Whereas people tend to rush to judgment and take corrective action, VALIDATE the problem
source by reconstructing the test conﬁguration, operating conditions, sequence of events, test pro-
cedures, and observations as documented in the test log, DR, and test personnel interviews.
     If the problem originated with the test article, retrace the development of the item in reverse
order to its system development workﬂow. Was the item built correctly per its design requirements?
Was it properly inspected and veriﬁed? If so, was there a problem due to component, material,
process, or workmanship defect(s) or in the veriﬁcation of the item? If so, determine if the test
article will have to be reworked, scrapped, reprocured, or retested. If not, the design or speciﬁca-
tion may be suspect.
     Audit the design. Is it fully compliant with its speciﬁcation? Does the design have an inherent
ﬂaw? Were there errors in translating speciﬁcation requirements into the design documentation?
Was the speciﬁcation requirement misinterpreted? If so, redesign to correct the ﬂaw or error will
have to be performed. If not, since the speciﬁcation establishes the compliance thresholds for
veriﬁcation testing, you may have to consider: 1) revising the speciﬁcation and 2) reallocating
performance budgets and margins. Based on your ﬁndings, recommend, obtain approval, and
implement the corrective actions. Then, perform regression testing based on the where the last val-
idate test unaffected by the failure was completed.


55.7 COMMON INTEGRATION AND TEST
CHALLENGES AND ISSUES

SITE practices often involve a number of challenges and issues for SEs. Let’s explore some of the
more common ones.

Challenge 1: SITE Data Integrity
Deﬁciencies in establishing the test environment, poor test assumptions, improperly trained and
skilled test operators, and an uncontrollable test environment compromise the integrity of engi-
neering test results. Ensuring the integrity of test data and results is crucial for downstream deci-
sion making involving formal acceptance, certiﬁcation, and accreditation of the system.

Warning! Purposeful actions to DISTORT or MISREPRESENT test data are a violation of pro-
fessional and business ethics. Such acts are subject to SERIOUS criminal penalties that are pun-
ishable under federal or other statutes or regulations.

Challenge 2: Biased or Aliased SITE Data Measurements
When instrumentation such as measuring devices are connected or “piggybacked” to “test points”,
the resulting impact can bias or alias test data and/or degrade system performance. Test data capture
should be not degrade system performance. Thoroughly analyze the impact of potential effects of
test device bias or alias on system performance BEFORE instrumenting a test article. Investigate
to see if some data may be derived implicitly from other data. Decide:
    1. How critical the data is needed.
    2. If there are alternative data collection mechanism or methods.
    3. Whether the data “value” to be gained is worth the technical, cost, and schedule risk.
752     Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

Challenge 3: Preserving and Archiving Test Data
The end technical goal of SITE and system veriﬁcation is to establish that a system, product, or
service fully complies with its System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). The validity and integrity
of the compliance decision resides in the formal acceptance test procedure (ATP) results used to
record objective evidence. Therefore, ALL test data recorded during a formal ATP must be pre-
served by archiving in a permanent, safe, secure, and limited access facility. Witnessed or authen-
ticated test data may be required to support:
      1. A functional conﬁguration audit (FCA) and a physical conﬁguration audit (PCA) prior to
         system delivery and formal acceptance by the Acquirer for the User.
      2. Analyses of system failures or problems in the ﬁeld.
      3. Legal claims.
Most contracts have requirements and organizations have policies that govern the storage and reten-
tion of contract data, typically several years after the completion of a contract.

Challenge 4: Test Data Authentication
When formal test data are recorded, the validity of the data should be authenticated, depending on
end usage. Authentication occurs in a number of ways. Generally, the authentication is performed
by an Independent Test Agency (ITA) or individual within the Quality Assurance (QA) organiza-
tion that is trained and authorized to authenticate test data in accordance with prescribed policies
and procedures. Authentication may also be required by higher level bonded, external organiza-
tions. At a minimum, authentication criteria include a witnessed afﬁrmation of the following:
      1. Test article and test environment conﬁguration
      2. Test operator qualiﬁcations and methods
      3. Test assumptions and operating conditions
      4. Test events and occurrences
      5. Accomplishment of expected results
      6. Pass/fail decision
      7. Test discrepancies

Challenge 5: Dealing with One Test Article and
Multiple Integrators and Testers
Because of the expense of developing large complex systems, multiple integrators may be required
to work sequentially in shifts to meet development schedules. This potentially presents problems
when integrators on the next shift waste time uninstalling undocumented “patches” to a build from a
previous shift. Therefore, each SITE work shift should begin with a joint coordination meeting of
persons going off shift and coming on shift. The purpose of the meeting is to make sure everyone com-
municates and understands the current conﬁguration “build” that transpired during the previous shift.

Challenge 6: Deviations and Waivers
When a system or item fails to meet its performance, development, and/or design requirements, the
item is tagged as noncompliant. For hardware, a nonconformance report (NCR) documents the dis-
crepancy and dispositions it for corrective action by a Material Review Board (MRB). For soft-
ware, a software developer submits a Software Change Request (SCR) to a Software Conﬁguration
Control Board (SCCB) for approval. Noncompliances are sometimes resolved by issuing a devia-
tion or waiver, rework, or scrap without requiring a CCB action.
                                        55.7 Common Integration and Test Challenges and Issues    753

Challenge 7: Equipment and Tool Calibration and Certiﬁcation
The credibility and integrity of a V&V effort is often dependent on:
    1. Facilities and equipment to establish a controlled environment for system modeling, simu-
       lation, and testing.
    2. Tools used to make precision adjustments in system/product functions and outputs.
    3. Tools used to measure and record the system’s environment, inputs, and outputs.
    4. Tools used to analyze the system responses based on I/O data.
All of these factors:
    1. Require calibration or certiﬁcation to standards for weights, measures, and conversion
       factors.
    2. Must be traceable to national/international standards.
Therefore, avoid rework and make sure that V&V activities have technical credibility and integrity.
Begin with a ﬁrm foundation by ensuring that all calibration and certiﬁcation is traceable to source
standards.

Challenge 8: Insufﬁcient Time Allocations for SITE
Perhaps one of the most SERIOUS challenges is making time allocations for SITE activities due
to poor program planning and implementation. When organizations bid on system development
contracts, executives bid an aggressive schedule based on some clever strategy to win the contract.
This occurs despite the fact the organization may have had a long-standing history of poor contract
performance such as cost/schedule overruns.
     Technically, the more testing you perform, the more latent defects you can discover due to
design deﬁciencies, ﬂaws, or errors. While every system is different, on average, you should spend
at least 40% of the schedule performing SITE. Most contract programs get behind schedule and
compress that 40% into 10%. As a result, they rush SITE activities and inadequately test the system
to “check the box” for completing schedule tasks.
     There are four primary reasons for this:
    1. Bidding aggressive, unrealistic schedules to win the contract.
    2. Allowing the program to get off schedule, beginning with Contract Award, due to a lack of
       understanding of the problem and solution spaces or poor data delivery performance by
       external organizations.
    3. Rushing immature designs into component procurement and development and ﬁnishing
       them during SITE.
    4. Compressing component procurement and development to “check the box” and boldly
       PROCLAIM that SITE was entered “on time.”
    5. Assigning program management that understands meeting schedules and making proﬁts but
       DOES NOT have a clue about the magnitude of the technical problem to be solved nor
       HOW TO orchestrate successful contract implementation and completion.

Challenge 9: Discrepancy Reporting Obstacles to SITE
One of the challenges of site is staying on schedule while dealing with test discrepancies. Estab-
lish a DR priority system to delineate those DRs from those that do not affect personal or equip-
ment safety and do not jeopardize higher level test results. Establish go/no-go DR criteria to proceed
to the next level of SITE.
754     Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

Challenge 10: DR Implementation Priorities
Humans, by nature, like to work on “fun” things and the easy tasks. So, when DR corrective actions
must be implemented, developers tend to work on those DRs that give them instant credit for com-
pletion. As a result, the challenging DRs get pushed to the bottom of the stack. Then, progress
report metrics proudly proclaim the large quantity of DR corrective actions completed. In an earned
value sense, you have a condition in which 50% of the DRs are completed the ﬁrst month. Sounds
great! Lots of productivity! Wrong! What we have is 50% of the quantity of DRs representing only
10% of the required work to be performed have been completed. Therefore, program technical man-
agement, who also contribute to this decision making, need to do the following:
      1. Prioritize and schedule DRs for implementation.
      2. Allocate resources based on those priorities.
      3. Measure earned value progress based on relative importance or value of DRs.
In this manner, you tackle the hard problems ﬁrst. Executive management and the Acquirer need
to understand and commit their full support to the approach as “the RIGHT thing to do!” As stake-
holders, they need to be participants in the prioritization process.

Challenge 11: Paragraph versus Singular Requirements
In addition to the SE Design Process challenges, the consequences of paragraph-based speciﬁca-
tion requirements arise during SITE. The realities of using a test to demonstrate several dependent
or related requirements scattered in paragraphs throughout a speciﬁcation can create many prob-
lems. THINK SMARTLY “up front” when speciﬁcations are written and create singular require-
ments statements that can be easily checked off as completed.

Referral For more information about singular requirements statements, refer to Chapter 33 on
Requirements Statement Development Practices.

Challenge 12: Credit for Requirements Veriﬁed
The issue of paragraph versus singular requirements also presents challenges during veriﬁcation.
The challenge is paragraph-based requirements cannot be checked off as veriﬁed until ALL of the
requirements in the paragraph have been veriﬁed. Otherwise, say the paragraph has 10 embedded
requirements and you have completed nine. Guess WHAT! You are stuck without a veriﬁcation
check mark until the tenth requirement is veriﬁed. Create singular requirement statements!

Challenge 13: Refurbishing/Reconditioning Test Articles
System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT) articles, especially expensive ones, may be acceptable for deliv-
ery under speciﬁed contract conditions—such as after refurbishment and touch-up. Establish accept-
ance criteria BEFORE the contact is signed concerning HOW SVT articles will be dispositioned
AFTER the completion of system testing. Consult your contract and your program, legal, or con-
tracts organization for guidance in this area.

Challenge 14: Calibration and Alignment of Test Equipment
Testing is very expensive and resource intensive. When the SVT is conducted, most programs are
already behind schedule. During SITE, if it is determined that a test article is misaligned or your
test equipment is out of calibration, you have test data integrity issues to resolve.
                                        55.7 Common Integration and Test Challenges and Issues    755

     Do yourself a favor. Make sure ALL test equipment and tools are certiﬁed to be calibrated and
aligned BEFORE you conduct formal tests. Since calibration certiﬁcations have expiration dates,
plan ahead and have a contingency plan to replace test equipment items with calibration due to
expire during the SITE. Tag all equipment and tools with expired calibration notices that are highly
visible; lock up the expired equipment until calibrated.

Challenge 15: Test “Hooks”
Test hooks provide a means to capture data measurements such as test points, and software data
measurements. Plan for these “hooks” during the SE Design Segment and make sure they do not
bias or alias the accuracy of hardware measurements or degrade software performance. Identify
and visibly tag each one for test reporting and easy removal later. Then, when test article veriﬁca-
tion is completed, make sure all test hooks are removed, unless they are required for higher level
integration tests.

Challenge 16: Anomalies
Anomalies can and do occur during formal SITE. Make sure that test operator personnel and equip-
ment properly log the occurrence and conﬁguration and event SEQUENCES when anomalies occur
to serve as a basis to initiate your investigation.
     Anomalies are particularly troublesome on large complex systems. Sometimes you can isolate
anomalies by luck; other times they are elusive, so you ﬁnd them later by accident. In any case,
when anomalies occur, record the sequence of events and conditions preceding the event. What
appears to be an anomaly as a single event may have patterns of recurrences over time. Tracking
anomaly records over time may provide clues that are traceable to a speciﬁc root or probable
cause.

Challenge 17: Technical Conﬂict and Issue Resolution
Technical conﬂicts and issues can and do arise during formal SITE between the Acquirer’s Test
Representative and the System Developer, particularly over interpretations of readings or data. First,
make sure that the test procedures are explicitly stated in a manner that avoids multiple interpreta-
tions. Where test areas may be questionable, the TEWG should establish prior to or during the Test
Requirements Review (TRR) HOW conﬂicts will be managed. Establish a conﬂict and issue reso-
lution process between the Acquirer (role) and System Developer (role) prior to formal testing.
Document it in the System Integration and Veriﬁcation Plan (SIVP).

Challenge 18: Creating the Real World Scenarios
During SITE planning, there is a tendency to “check-off” individual requirements via individual
tests during veriﬁcation. From a requirements compliance perspective, this has to be accomplished.
However, verifying each requirement as a discrete test may not be desirable. There are two reasons:
1) cost and 2) real world.
     First, just because a speciﬁcation has separately stated requirements does not mean that you
cannot conduct a single test that veriﬁes a multiple number of requirements to minimize costs. This
assumes the test is representative of system usage rather than a random combination of unrelated
capabilities.
     Secondly, most systems consist of multiple capabilities operating simultaneously. In some
cases, interactions between capabilities may conﬂict. This can be a problem, especially if you dis-
cover later after individual speciﬁcation requirement tests that indicated the system is compliant
with the requirements. This point emphasizes the need for use case and scenario based tests and
756     Chapter 55   System Integration, Test, and Evaluation

test cases to exercise and stress combinations of system/entity capabilities to expose potential inter-
action conﬂicts while verifying one or more speciﬁcation requirements.


55.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern SITE practices.

Principle 5.1 Every Acquirer must have one Test Representative who serves as THE single voice
of authority representing the Acquirer-User community concerning SITE decisions.

Principle 5.2 Speciﬁcation compliance requires presentation of work products as objective evi-
dence of satisfactory accomplishment of each requirement. Apply the rule: if it isn’t documented,
it didn’t occur.

Principle 5.3 (Under contract protocol) System Developers invite Acquirer representatives to
observe and/or witness a TEST; Acquirers extend invitations to Users unless prior arrangements
with the System Developer have been made.

Principle 5.4 Every discrepancy has a level of signiﬁcance and importance to the System Devel-
oper and Acquirer. Develop a consensus of priorities and allocate resources accordingly.


55.9 SUMMARY

Our discussion of SITE as one of the veriﬁcation and validation (V&V) practices explored the key activities
of Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) under controlled laboratory conditions. Work products and
quality records from these activities provide the contractual foundation for determining if a system or product
fully complies with its System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS). Data collected during SITE enables SEs to:
      1. Develop conﬁdence in the integrity of the Developmental Conﬁguration.
      2. Support the functional conﬁguration audit (FCA) and physical conﬁguration audit (PCA).
      3. Answer the key veriﬁcation question: Did we build the system or product RIGHT—meaning in com-
         pliance with the SPS?


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
   (a) Describe the primary test conﬁgurations for testing the system.
   (b) Given the size and complexity of the system, recommend a test organization and provide rationale for
       the role-based selections.
   (c) If you were the Acquirer of this system, would you require procedure-based ATPs or scenario-based
       ATPs? Provide supporting rationale.
   (d) What special considerations are required for testing this system—such as OPERATING ENVIRON-
       MENT, tools, and equipment?
                                                                                         Additional Reading      757

   (e) Identify the basic integration and test strategy of steps you would specify in the SIVP.
   (f) What types of DRs do you believe would require the Acquirer’s Test Representative to review and
       approve? Provide examples.


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Research your organization’s command media for SITE policies and procedures.
   (a) Identify the command media requirements by source:
       1. Test planning
       2. Test procedures
       3. Test operator training
       4. Equipment alignment and calibration
       5. Test results reporting format and approvals
   (b) Document your ﬁndings and report your results.
2. Contact two or three contract programs within your organization.
   (a) What type of test plan, test procedures, and reporting requirements—such as the Contract Data
       Requirements List (CDRL)—are established by contract?
   (b) Does the Acquirer have approval of the test plan and procedures?
   (c) When are the test plan and procedures due for review and approval?
       1. How is the program implementing: 1) test logs and 2) test discrepancies (TDs), including TD track-
          ing, emergency approvals, and TD corrective actions?
        2. Are TDs classiﬁed in terms of corrective action urgency? If so, what levels and criteria are used?
        3. Are all TDs required to be resolved prior to system delivery?
        4. What testing does the contract require during site installation for system acceptance?


REFERENCES

DSMC. 1998. Simulation Based Acquisition: A New               MIL-HDBK-470A. 1997. Designing and Developing Main-
  Approach. Defense System Management College                   tainable Products and Systems. Washington, DC. Depart-
  (DSMC) Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.                                 ment of Defense (DoD).
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.              MIL-HDBK-881. 1998. Military Handbook—Work Break-
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th        down Structure, Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  ed. Defense Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.     (DoD).
IEEE Std 610.12-1990. 1990. IEEE Standard Glossary of         MIL-STD-480B (canceled). 1988. Conﬁguration Control—
  Modeling and Simulation Terminology. Institute of Elec-       Engineering Changes, Deviations, and Waivers. Wash-
  trical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE). New York, NY.         ington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
Kossiakoff, Alexander, and Sweet, William N. 2003.            Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 1998. Test
  Systems Engineering Principles and Practice. New York:        and Evaluation Management Guide, 3rd ed. Defense
  Wiley-InterScience.                                           Acquisition University Press Ft. Belvoir, VA.


ADDITIONAL READING

MIL-STD-0810. 2002. DOD Test Method Standard for Environmental Engineering Considerations and Laboratory Tests.
 Washington, DC: Department of Defense (DoD).
Chapter              56

      System Deployment

56.1 INTRODUCTION

Most systems, products, or services require deployment or distribution by their System Developer
or supplier to a User’s designated ﬁeld site. During the deployment, the system may be subjected
to numerous types of OPERATING ENVIRONMENT threats and conditions such as temperature,
humidity, shock, vibration, electromagnetic interference (EMI), electrostatic discharge (ESD), salt
spray, wind, rail, sleet, and snow.
     System deployment involves more than physically deploying the system or product. The
system, at a minimum and as applicable, may also require:
      1. Storage in and/or interface with temporary, interim, or permanent warehouse or support
         facilities.
      2. Assembly, installation, and integration into the User’s Level 0/Tier 0 system.
      3. Support training of operators and maintainers.
      4. Calibration and alignment.
      5. Reveriﬁcation.
To accommodate these challenges, system designs and components must be sufﬁciently robust to
survive in these conditions, either in an operational or nonoperational state. For a system design
to accommodate these challenges, the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) must deﬁne and
bound the required operational capabilities and performance to SATISFY these conditions.
     This chapter is intended to enhance your awareness of key considerations that must be fac-
tored into specifying system, product, or service requirements. During our discussion we will inves-
tigate the key concepts of system transportation, and operational site activation.

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
       1. What is the objective of system deployment?
       2. What is site development?
       3. What types of considerations go into developing a site for a system?
       4. What is operational site activation?
       5. Compare and contrast system deployment versus system distribution.
       6. What is a site survey?
       7. Who conducts site surveys?


System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

758
                                                                               56.1 Introduction    759

     8. How should you approach conducting a site survey?
     9. How should a site survey be conducted?
    10. What are some considerations that need to go into specifying systems for deployment?
    11. What is system installation and checkout?
    12. What are some methods to mitigate risk during system deployment?
    13. Why is environmental, safety, and health (ES&H) a critical issue during system
        deployment?
    14. What are some common system deployment issues?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
    • Deployment The assignment, tasking, and physical relocation of a system, product, or
      service to a new active duty station for purposes of conducting organizational missions.
    • Disposal (Waste) “The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing
      of any solid waste or hazardous waste into or on any land or water. The act is such that the
      solid waste or hazardous waste, or any constituent there of, may enter the environment or
      be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground water (40 CFR section
      260.10).” (Source: AR 200-1 Glossary, p. 37)
    • Operational Site Activation “The real estate, construction, conversion, utilities, and equip-
      ment to provide all facilities required to house, service, and launch prime mission equipment
      at the organizational and intermediate level.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-881, Section H.3.8)
    • Site Installation The process of unpacking, erecting, assembling, aligning, and calibrating
      a system and installing it into a facility, if applicable.
    • Site Selection The process of identifying candidate sites to serve as the location for a system
      deployment and making the ﬁnal selection that balances operational needs with environ-
      mental, historical, cultural, political, and religious constraints or customs.
    • Site Survey A pre-arranged tour of a potential deployment site to understand the physical
      context and terrain; natural, historical, political, and cultural environments; and issues related
      to developing it to accommodate a system.

Objectives of System Deployment
The objective of system deployment is to safely and securely relocate or reposition a system or
product from one ﬁeld site to another using the most efﬁcient methods available with the lowest
acceptable technical, operational, cost, and schedule impacts and risk.
    To accomplish a deployment for most mobile systems, we decompose this objective into
several supporting objectives:
    1. Prepare the system for shipment, including disassembly, inventory, packaging of compo-
       nents, and crating.
    2. Coordinate the land, sea, air, or space based transportation.
    3. Transport the device to the new location.
    4. Store or install the system or product at the new site.
    5. Install, erect, assemble, align, calibrate, checkout, and verify capabilities and performance.
760     Chapter 56   System Deployment

System Deployment Contexts
System deployment has three contexts:
      1. First Article(s) Deployment The relocation of ﬁrst article systems to a test location range
         during the System Development Phase to perform operational test and evaluation (OT&E)
         activities.
      2. Production Distribution Deployment The relocation of production systems via distribution
         systems to User sites or consumer accessible sites.
      3. Physical System Redeployment The relocation of the physical deployed system during the
         System Operations and Support Phase (O&S) of the System/Product Life Cycle.

First Article Deployment. First article(s) deployment tends to be a very intensive exercise. Due
to the cost of some systems, limited quantity, and length of time required to build a system with
long lead time items, system deployment requires very close scrutiny. Time and/or resources may
prohibit building another system, especially if it is inadvertently destroyed or damaged beyond
repair during deployment.
     First article deployment for commercial systems typically includes a lot of promotional fanfare
and publicity. Referred to as a rollout, this event represents a key milestone toward the physical
realization of the end deliverable system, product, or service. Depending on the system, ﬁrst article
deployment may involve moving a ﬁrst article system test facilities or test ranges for completion of
Developmental Test and Evaluation (DT&E) or initiation of Operational Test and Evaluation
(OT&E).

System Certiﬁcation Some systems require certiﬁcation before they are permitted to be
deployed for the System Operations and Support (O&S) phase. Examples are commercial aircraft
airworthiness certiﬁcation, sea trials for ships and submarines, weights and measures for busi-
nesses, calibration of test instrumentation, and so forth.
    Since the certiﬁcation process can take several months or years, perform advance planning
early to avoid any showstopper events that adversely impact program costs and schedules.

Production Distribution System Deployment. Once the system or product is veriﬁed and
validated, it is ready for the System Production Phase to be initiated. Production engineering efforts
focus on the reduction of nonrecurring engineering cost and risk to the system, product, or service.
This includes innovating packaging and delivery solutions to deploy large or mass quantities via
distribution systems to the Users.
     Whereas ﬁrst article deployment tends to focus on protecting the engineering model or proto-
type system or product while in transit, these distribution systems have to efﬁciently move multi-
ple packages via pallets and other instruments. Therefore, the System Developer must factor in
design features that facilitate production and logistical distribution of systems and products, such
as tracking bar coding and packaging for environmental conditions.

56.2 SE ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
DURING DEPLOYMENT

The major SEs activities related to system deployment occur during the System Procurement Phase
and early SE Design Segment of the System Development Phase prior to the System Requirements
Review (SRR). These activities include mission and system analysis, establishing site selection cri-
teria, conducting site surveys, conducting trade-offs, deriving system requirements, and identify-
ing system design and construction constraints.
                                        56.3 Selection and Development of Operational Location   761

    During system deployment, the level of SE support varies depending on the situation. In
general, some systems do not require any SE support. This is because appropriate risk mitigation
plans (RMPs) are already in place. SEs should be available on call to immediately respond to any
emergency or crisis situation. If possible, SEs should actively participate in the deployment and
oversee some or all of the support operations.

Applying SE to Deployment
One of the preferred ways to identify SE requirements for deployment applications is to use a
system block diagram (SBD). The SBD depicts the System Elements (EQUIPMENT, PERSON-
NEL, etc.) and their interfaces during the System Deployment Phase. Speciﬁc system engineering
considerations include physical interfaces between the system being deployed and its transporta-
tion system as well as the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT encountered during the deployment.

System Deployment Interfaces
System deployment requires mechanical interfaces and measurement devices between the trans-
portation device or container and the SYSTEM being deployed. This includes electronic tempera-
ture, humidity, shock, and vibration sensors to assess the health and status of the deployed SYSTEM
and record worst case transients.
     OPERATING ENVIRONMENT interfaces establish the conditions of the transfer of the system
during the deployment. These may involve shock and vibration, temperature, humidity, wind
conditions, and toxic or hazardous materials. Additional special considerations may include
environmentally controlled transport containers to maintain or protect against cooling, heating, or
humidity.
     Each of these interfaces represents potential types of requirements for the System Performance
Speciﬁcations (SPS). These requirements must be identiﬁed during the System Procurement Phase
of the System/Product Life Cycle of a program to ensure that the SE design of the deployed system
fully accommodates these considerations.

Author’s Note 56.1 Unless there are compelling reasons, the System Developer does not need
to be instructed in HOW to deploy the system for delivery or during the System Operations and
Support (O&S) Phase. Instead, the required operational interface capabilities and performance
should be bounded to allow the System Developer the ﬂexibility to select the optimal mix of deploy-
ment method(s).

Deployment Modes of Transportation Selection
Transportation by land, sea, air, space or combinations of these options is the way most systems,
products, and services get from Point A to Point B. Each mode of transportation should be inves-
tigated in a trade study analysis of alternative modes that includes cost, schedule, efﬁciency, and
timing considerations.


56.3 SELECTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF
OPERATIONAL LOCATION

Preparations for system or product deployment to a ﬁeld site require that the location be selected,
developed, and activated. On delivery of the system, the site must be operationally ready to accept
the system or product for system installation and integration into a higher level system (i.e., Level
0/Tier 0).
762    Chapter 56   System Deployment

      Development of the deployment site to support the system depends on the mission. Some
systems require temporary storage until they are ready to be moved to a permanent location. Others
require assembly, installation, and integration into a higher level system without disruption to exist-
ing facility operations. Some facilities provide high bays with cranes to accommodate system
assembly, installation, and integration. Other facilities may require you to provide your own rental
or leased equipment such as cranes and transport vehicles.
      Whatever the plan is for the facility, SEs are tasked to select, develop, and activate the ﬁeld
site. These activities include site surveys, site selection, site requirements derivation, facility engi-
neering or site planning, site preparation, and system deployment safety and security.

Special Site Selection Considerations
In our discussion of the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT architecture in Chapter 11, we noted that
external HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS include historical, ethnic, and cultural systems that must be
considered and preserved when deploying a system. The same is true for NATURAL ENVIRON-
MENT ecosystems such as wetlands, rivers, and habitat.

The Need for Site Surveys
On-site surveys reveal signiﬁcant information about doorways sizes, blocked entrances, entrance
corridors with hairpin switchbacks, considerations of 60 Hz versus 50 Hz versus 400 Hz electrical
power, 110 vac versus 230 vac, and so on, that drive SPS requirements. So, research and carry facil-
ity documentation with you. Visually observe the facility and measure it, if required, and validate
the currency of the documentation.

Author’s Note 56.2 Site surveys are crucial for validating User documentation for decision
making and observing obstacles. Organizational source documentation of ﬁelded MISSION
SYSTEMS and SUPPORT SYSTEMS tends to be lax; drawings are often out of date and do not
reﬂect current conﬁgurations of EQUIPMENT and FACILITIES. ALWAYS make it a point to visit
the location of the deployment, preferably AFTER a thorough review of site documentation. If
impractical, you had better have an innovative, cost plus ﬁxed fee (CPFF) contract or another con-
tract that provides the ﬂexibility to cover your costs at the Acquirer-User’s expense for the
UNKNOWN risks.

Given this backdrop, let’s address how site surveys are planned and conducted.

Planning and Conducting Site Surveys
Site surveys provide a key opportunity for a Site Survey Team to observe how the User envisions
operating and maintaining a system, product, or service. Many sites may not be developed or pos-
tured to accommodate a new system. However, legacy systems typically exist that are comparable
and provide an invaluable opportunity to explore the site and determine design options. These
options may pertain to constrained spaces that limit hands-on access, height restrictions, crawl
spaces, lighting, environmental control, communications, and so on. For system upgrades, the Site
Survey Team can explore various options for installation.
     Site surveys are also valuable means of learning about the environmental and operational chal-
lenges. Generally, the site surveys consist of a preparatory phase during which NATURAL ENVI-
RONMENT information about geographical, geologic, and regional life characteristics are collected
and analyzed to properly understand the potential environmental issues.
     Site surveys are more than surveying the landscape; the landscape includes environmental, his-
torical, and cultural artifacts and sensitivities. As such, site survey activities include developing a list
                                         56.3 Selection and Development of Operational Location    763

of critical operational technical issues (COIs/CTIs) to be resolved. For existing facilities, the site
surveys also provide insights concerning the physical state of the existing facility, as well as
COIs/CTIs related to modifying the building or integrating the new system while minimizing inter-
ruptions to the organization’s workﬂow.

Site Survey Decision Criteria. Site selection often involves conducting a trade study. This
requires identifying and weighting decision criteria based on the User values and priorities. Col-
laborate with the User via the Acquirer contract protocol to establish the decision criteria. Each cri-
terion requires identifying HOW and from WHOM the data will be collected while on site or as
follow-up data requests via the Acquirer.
     Decision criteria include two types of data: quantitative and qualitative.
    • Quantitative For example, the facility operates on 220 vac, 3-phase, 60 Hz power.
    • Qualitative For example, WHAT problems you encountered with the existing system that
      you would like to AVOID when installing, operating, and supporting the new system.
Obviously, we prefer all data to be quantitative. However, qualitative data may express HOW the
User truly feels about an existing system or the agony of installing it. Therefore, structure open-
ended questions in a manner that encourages the User to provide elaborate answers—such as, given
Options A or B, WHICH would you prefer and WHY?

Site Survey Data Collection. When identifying the list of site data to be collected, prioritize
questions to accommodate time restrictions for site personnel interviews. There is a tendency to
prepare site survey forms, send them out for responses, and then analyze the data. While this can
be helpful in some cases, potential respondents today do not have time to ﬁll out surveys.
     One method for gaining advance information may come from alternative sources such satel-
lite or aerial photos, assuming they are current, and teleconferences with the site personnel. So,
when conducting teleconferences, ask open-ended and clariﬁcation questions that encourage the
participants to answer freely rather than asking closed-ended questions that draw yes or no answers.

Site Survey Advance Coordination. One of the most fundamental rules of site surveys is
advance coordination via Acquirer contract protocol. Security clearances, transportation, use of
cameras and tape recorders, if permitted, are useful forms of documentation.

Author’s Note 56.3 ALWAYS confer with site ofﬁcials prior to the visit as to what media are
permitted on site for data collection and any data approvals required before leaving. Some organ-
izations require data requests to be submitted during the visit with subsequent internal approvals
and delivery following the visit.

Conducting the Site Visit. During the site visit, observe and ask about everything related to
the system or product’s deployment, installation, integration, operation, and support including
processes and procedures. LEAVE NOTHING TO CHANCE! Before you leave, request some time
to assemble your team and reconcile notes. THINK about WHAT you saw and DIDN’T see that you
EXPECTED or would have EXPECTED to see and WHY NOT. If necessary, follow up on these
questions before you leave the site.

Selecting the Deployment Site
System deployment sites vary as a function of system mission. Consider the following examples:
764    Chapter 56   System Deployment


 EXAMPLE 56.1
A computer system for an organization may have a limited number of deployment sites within an ofﬁce build-
ing, even within the room of the existing computer system being replaced.



 EXAMPLE 56.2
The NASA Surveyor and Apollo programs had to select landing sites on the Moon.



 EXAMPLE 56.3
A business may require immediate access to a multi-modal facility that provides land, sea, and air
transportation.



 EXAMPLE 56.4
An astronomical observatory may require a remote, unpopulated location far from the effects of atmospheric
haze and scattering of city lights.



 EXAMPLE 56.5
Nuclear power plants require water resources—a MISSION RESOURCES Element—for cooling towers.

Site selection requires establishing boundary constraints that impact site selection. These include
environmental threats to wildlife habitat, drinking water aquifers, preservation of historical and cul-
tural sites, and political and religious sensitivities.

Site FACILITY Engineering Planning and Development
Successful system deployment at operational sites begins with the Site Activation Concept. The
basic idea is to identify HOW and WHERE the User considers deploying the SYSTEM at the site,
either permanently or temporarily.
     In the Introduction of this book, we stated that system success BEGINS with successful
ENDINGS. This requires deriving all the hierarchical tasks and activities that contribute to achiev-
ing success before any insightful planning, preparation, and enroute coordination of events, accom-
plishments, and criteria identiﬁed in the Integrated Master Plan (IMP) can take place. Such is
particularly the case for facility engineering.

Modifying Existing Facilities. Preparation for operational site activation begins with estab-
lishing the FACILITY interface requirements to accommodate the new system. The mechanism for
identifying and specifying these requirements is the facility interface speciﬁcation (FIS). The FIS
speciﬁes and bounds the boundary envelope conditions, capabilities and performance requirements
to ensure that all facility interfaces are capable, compatible, and interoperable with the new
SYSTEM.

Developing the Operational Site Activation Plan. The operation site activation plan
describes the organization, roles and responsibilities, tasks, resources, and schedule required to
                                        56.3 Selection and Development of Operational Location    765

develop and activate a new facility or to modify an existing facility. One of the key objectives of
the plan is to describe HOW the system will be installed, aligned, calibrated, and integrated, as
applicable, into higher level systems without interrupting normal operations, if relevant.

Site Development Planning Approvals. Approval of operational site activation plans some-
times requires several months or even years. At issue are things such as statutory and regulatory
compliance, environmental impact considerations, and presence of historical artifacts. As an SE,
AVOID the notion that all you have to do is simply write the plan and have it approved in a few
days. When you prepare the plan, employ the services of a subject matter expert (SME) to make
sure that all key tasks in activities are properly identiﬁed and comply with federal, state, and local
statutes, regulations, and ordinances. Identify:
    1. WHO are the key decision makers?
    2. WHAT types of documentation are required to successfully complete the exercise?
    3. WHEN must documentation be submitted for approval?
    4. WHERE and to WHOM should documentation approval requests be submitted?
    5. HOW long is the typical documentation approval cycle?
Other key considerations include zoning restrictions, permits or licenses, certiﬁcations, deviations,
and waivers.

Site Preparation and Development
Site preparation includes all those activities required before the site can be developed to accept the
deployed system. This may include grading the land, building temporary bridges, and installating
primary power utility, sewer and drain lines.

Site Inspections. When the site has been prepared, the next step is to conduct site inspections.
Site inspections may consist of on-site compliance assessments:
    1. By the stakeholders to ensure that everything is in place to accept the new system.
    2. By local and Acquirer representative authorities to verify compliance to statutory and
       regulatory constraints.

Author’s Note 56.4 Site inspections sometimes involve closed mindedness that has to be rec-
ognized and reconciled. As humans, we typically enter into site inspections from the perspective of
viewing WHAT is currently in place. This is true especially for compliance checks. The critical
issue, however, may be determining WHAT is NOT in place or compliant.
     Remember, local authorities verify whether site capabilities comply with local and statutory
requirements. They do not, however, make a determination as to whether the site has ALL of the
capabilities and people required to successfully support your system once it is be deployed. This
is the SE’s job! Therefore, make sure that all System Elements to be deployed are in place. Incor-
porate these requirements to the facility interface speciﬁcation (FIS).

Enroute Modiﬁcations. Some system deployment efforts require temporary modiﬁcations to
enroute roads and bridges, utility power poles and lines, signal light relocation, trafﬁc rerouting,
and road load bearing. Consider the following example:
766    Chapter 56    System Deployment


 EXAMPLE 56.6
An existing home is to be physically relocated elsewhere within a town. In preparation for the move, coordi-
nation is required to temporarily move utility lines and reroute trafﬁc. In addition to the necessary permits and
licenses, law enforcement ofﬁcers will need to redirect trafﬁc and utility crews will need to reinstate utility
lines, including telephone, power, and signal lights cables.

System Deployment Safety and Security. The deployment of a new system from one loca-
tion to another should be performed as expeditiously, efﬁciently, and effectively as practical. The
intent is to safely and securely transport the system with minimal impact to it, the public, and the
environment. Safety and security planning considerations include protecting the system to be
deployed, the personnel who perform the deployment, and the support equipment.
     System engineering requirement considerations should include modularity of the equipment.
This means the removal of computer hard drives containing sensitive data that require special han-
dling and protection. The same is true with hazardous materials such as ﬂammable liquids, toxic
chemicals, explosives, munitions, and ordinances. In these cases special equipment and tools may
be needed to ensure their safe and secure transport by courier or by security teams. Additionally,
environmental, safety, and health (ESH) Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) should accompany
the deployment.

56.4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS
DURING DEPLOYMENT

Environmental concerns have a major impact on all facets of system analysis, design, and devel-
opment as well as on all phases of the system/product life cycle.

Statutory and Regulatory Requirements
Statutory and regulatory requirements concerning environmental protection and transportation of
hazardous materials (HAZMAT) are mandated by local, state, federal, and international organiza-
tions. These regulations are intended to protect the cultural, historical, religious, and political envi-
ronment and the public. SEs have signiﬁcant challenges in ensuring that new systems and products
are properly speciﬁed, developed, deployed, operated, supported, and fully comply with statutory
and regulatory requirements. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 56.7
The US National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
establishes requirements on system deployment, operations, and support that impact the natural environment.
In many cases System Developers, Acquirers, and Users are required to submit advance documentation such as
Environmental Impact Statements (EIS) and other types of documents for approval prior to implementation.

Author’s Note 56.5 ALWAYS consult the provisions of your contract as well as with your con-
tracts; legal; and environmental, safety, and health (ESH) organizations for guidance in comply-
ing with the appropriate statutory and regulatory environmental requirements.

Environmental Mitigation Plans
Despite meticulous planning, environmental emergencies can and do occur during the deployment
of a system. Develop risk mitigation plans and coordinate resources along the transportation route
                                              56.5 System Installation, Integration, and Checkout   767

to clean up and remediate any environmental spills or catastrophes. Transportation vehicles,
systems, and shipping containers should fully comply with all applicable federal and state statutory
regulatory laws for labeling and handling. Organizations such as the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), et al may require submittal of environmental documentation for certain types of
programs. Investigate how the US National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and other legislation
applies to your system’s development and deployment.

Environmental Safety and Health (ES&H)
Environmental safety and health (ES&H) is a critical issue during system development and deploy-
ment. The objective is to safely and securely relocate a SYSTEM without impacting the system’s
capabilities and performance or endangering the health of the public or NATURAL ENVIRON-
MENT, nor that of the deployment team. ALWAYS investigate the requirements to ensure that the
ES&H concerns are properly addressed in the design of the equipment as well as the means of
transportation. ISO 14000 serves as the international standard used to assess and certify organiza-
tional environmental management processes and procedures.
     Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910 is the occupational
safety and health standard in the US.

Environmental Reclamation
Environmental resources are extremely fragile. Today, great effort is being made to preserve the
natural environment for future generations to enjoy. Therefore, during the transport of a system to
a new job site, the risk of spills and emissions into the atmosphere should be minimized and miti-
gated to a level acceptable by law or eliminated.


56.5 SYSTEM INSTALLATION,
INTEGRATION, AND CHECKOUT

Once the ﬁeld site is prepared to accept the system, the next step is to install, integrate, and check
out the system if the system’s mission is at this facility. This requires conducting various levels of
system installation and checkout tests.

Installation and Checkout Plan Activities
Installation and checkout activities cover a sequence of activities, organizational roles and respon-
sibilities, and tasks before the newly deployed system can be located at a speciﬁc job site. SYSTEM
requirements that are unique to on-site system installation and integration must be identiﬁed
by analysis and incorporated into the System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) PRIOR TO the
Contract Award.

User Training
When a new system is ready to be deployed, a key task is to train Users to deploy, install, and
check out the system. Generally, a system development contract will require the System Developer
to train Users PRIOR TO disassembly for deployment from the System Developer’s or system inte-
gration facility. The training sessions should prepare Users to safely and properly operate and to
support Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E) during the ﬁnal portions of the System Devel-
opment Phase.
768     Chapter 56   System Deployment

“Shadow” Operations
Installation and checkout of new systems may require integration into higher level systems. The
integration may involve the new system as an additional element or as a replacement for an exist-
ing or legacy system. Whichever is the case, system integration often involves critical operational
and technical issues (COIs/CTIs), especially from the standpoint of interoperability and security.
     Depending on the criticality of the system, some Acquirers and Users require the new system
to operate in a “shadow” mode to validate system responses to external stimuli while the existing
system remains in place as the primary operating element. Upon completion of the evaluation,
assessment, and certiﬁcation, the new system may be brought “on line” as an Initial Operational
Capability (IOC). Incremental capabilities may be added until Full Operational Capability (FOC)
is achieved. To illustrate the criticality and importance of this type of deployment and integration,
consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 56.8
Financial organizations such as banks depend on highly integrated, audited, certiﬁed systems that validate the
integrity of the overall system. Consider the magnitude and signiﬁcance of decisions related to integrating
either new or replacement software systems to ensure interoperability without degrading system performance
or compromising the integrity of the system or its security.


56.6 SYSTEM DEPLOYMENT
ENGINEERING CONSIDERATIONS

System deployment engineering requires SEs to consider two key areas of system deployment:
      • Operational transport considerations
      • Environmental considerations
Table 56.1 provides system design areas for assessment.
     Systems such as construction equipment cranes, bulldozers, the Space Shuttle, and military
equipment are designed for multiple redeployments. In most cases the system is loaded onto a trans-
port vehicle such as truck, aircraft, train, or ship.
     Once loaded, the primary restrictions for travel include compatible tiedowns, load weights,
size limitations, bridge underpass height, and shock/vibration suppression. Some systems may
require shipping in specialized containers that are environmentally controlled for temperature,
humidity, and protection from salt spray. How do engineers accommodate these restrictions and
AVOID surprises at deployment?
     The deployment engineering solution requires a structured analysis approach based on the
System Operations Model discussed in Chapter 18. Perform operational and task analysis by
sequencing the chain of events required to move the system from Point A to Point B. This includes
cost, performance, and risk trade-offs for competing land, sea, and air modes of transportation and
transport mechanisms such as truck, aircraft, ship, and train.
     Once the modes of transportation issues are resolved, develop system interface diagrams for
each phase of deployment. Specify and bound system requirements and incorporate them into the
System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) or system design.

Guidepost 56.1 Our discussion has focused on deploying a MISSION SYSTEM and designing
it to be compatible with an existing system performing a SUPPORT SYSTEM role. Now, let’s switch
the context and consider WHAT mission capabilities a SUPPORT SYSTEM requires.
                                                56.7 Common System Deployment Challenges            769

Table 56.1 System deployment engineering considerations

System Deployment Consideration                                          System Design

Operational transport considerations                      • Tie downs, hold downs, and safety chains
                                                          • Lift points
                                                          • Land grades
                                                          • Emergency stopping
                                                          • Auxiliary power
                                                          • Vehicle markings
                                                          • Mock dry runs with simulated equipment
                                                          • System security
                                                          • Maintenance
                                                          • Bridge, highway, and street load restrictions
                                                          • Bridge and power line height restrictions.
Environmental considerations                              • Shock and vibration
                                                          • Saltwater and spray
                                                          • Temperature and humidity control
                                                          • Electrical ﬁelds and discharges (grounding)
                                                          • Flying debris
                                                          • Altitude and atmospheric pressure changes
                                                          • Environmental instrumentation
                                                          • Hazardous materials




Support Equipment
System design involves more than creating interfaces between a MISSION SYSTEM and its
SUPPORT SYSTEM. Support equipment such as tools, sensors, and diagnostic equipment is often
required to establish the interfaces for travel. Remember, support equipment includes:
    1. Common Support Equipment (CSE) includes hammers, screwdrivers, and other hand tools
       that are applicable to most systems.
    2. Peculiar Support Equipment (PSE) includes specialty tools and devices that are unique to
       a speciﬁc system.


56.7 COMMON SYSTEM DEPLOYMENT CHALLENGES

Depending on the risks associated with the system, deployment route, and site, deployment activ-
ities generate a lot of excitement and challenges. Let’s investigate a few.

Challenge 1: Risk Mitigation Planning
When systems or products are deployed, the natural tendency is to assume you have selected the
best approach for deployment. However, political conditions in foreign countries, such as labor
strikes, can disrupt system deployment and force you to reconsider alternative methods. Develop
risk mitigation plans that accommodate all or the most likely scenarios.

Challenge 2: Conduct a Mock Deployment
For large, complex systems and that require special handling considerations, a mock deployment
exercise may be appropriate. A mock deployment involves some form of prototype or model having
770    Chapter 56      System Deployment

Table 56.2 System deployment design and development rules

ID             Title                         System Deployment Design and Development Rule

56.1   System deployment         Bound and specify the set of system deployment requirements and
       requirements              constraints for every system, product, or service in the System
       and constraints           Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
56.2   Deployment                When planning deployment of a system or product, at a minimum, consider
       conditions                the following factors:
                                 1. Deployment routes
                                 2. System safety
                                 3. System security
                                 4. Logistical support operations
                                 5. Training
                                 6. Licenses, certiﬁcations, and permits
                                 7. System/product stowage and protection during shipment
                                 8. Environmental conditions (weather and road, etc.)
56.3   Deployment                For systems or products that require facility interfaces, specify and bound
       facilities                interface requirements via a facility interface speciﬁcation (FIS) or
                                 equivalent.
56.4   Site activation           Prepare a site activation plan for every system, product, or service for
                                 review and approval by the User and support facility.
56.5   System design             When developing a system, product, or service factor, at a minimum, factor
                                 in considerations to protect a system during deployment operations and
                                 conditions to minimize the effects of physical harm such as appearance,
                                 form, ﬁt, or function.
56.6   Deployment                Verify that a system, product, or service design is compatible and
       interfaces                interoperable, if necessary, with the deployment mechanism used to deploy
                                 the system to its designated ﬁeld site.
56.7   Stakeholder               When planning deployment of a system or product, include considerations
       decision-making           by those stakeholder organizations that permit system deployment through
       participation             their jurisdictions—bridge heights above roads and weights permitted;
                                 barge, truck, aircraft payload restrictions; hazardous material passage
                                 through public areas, and aircraft landing constraints.



comparable form, ﬁt, and weight to the actual system being ﬁctionally transported to an approved
site. The exercise debugs the deployment process and facilitates identiﬁcation of unanticipated
scenarios and events for the processes, methods, and tasks of deployment.

Challenge 3: Stakeholders Participation in Decision Making
System deployment often involves large numbers of geographically dispersed stakeholders. There-
fore, stakeholders should be actively involved in the decision-making process, from the early plan-
ning stage but subject to contract type limitations. So, what happens if you do not include these
stakeholders?
     Depending on the situation, a stakeholder could become a SHOWSTOPPER and signiﬁcantly
impact system deployment schedules and costs. Do yourself and your organization a favor. Under-
stand the deployment, site selection and development, and system installation and integration
decision-making chain. This is key to ensuring success when the time comes to deploy the system.
                                                                                    56.9 Summary      771

AVOID a “downstream” SHOWSTOPPER situation simply because you and your organization
chose to IGNORE some odd suggestions and views during the System Development Phase.

Challenge 4: System Security During Deployment
Some systems require a purposeful deployment using low proﬁle or visibility methods to minimize
publicity, depending on the sensitivity and security of the situation.

Challenge 5: Shock and Vibration
Professional systems and products such as instruments can be very sensitive to shock and vibra-
tion. Plan ahead for these critical design factors. Make sure that the system in a stand-alone mode
is adequately designed to offset any shock or vibration conditions that occur during deployment.
This includes establishing appropriate design safety margins. If appropriate, the SPS should specify
shock and vibration requirements.

Challenge 6: Hazardous Material (HAZMAT) Spillage
When transporting EQUIPMENT systems and products that contain various ﬂuids, hazardous mate-
rial (HAZMAT) spillage is always a major concern, particularly for wildlife estuaries, rivers, and
streams, but also underground water acquifers. Perform insightful ES&H planning and coordina-
tion to ensure that SUPPORT SYSTEMS—such as PERSONNEL, PROCEDURAL DATA, and
EQUIPMENT—are readily available to enable the SUPPORT SYSTEM to rapidly respond to a
hazardous event.

Challenge 7: Workforce Expertise Availability
Service contracts are often bid on the assumption of employing local resources to perform system
operations, support, and maintenance. DO NOT ASSUME ANYTHING. Unless you are certain
that these resources are dependable and will commit to the contract, you may be at risk. ALWAYS
have a contingency plan!


56.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern system deployment practices.

Principle 56.1 Specify and bound a system’s deployment mode(s) of transportation, distribu-
tion methods, and constraints; otherwise, the system’s form, ﬁt, and function may be incompatible
with its deployment delivery system.

Principle 56.2 Site survey data quality begins with advance coordination and insightful plan-
ning. Obtain what you need on the ﬁrst trip; you may not be permitted for a second visit.


56.9 SUMMARY

During our discussion of system deployment, we highlighted the importance for SEs to thoroughly understand
all of the system deployment issues and ensure that requirements are properly addressed in the contract and
System Performance Speciﬁcations (SPS). When the system is being deployed, SEs should be involved to
ensure that the system interfaces to the appropriate means of transportation and facilities.
772    Chapter 56     System Deployment

GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Speciﬁcally identify the following:
3. Research the following topics and investigate how the system was deployed—packaging, handling, ship-
   ping, and transportation (PHS&T)—during integration and on system delivery to its ﬁeld site:
   (a) International Space Station (ISS)
   (b) Hubble Space Telescope (HST)
   (c) Construction crane
   (d) Portable electronic device


ORGANIZATIONAL EXERCISES

1. Research your organizational command media for guidance concerning system deployment
   operations.
   (a) What requirements are imposed on system deployment requirements and design considerations?
   (b) What work products or quality records are required?
2. Contact several contract programs within your organization.
   (a) What system deployment requirements are stated in the contract and System Performance
       Speciﬁcation (SPS)?
   (b) What capabilities and features are incorporated into the system design to comply with these
       requirements?
   (c) Does the program have a system deployment plan? If so, what types of routes, means of transporta-
       tion, licenses, and permits are planned?
   (d) Did the program have requirements for measurement of deployment conditions—such as shock,
       vibration, temperature, and humidity?
   (e) How were countermeasures to temperature, humidity, shock, vibration, ESD, and salt spray
       accommodated in the design or packaging?


REFERENCES

AR 200-1. 1997. Army Regulation: Environmental Protec-     MIL-HDBK-881. 1998. Military Handbook—Work Break-
 tion and Enhancement. Washington, DC: Department of        down Structure. Washington, DC: Department of
 Defense (DoD).                                             Defense.


ADDITIONAL READING

ISO 14000 Series. Environmental Management. Interna-         Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Washington,
  tional Organization for Standardization (ISO). Geneva,     DC: Government Printing Ofﬁce.
  Sweden.                                                  Public Law 91-190. 1969. National Environmental Policy
MIL-STD-882D. 2000. System Safety. Washington, DC:           Act (NEPA). Washington, DC: Government Printing
  Department of Defense (DoD).                               Ofﬁce.
OSHA 29 CFR 1910, (on-line always current date) Occu-
  pational Safety and Health Standards, Occupational
Chapter              57

     System Operations and Support

57.1 INTRODUCTION

As the preceding chapters have illustrated, the engineering of systems is not complete when the
Acquirer formally accepts a new system for the User. In terms of SE level of effort to support the
development of the system, product, or service this is true; however, the system performance
assessment activities continue throughout the system’s active duty service. Thus, when the system
acceptance is complete, the System Operations and Support (O&S) phase begins. Depending on
the type of system, product, or service, SE technical and analytical expertise may be required to
monitor, track, and analyze system performance in the ﬁeld.
     Our discussion of system performance returns to where we started, to the System Element
Architecture that forms the basis for HOW a system, product, or service is intended to operate.
Since the SYSTEM OF INTEREST (SOI) is composed of one or more MISSION SYSTEMS that
are supported by one or more SUPPORT SYSTEMS, we will approach the discussion from those
two perspectives.
     Our discussions explore system performance related to the MISSION SYSTEM and the
SUPPORT SYSTEM. This includes:
     1. Elimination of latent defects such as design ﬂaws, errors, or safety issues.
     2. Identiﬁcation and removal of defective materials or components.
     3. Optimization of system performance.
These activities also represent the BEGINNING of collecting requirements for:
     1. Procuring follow-on systems, products, or services.
     2. Upgrading capabilities of the existing system.
     3. Reﬁning current system performance.

Author’s Note 57.1 This chapter has a twofold purpose. First, it provides the basis for assess-
ing the operational utility, suitability, availability, and effectiveness of new systems to ensure that
they integrate and achieve levels of performance that satisfy organizational mission and system
application objectives. Second, as we saw in Chapter 7 in our discussion of the System/Product
Life Cycle, gaps evolve in a system, product, or service’s capability to meet organizational objec-
tives or external threats. In this chapter we learn about legacy and new system performance and
need for developing operational capability requirements for the next generation of system, product,
or service.



System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                   773
774     Chapter 57   System Operations and Support

What You Should Learn from This Chapter
      1. What are the primary objectives for system operation and support (O&S)?
      2. What are key areas for monitoring and analyzing SYSTEM level performance?
      3. What are key questions for assessing system element performance?
      4. What are common methods for assessing SYSTEM and element performance?
      5. What are the key SE focus areas for current system performance?
      6. What are the key SE focus areas for planning next generation systems?

Deﬁnitions of Key Terms
      • Equipment, Powered Ground (PGE) “An assembly of mechanical components including
        an internal combustion engine or motor, gas turbine, or steam turbine engine mounted as a
        single unit on an integral base or chassis. Equipment may pump gases, liquids, or solids; or
        produce compressed, cooled, refrigerated or heater air; or generate electricity and oxygen.
        Examples of this equipment: portable cleaners, ﬁlters, hydraulic test stands, pumps and
        welders, air compressors, air conditioners. Term applies primarily to aeronautical systems.”
        (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 20)
      • Field Maintenance “That maintenance authorized and performed by designated mainte-
        nance activities in direct support of using organizations. It is normally limited to replace-
        ment of unserviceable parts, subassemblies, or assemblies.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908,
        Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 15)
      • Human Performance “A measure of human functions and action in a speciﬁed environment,
        reﬂecting the ability of actual users and maintainers to meet the system’s performance stan-
        dards, including reliability and maintainability, under the conditions in which the system will
        be employed.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 18)
      • Line Replaceable Unit (LRU) Refer to deﬁnition in Chapter 42 on System Conﬁguration
        Identiﬁcation Practices.
      • Logistic Support Analysis (LSA) “The selective application of scientiﬁc and engineering
        efforts undertaken during the acquisition process, as part of the system engineering and
        design processes to assist in complying with supportability and other Integrated Logistics
        Support (ILS) objectives. ILS is a management process to facilitate development and inte-
        gration of logistics support elements to acquire, ﬁeld and support a system. These elements
        include: design, maintenance planning, manpower and personnel, supply support, support
        equipment, training, packaging and handling, transport, standardization and interoperabil-
        ity.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 20)
      • Maintenance “All actions necessary for retaining material in (or restoring it to) a service-
        able condition. Maintenance includes servicing, repair, modiﬁcation, modernization, over-
        haul, inspection, condition determination, corrosion control, and initial provisioning of
        support items.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-1908, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 21)
      • Problem Report A formal document of a problem with or failure of MISSION SYSTEM
        or SUPPORT SYSTEM hardware—such as the EQUIPMENT System Element.
      • Provisioning “The process of determining and acquiring the range and quantity (depth) of
        spares and repair parts, and support and test equipment required to operate and maintain
        an end item of material for an initial period of service. Usually refers to ﬁrst outﬁtting of a
        ship, unit, or system.” (Source: DSMC, Glossary of Defense Acquisition Acronyms and
        Terms)
                             57.2 System Engineering Operations and Support (O&S) Objectives     775

    • Repair “A procedure which reduces but does not completely eliminate a nonconformance
      resulting from production, and which has been reviewed and concurred in by the Material
      Review Board (MRB) and approved for use by the Acquirer. The purpose of repair is to reduce
      the effect of the nonconformance. Repair is distinguished from rework in that the characteris-
      tic after repair still does not completely conform to the applicable speciﬁcations, drawings or
      contract requirements.” (Source: Adapted from Former MIL-STD-480, Section 3.1, Deﬁni-
      tions, para. 3.1.58, p. 13)
    • Repairability “The probability that a failed system will be restored to operable condition
      within a speciﬁed active repair time.” (Source: DSMC, Glossary of Defense Acquisition
      Acronyms and Terms)
    • Repairable Item “An item of a durable nature which has been determined by the applica-
      tion of engineering, economic, and other factors to be the type of item feasible for restora-
      tion to a serviceable condition through regular repair procedures.” (Source: DSMC, Glossary
      of Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)
    • Replacement Item “An item which is replaceable with another item, but which may differ
      physically from the original item in that the installation of the replacement item requires
      operations such as drilling, reaming, cutting, ﬁling, shimming, etc., in addition to the normal
      application and methods of attachment.” (Source: Former MIL-STD-480, Section 3.1, Def-
      initions, para. 3.1.45.2, p. 11)
    • Support Equipment “All equipment required to perform the support function, except that
      which is an integral part of the mission equipment. SE includes tools, test equipment, auto-
      matic test equipment (ATE) (when the ATE is accomplishing a support function), organiza-
      tional, intermediate, and related computer programs and software. It does not include any of
      the equipment required to perform mission operations functions.” (Source: MIL-HDBK-
      1908, Deﬁnitions, para. 3.0, p. 30)
    • Common Support Equipment (CSE) Refer to Chapter 10 on SYSTEM OF INTEREST
      Architecture.
    • Peculiar Support Equipment (PSE) Refer to Chapter 10 on SYSTEM OF INTEREST
      Architecture.
    • Test, Measurement, and Diagnostic Equipment (TMDE) Refer Chapter 10 on SYSTEM
      OF INTEREST Architecture.
    • Turn Around Time “Time required to return an item to use between missions or after
      removed from use.” (Source: DSMC, Glossary of Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms)

57.2 SYSTEM ENGINEERING OPERATIONS
and SUPPORT (O&S) OBJECTIVES

Once a system is ﬁelded, SEs should continue to be a vital element of the program. Speciﬁcally,
system performance, efﬁciency, and effectiveness should be monitored continuously. This requires
SE expertise to address the following objectives:
    1. Monitor and analyze the OPERATIONAL UTILITY, SUITABILITY, AVAILABILITY, and
       EFFECTIVENESS of system applications, capabilities, performance, and the service life of
       the newly deployed system—including products and services—relative to its intended
       mission(s) in its OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
    2. Identify and CORRECT latent defects—such as design ﬂaws and errors, faulty or defective
       components, and system deﬁciencies.
776     Chapter 57   System Operations and Support

      3. Maintain AWARENESS of the “gap”—in the problem space—that evolves over time
         between this existing system, product, or service and comparable competitor and adversar-
         ial capabilities.
      4. Accumulate and evolve requirements for a new system or capability or upgrade to the exist-
         ing system to ﬁll the solution space(s) and eliminate the problem space.
      5. Propose interim operational solutions—plans and tactics—to ﬁll the “gap” until a replace-
         ment capability is established.
      6. Maintain system conﬁguration baselines.
      7. Maintain MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM concurrency.
Let’s explore each of these objectives further.


57.3 MONITOR AND ANALYZE SYSTEM PERFORMANCE

When new systems or capabilities are conceived, SEs are challenged to translate the operational
needs that prompted the development into Requirements, Operations, Logical, and Physical Domain
Solutions. System Developers apply system veriﬁcation practices to answer the question: Are we
building the system RIGHT—in compliance with the speciﬁcation requirements? Acquirers or Users,
or their Independent Test Agency (ITA), apply System Validation Practices to answer the question:
Did we procure the RIGHT system?
     System speciﬁcation and development activities represent the best efforts of humans to trans-
late, quantify, and achieve technical and operational expectations and thresholds derived from
abstract visions. The ultimate question for Users to answer is: Given our organizational objectives
and budgetary constraints, did we procure the RIGHT system, product, or service to fulﬁll our
needs?
     This question may appear to conﬂict with the validation purpose of Operational Test and Eval-
uation (OT&E). OT&E is intended to provide Acquirer and User pre-system delivery and accept-
ance answers to this question. However, OT&E activities have a ﬁnite length—of days, weeks, or
months—under tightly controlled and monitored conditions representing or simulating the actual
OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.
     The challenge for the ITA is to avoid aliasing the answers due to the controlled environment.
The underlying question is: Will Users perform differently if they know they are being observed
and monitored versus on their own? The true answer resides with the User after the system, product,
or service has “stood the test of time.” Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 57.1
During the course of normal operations in the respective OPERATING ENVIRONMENTS, construction, agri-
cultural, military, medical, and other types of EQUIPMENT are subjected to various levels of use, misapplica-
tion, misuse, abuse, maintenance, or the lack thereof. During system development, time and resource constraints
limit contract-based OT&E of these systems. Typically, a full OT&E of these systems is impractical and limited
to a representative sampling of most probable or likely use cases and scenarios over a few weeks or months. In
contrast, commercial product test marketing of some systems, products, or services over a period of time with
large sample sizes may provide better insights as to whether the Users love or loathe a product.

Ultimately, the User is the SOLE entity that can answer four key questions that formed the basis
for our System Design and Development Practices:
                                                    57.3 Monitor and Analyze System Performance   777

    1. Does the system add value to the User and provide the RIGHT capabilities to accomplish
       the User’s organizational missions and objectives—OPERATIONAL UTILITY?
    2. Does the system integrate and interoperate successfully within the User’s “system of
       systems”—OPERATIONAL SUITABILITY?
    3. Is the system operationally available when called upon by the User to successfully perform
       its missions—OPERATIONAL AVAILABILITY?
    4. How well does the system support User missions as exempliﬁed in achievement of mission
       objectives—OPERATIONAL EFFECTIVENESS?
Answers to these questions require monitoring system performance. If your mission as an SE is to
MONITOR overall system performance, how would you approach this task?
     The answer resides in WHERE we began with the System Element Architecture template shown
in Figure 10.1. The template serves as a simplistic starting point model of the SYSTEM. Since the
model represents the integrated set of capabilities required to achieve organizational mission objec-
tives, we allocate SPS requirements to each of the system elements—EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL,
FACILTIES, and so forth. Given this analytical framework, SEs need to ask two questions:
    1. HOW WELL is the interated System Element Architecture Model performing—system oper-
       ational performance?
    2. Physically, HOW WELL is each System Element and their set of physical components per-
       forming—system element performance?
Let’s explore each of these points further.

SYSTEM Operational Performance Monitoring
Real-time system performance monitoring should occur throughout the pre-mission, mission, and
postmission phases of operation as paced by the Mission Event Timeline (MET). Depending on the
system and mission application, the achievement of system objectives, in combination with the
MET, provides the BASIS for operational system performance evaluation.
     In general, answering HOW WELL the SYSTEM is performing depends on:
    1. WHO you interview—the stakeholders.
    2. WHAT their objectives are.
Consider the following example from the perspectives of the System Owner and the System
Developer:


 EXAMPLE 57.2
From the SYSTEM Owner’s perspective, example questions might include:
1. Are we achieving mission objectives?
2. Are we meeting our projected ﬁnancial cost of ownership targets?
3. Are our maintenance costs in line with projections?
4. Is the per unit cost at or below what we projected?
From the User’s perspective, example questions might include:
1. Is the system achieving its performance contribution thresholds established by the SPS?
2. Are there capability and performance areas that need to be improved?
778     Chapter 57   System Operations and Support

3. Is the SYSTEM responsive to our mission needs?
4. Does the SYSTEM exhibit any instabilities, latent defects, or deﬁciencies that require corrective action?

Author’s Note 57.2 Note the ﬁrst item, SPS “performance contribution thresholds.” Users
often complain that a system does not “live up to their expectations.” Several key questions:
      1. Were those “expectations” documented as requirements in the SPS?
      2. Did the Acquirer, as the user’s contract and technical representative, VERIFY and ACCEPT
         the SYSTEM as meeting the SPS requirements?
      3. Using system acceptance as a point of reference, have User expectations changed?
Remember, aside from normal performance degradation from use, misuse, misapplication, lack of
proper maintenance, and OPERATING ENVIRONMENT threats, a SYSTEM, as an inanimate
object, does not change. People and organizations do. So, if the system IS NOT meeting User expec-
tations, is it the SYSTEM or the operators/organization?

These are a few of the types of SYSTEM level questions to investigate. Once you have a good
understanding of critical SYSTEM performance areas, the next question is: WHAT System Elements
are primary and secondary performance effecters that drive these results.

System Element Performance Monitoring
Based on SYSTEM operational performance results, the key question for SEs to answer is: what
are the System Element contributions. System Element performance areas include:
      1. EQUIPMENT element
      2. PERSONNEL element
      3. MISSION RESOURCES element
      4. PROCEDURAL DATA element
      5. SYSTEM RESPONSES element—behavior, products, by-products, and services
      6. SUPPORT SYSTEM element
         (a) Decision support operations
         (b) System maintenance operations
         (c) Manpower and personnel operations
         (d) Supply support operations
         (e) Training and training support operations
         (f) Technical data operations
         (g) Computer resources support operations
         (h) Facilities operations
         (i) Packaging, handling, storage, and transportation (PHST) operations
         (j) Publications support operations
Each of these System Element areas maps to the integrated set of physical architecture components
that contribute to System Element and overall performance.

Guidepost 57.1 At this juncture we have established WHAT needs to be monitored. We now
shift our focus to HOW system performance monitoring is accomplished.
                                                        57.4 Performance Monitoring Methods     779

57.4 PERFORMANCE MONITORING METHODS

The System Element performance monitoring presents several challenges.
     First, User/Maintainer organization SEs are accountable for answering these questions. If
they do not have SEs on staff, they may task support contractors to collect data and make
recommendations.
     Second, Offeror organizations intending to successfully propose next-generation systems
or upgrades to legacy systems have to GET SMART in system performance areas and critical
operational and technical issues, (COIs/CTIs) in a very short period of time. As a general rule,
Offerors track and demonstrate performance in these areas over several years before they qualify
themselves as competent suppliers. The competitive advantage resides with the incumbent con-
tractor unless the User decides to change. Often your chances of success are diminished if you wait
to start answering these questions when the DRAFT Request for Proposal (RFP) solicitation is
released; it is simply impractical.
     So, for those organizations that prepare for and posture themselves for success, how do they
obtain the data? Basic data collection methods include, if accessible:

    1. Personal interviews with User and maintainer personnel.
    2. Postmission data analysis—such as problem reports (PRs), mission debrieﬁngs, and post-
       action reports.
    3. Visual inspections—such as on-site surveys and SYSTEM checkout lists.
    4. Analysis of preventive and corrective maintenance records—such as a Failure Reporting
       and Corrective Action System (FRACAS), if available.
    5. Observation of SYSTEM and PERSONNEL in action.

Although these methods look good on paper, they are ONLY as GOOD as the “corporate memo-
ries” of the User and maintainer organizations. Data retention following a mission drops signiﬁ-
cantly over several hours and days. Reality tends to become embellished over time. So, every event
during the pre-mission, mission, and postmission phases of operation becomes a critical staging
point for after action and follow-up reporting. This requires three actions:

    1. Establishing record-keeping systems.
    2. Ingrain professional discipline in PERSONNEL to record a mission or maintenance event.
    3. Thoroughly document the sequence of actions leading up to a mission or maintenance event.

Depending on the consequences of the event, failure boards may be convened that investigate
the WHO, WHAT, WHEN, WHERE, WHY, and WHY NOT of emergency and catastrophic
events.
    People, in general, and SEs, in particular, often lack proper training in reporting malfunctions
or events. Most people, by nature, do not like to document things. So-called event reporting tools
are not User friendly and typically perform poorly. For these reasons organizations should train
personnel and assess their performance from day 1 of employment concerning:

    1. WHAT data records are to be maintained and in what media.
    2. WHY the data are required.
    3. WHEN data are to be collected.
    4. WHO the Users are.
    5. HOW the User(s) apply the data to improving system performance
780    Chapter 57    System Operations and Support

Final Thought
The preceding discussions are intended to illustrate HOW TO THINK about system performance
monitoring. Earlier we described a condition referred to as analysis paralysis. These areas are prime
example.
     As a reality check, SEs need to ask themselves the question: If we simply asked Users to iden-
tify and prioritize 3 to 5 system areas for improvement, would we glean as much knowledge and
intelligence as analyzing warehouses full of data? The answer depends. If you have to have objec-
tive evidence in hand to rationalize a decision, the answer is yes. Alternatively, establishing data-
base reporting systems that can be queried provide an alternative. IF you choose to take the shortcut
and only identify the 3 to 5 areas for improvement, you may overlook what seems to be a minis-
cule topic that may become tomorrow’s headlines. Choose the method WISELY!


57.5 WHY ANALYZE SYSTEM PERFORMANCE DATA?

You may ask: WHY do SEs need to analyze system performance data? If the system works prop-
erly, WHAT do you expect to gain from the exercise? WHAT is the return on investment (ROI)?
These are good questions. Actually there are at least several primary reasons WHY you need to
analyze system performance data for some systems:
Reason 1:     To benchmark nominal system performance.
Reason 2:     To track and identify system performance trends.
Reason 3:     To improve operator training, skills, and proﬁciency.
Reason 4:     To correlate mission events with system performance.
Reason 5:     To support gap analysis.
Reason 6:     To validate models and simulations.
Reason 7:     To evaluate human performance.
Let’s explore each of these reasons further.

Reason 1: To Benchmark Nominal System Performance
Establish statistical performance benchmarks via baselines, where applicable, for WHAT consti-
tutes actual nominal system performance. For example, your car’s gas mileage has a statistical mean
of 30 miles per gallon as measured over its ﬁrst 20,000 miles.
     Remember, the original System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS) was effectively a “Design-To
limits” set of requirements based on human estimates of required performance. Veriﬁcation simply
proved that the physical deliverable system or product performed within acceptable boundary limits
and conditions. Every HUMAN-MADE system has its own unique idiosyncrasies that require
awareness and understanding whether it is performing nominally or drifting in/out of speciﬁcation.
Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 57.3
If a hypothetical performance requirement is 100 ± 10, you NEED TO KNOW that System X’s nominal per-
formance is 90 and System Y’s nominal performance is 100. Sometimes this is important; sometimes not. The
borderline “90” system could stay at that level throughout its life while the perfect “100” system could drift
out of tolerance and require continual maintenance.
                                                            57.6 SE Focus Areas During O&S      781

Reason 2: To Track and Identify System Performance Trends
Use the nominal performance baselines as a benchmark comparison for system performance degra-
dation and trends over its service life to ensure preventive and corrective maintenance occur at the
proper time and are performed correctly. For example, suppose your car at 30,000 miles is only
averaging 25 miles per gallon.

Reason 3: To Improve Operator Training and Skills
Determine IF and HOW systems are being unnecessarily stressed, misused, abused, or misapplied
by particular operators.

Reason 4: To Correlate Mission Events
with System Performance
Correlate system mission events and operator observations with recorded system responses and per-
formance data. Ask yourself: Are we observing a problem area or symptom of a problem that has
a root case traceable to latent defects?

Reason 5: To Support Gap Analysis
Collect objective evidence of existing system capabilities and performance to support “gap” analy-
sis between the current system and projected competitive or adversarial system performance.

Reason 6: To Validate Models and Simulations
VALIDATE laboratory models and simulations against actual system performance to support future
mission planning or assess proposed capability or performance upgrades.

Reason 7: To Evaluate Human Performance
Personnel such as infantry, pilots, and NASA astronauts are subjected to operating environments
that can overstress human performance. Thus, human operator performance within the context of
the overall MISSION SYSTEM performance must be well understood to ensure that training cor-
rects or enhances operator performance for future missions.


57.6 SE FOCUS AREAS DURING O&S

During the System Operations and Support (O&S) Phase, there are a number of SE focus areas
that represent initial starting points for tracking and assessing system, product, or service per-
formance. As stated in the Introduction, this chapter has two contexts:
    1. Sustaining and improving current system performance.
    2. Planning for next generation systems.
Assessment of current system performance includes several focus areas:
Focus Area 1:    Correct latent defects.
Focus Area 2:    Improve Human–System Integration (HSI) performance.
Focus Area 3:    Maintain MISSION SYSTEM–training device concurrency.
Focus Area 4:    Maintain system baselines.
782    Chapter 57   System Operations and Support

Focus Area 1: Correct Latent Defects
Systems, products, and services have degrees of perfection as viewed by the User and System
Developer. System Developers employ design veriﬁcation and validation practices to discover any
latent defects and deﬁciencies early in the System Development Phase when corrective actions are
less costly. Despite the best of human attempts to perfect systems, some latent defects and deﬁ-
ciencies remain hidden until someone discovers the problem during the System O&S Phase—hope-
fully WITHOUT adverse or catastrophic EFFECTS.
     New systems, especially large complex systems, inevitably have latent defects and deﬁcien-
cies. Sometimes these are minor; other times they are major. From a program and SE perspective,
the critical operational issue (COI) is to ensure that the delivered EQUIPMENT and its operators
are able to achieve their mission objectives without subjecting them to injury, damage, or threats
that jeopardize the mission. Software-intensive systems are especially prone to latent defects that
are not discovered during system veriﬁcation testing.
     Some defects or deﬁciencies not discovered until a system is ﬁelded. Sometimes they are highly
obvious, and sometimes they are only detected over a period of time. The discovery may occur
directly or indirectly during analysis of large amounts of data. Therefore, monitor Problem Reports
(PRs) closely to determine if there are latent defects that need to be corrected and, if so, the degree
of urgency in correcting them.

Focus Area 2: Improve Human–System Integration
(HSI) Performance
Our discussions up to this point focused on improving EQUIPMENT Element performance. As dis-
cussed earlier in this section, EQUIPMENT is just one of several system element performance
effecters that contribute to overall system performance. Measurable system performance may also
be achieved by improving the PERSONNEL Element performance aspects without having to
procure new EQUIPMENT solutions. How do we do this?
     EQUIPMENT system performance is often limited by system operator and maintainer skills,
proﬁciency, and performance. System operators and maintainers require training to improve their
knowledge, skills, and proﬁciency in understanding the limitations of the EQUIPMENT and HOW
to properly apply the EQUIPMENT.
     The mechanisms for improving human performance includes operator and maintainer selec-
tion, classroom training, ﬁeld experience operating the system, and sometimes LUCK. Experienced
system operators and maintainers are often responsible for training new students. The training,
however, is dependent on the availability of training aides and devices that provide the students the
look, feel, and decision-making environment that enables them to become proﬁcient.
     The question for SEs is: HOW do we specify system capabilities that enable instructors to train
and evaluate student performance on the EQUIPMENT? Training sessions need to employ devices
that immerse the student in the types of operational and decision-making environments they will
actually confront in the OPERATING ENVIRONMENT. This presents several challenges for SEs.

Training Challenge for SEs. Most engineers, by virtue of education and lack of system devel-
opment training, focus immediately on hardware and software design details. If you ask most to
write a speciﬁcation, seldom will you ﬁnd anyone who SIMPLY asks the question: Does this system
have a training requirement? If so, WHAT capabilities must be incorporated into the system to
support training?
     The solution to this challenge is to conduct on-site visits with the User stakeholders—the
system operators, maintainers, and instructors—and determine what training requirements will be
required for the system. Remember, the system requirements listed in the Operational Require-
                                                                  57.6 SE Focus Areas During O&S        783

ments Document (ORD) should include training requirements. Some of those requirements are allo-
cated to training media, some to instructors, and some to the EQUIPMENT Element items that are
to be procured. In some cases, the System Developer’s contract may specify delivery of training
systems to support the EQUIPMENT Element.
     For most HUMAN-MADE systems, the general thinking is to train system operators to use a
system or product after delivery. However, there are cases, especially in single-use systems, where
the actual mission is the one and only real world training session. Consider the following example:


 EXAMPLE 57.4
During the Apollo program, astronauts trained with laboratory simulators, physical landing device simulators,
and neutral buoyancy tanks that provided the LOOK and FEEL of a zero gravity landing on the Moon.
However, all training had to be accomplished in a normal Earth gravity environment. THINK about the train-
ing challenge! The actual landing of the manned Apollo Lunar Lander, as an unprecedented system, on the
Moon’s surface represented the ﬁrst time all elements of a single-use system were operated simultaneously in
its prescribed zero gravity OPERATING ENVIRONMENT.

So, HOW do we create training aids to support training? The answer is by way of training devices.

Training Devices. The cost, complexity, availability, and risk of using actual systems for train-
ing purposes often limits training. One mechanism for achieving similar results is to develop sim-
ulators that enable students to learn in a realistic, immersive environment without harming
themselves, the public, instructors, or the EQUIPMENT. Training devices provide this capability.
Training devices range from simple desktop computer models to highly complex aircraft simula-
tors located on multi-axis motion platforms as illustrated in Figure 51.6.
     In general, most systems have training task lists (TTLs) that identify speciﬁc mission tasks for
assessing the knowledge, skills, and proﬁciency of trainee operators. Instructional System Devel-
opment (ISD) personnel analyze these tasks and determine what types of training aides and media
are required—whether to use classroom instruction, laboratory training devices or simulations, or
actual EQUIPMENT systems. As a result of the ISD analyses, TTL items are allocated to one or
more types of training. Therefore, training devices are required to provide capabilities to support
all or some of the TTL items.

Training Device Speciﬁcation Challenges. Training devices present a couple of key chal-
lenges to SEs.

Challenge 1: Degree of Realism. The need to create and immerse a student in a realistic envi-
ronment sounds pretty simple. Wrong! The challenge for SEs is: HOW do we specify a system that
is: 1) realistic, 2) representative of the real world, and 3) provides effective training? THINK about
it. Do you specify that the simulated world should look and feel like the real world?
     This challenge drives SEs to develop levels of ﬁdelity—or the degree of realism representative
of the physical world. Typically, attribute descriptors such as low, medium, and high are applied to
levels of ﬁdelity. However, deﬁne low, medium, and high? Medium ﬁdelity to one person may be
low ﬁdelity to someone else. Does a training device require components—such as switches, dials,
and gauges—that identically match the MISSION SYSTEM or are photographic models accept-
able? SEs must bound and deﬁne these terms to avoid confusion and misinterpretation.

Challenge 2: Simulator Concurrency. Another challenge for SEs is specifying a simulator
that identically matches the actual MISSION SYSTEM—e.g. aircraft, spacecraft, nuclear power
784     Chapter 57   System Operations and Support

plant, etc.—in look, feel, and performance. If the simulator is not concurrent with the actual system,
you may have a negative training condition. If part of the actual system—e.g. vehicle—does not
operate due to a lack of maintenance, etc., that training device capability should also be inopera-
ble. This includes: switches, indicators lamps, displays, audio, etc.

Challenge 3: Scoring Capability Requirements. As with any training device, the question
is: HOW do we measure levels of student skills and proﬁciency? This area represents a highly
debated topic. The challenge for SEs is: HOW do you specify scoring capability requirements?
     A word of caution: some SEs have inﬂated egos and erroneously believe they can specify train-
ing capabilities for this area. AVOID this notion; recognize the limitations of your expertise! Talk
with the Instructional System Development (ISD) subject matter experts (SMEs) who are the pro-
fessionals and understand WHAT constitutes effective training capabilities. Collaborate with the
ISD SMEs to identify and specify the training capability requirements.

Challenge 4: Operational Task List Training. Large complex EQUIPMENT systems such as
ground vehicles, aircraft, and spacecraft involve Training Task Lists (TTLs) that must be performed
as part of normal system operations as well as in response to malfunctions.
     Each of these operational tasks employs various system capabilities and levels of performance
that are controlled by the Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) or by automated decision-making systems.
When developing training devices, recognize that the simulator must provide the capability to train
system operators in using the TTLs. Some TTL items may or may not be applicable or trainable
except on the actual equipment. TTL items allocated to the simulator should be documented in the
System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS).
     The challenge for SEs is to specify the simulation device(s) with capabilities that enable
effective training students in applying the respective TTLs in the simulated OPERATING
ENVIRONMENT.

Challenge 5: Levels of Training Capabilities. Human performance improvement entails
training in several skills areas. These include basic training, advanced training, and remedial
training.
      1. Basic Training Fundamental instruction complemented with hands-on experience to
         achieve a level of competence in basic system capabilities and levels of performance.
      2. Advance Training Specialized training in mission scenario environments that challenge the
         limitations of the human and machine and ensure a level of proﬁciency in achieving mission
         objectives.
      3. Remedial/Refresher Training Retraining in skills and proﬁciency areas that may be
         deﬁcient.

Challenge 6: Other Human Performance Indicators. Earlier we highlighted the depend-
ence of many engineers on actual EQUIPMENT data and noted that simple inspection by exami-
nation—such as for oil leaks, hydraulic leaks, or fatigue cracks—provides valuable insights into
system performance. The same is true with human performance.
     When systems are designed, vast energies are expended designing them idealistically for
people who are in the 95th percentile of established anthropometric standards. For many applica-
tions, these design rules work. However, after a system is deployed to the ﬁeld, SEs need to take
a ﬁeld trip to observe the system’s operators and maintainers in action. Startling discoveries some-
times arise.
                                                    57.7 Planning for Next-Generation Systems   785

     System operators and maintainers are clever and sometimes show the developers a better way
of doing things. All this is dependent on HOW WELL the Users like or loathe the system or product.
Also, observe the ergonomics of the work environment. Are there work habits or indications that
can degrade their performance?

Focus Area 3: Maintain MISSION SYSTEM-Training
Device Concurrency
Training devices such as models, simulations, and simulators must remain in synchronized lock
step with the MISSION SYSTEM they simulate such as ground vehicles, aircraft, ships, nuclear
reactors, robotics surgeries and so forth.
     Typically, the MISSION SYSTEM developer is different from the training device(s) devel-
oper. Where concurrency is a critical operational or technical issue (COI/CTI), Users and the
Acquirers must ensure that contracts are in place to support concurrency requirements to promote
communications among the organizations.

Focus Area 4: Maintain System Baselines
One of the challenges of ﬁelded systems is failure to keep the As-Maintained conﬁguration base-
line current. This commonly occurs when budgets are reduced or priorities are focused on other
activities. Unfortunately, some organizations have a view that if an activity doesn’t help the
bottom line or accomplish a mission, it must not be worth investing resources. So, MISSION
SYSTEM Users and System Developers ask: “Do we invest money in the actual system to get more
capability or in maintaining system baselines in lock step?” Generally, the capability argument
wins. As a result, there may be a discrepancy between the physical MISSION SYSTEM and its
baselines.
     Once a system is developed, delivered, and accepted, a key question is: WHO maintains the
product baseline for ﬁelded systems? Systems often go through a series of major upgrades over
their useful service life. Each improvement or upgrade may be performed internally or externally
by a new System Developer contract. The challenge for User and Acquirer to ultimately answer is:
HOW do we assure the developer that the baseline conﬁguration documentation identically matches
the improved or upgraded, As-Maintained system? As a User SE, you will be expected to answer
this question and vouch for the integrity of the As-Maintained Product Baseline.
     Maintaining the currency of the Product Baseline is important not only for the existing ﬁelded
systems but also for future production runs. Some systems are ﬁelded in low quantities as trial runs
to assess consumer feedback in the marketplace. After the initial trials, production contracts may
be released for large quantities. Some markets may saturate quickly or, if your organization is
lucky, enjoy system production over several years. These production runs may involve a single
production contractor or multiple contractors; the baseline integrity challenges, however, are the
same.


57.7 PLANNING FOR NEXT-GENERATION SYSTEMS

Planning of next generation systems includes several focus areas:
Focus Area 5: Perform and maintain a “gap” analysis.
Focus Area 6: Bound and partition the problem and solution spaces.
Focus Area 7: Formulate and develop new capability requirements.
786   Chapter 57   System Operations and Support

Focus Area 5: Perform and Maintain a “Gap” Analysis
As MISSION SYSTEM and SUPPORT SYSTEM data are collected and analyzed, a repository of
knowledge is established. So, what do you do with all this data? Despite its title, this could be
simply a single page for management with a brief rationale depicting the current gap and gap pro-
jections over time.
     The OPERATING ENVIRONMENT element of most systems is often highly competitive and
may range from benign or adversarial. Depending on the overall organizational mission, competi-
tors and adversaries will continually improve and upgrade their system capabilities. Regardless of
your organization’s operating domain, the marketplace, military environment, space environment,
and medical environment are dynamic and continually change in response to MISSION SYSTEM
changes.
     For some systems survival or convenience means changing, either by necessity due to com-
ponent or obsolescence accordance cost of maintenance, in accord with marketplace trends and
demands. Thus, operational capability and performance gaps emerge between your existing system
and those of competitors and adversaries. This in turn forces investment to improve existing system
performance or develop new systems, products, and services.

Focus Area 6: Bound and Partition the Problem and
Solution Spaces
The gap analysis provides an assessment of current capabilities and performance relative to pro-
jected organizational needs as well as competitor and adversarial capability projections. Analysis
of the “gaps” may reveal one or more potential problem spaces, each with its own degree of urgency
for fulﬁllment. Each problem space in turn must be partitioned into one or more solution spaces.

Focus Area 7: Formulate and Develop
New Capability Requirements
Over time, the capability “gap” between the existing system and projected needs widens. At some
point in time a determination will be made to initiate actions to improve or upgrade existing system
performance or to develop a new system. Thus, the evolving problem and solution space bound-
aries—the Requirements Domain—will have to be captured in terms of required operational capa-
bilities and costs. As an SE, you may be assigned responsibility to collect and quantify these
requirements.

Referral For more information regarding system capabilities, refer to Chapter 21 on System
Operational Capability Derivation and Allocation.


57.8 GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In summary, the preceding discussions provide the basis with which to establish the guiding prin-
ciples that govern System Operations and Support (O&S) practices.

Principle 57.1 SE does not end with the System Development Phase; it addresses system per-
formance assessments throughout the System O&S Phase.

Principle 57.2 Ensure that the As-Maintained conﬁguration baseline is current with the ﬁelded
system at all times.
                                                                                         Additional Reading     787

57.9 SUMMARY

Our discussion of system O&S practices was intended to familiarize SEs with key areas that require deﬁni-
tion prior to the formal solicitation effort that leads to new system development. We emphasized the two con-
texts of O&S:
     1. Assessing existing system performance.
     2. Planning for capability improvement upgrades and next-generation system requirements.


GENERAL EXERCISES

1. Answer each of the What You Should Learn from This Chapter questions identiﬁed in the Introduction.
2. Refer to the list of systems identiﬁed in Chapter 2. Based on a selection from the preceding chapter’s
   General Exercises or a new system selection, apply your knowledge derived from this chapter’s topical
   discussions. Assume that you have been contracted to develop requirements for the next-generation system.
   (a) What are the SYSTEM level questions you would pose to the owners and Users concerning the
       performance of current operations?
   (b) Using the System Elements as the frame of reference, what questions would you ask regarding the
       performance of each element?


ORGANIZATIONAL CENTRIC EXERCISES

1. Contact programs and functional organizations within your facility that procure systems for integration into
   contract deliverables or installation within the facility.
   (a) What experiences did they have with installation and integration of the new system?
   (b) What types of latent defects or deﬁciencies were discovered after system delivery?
   (c) Can they show metrics proﬁles concerning the frequency of ﬁnding defects over time?
   (d) Did the supplier provide training for the users?
   (e) For each of the System Elements, how would they grade the supplier’s performance?
   (f) What lessons learned do they recommend avoiding in future procurements?


REFERENCES

Defense Systems Management College (DSMC). 2001.                and Waivers. Washingtons, DC: Department of Defense
  Glossary: Defense Acquisition Acronyms and Terms, 10th        (DoD).
  ed. Defense Acquisition University Press. Fr. Belvoir, VA.   MIL-HDBK-1908B. 1999. DoD Deﬁnitions of Human
MIL-STD-480B (canceled). 1988. Military Standard Con-           Factors Terms. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
  ﬁguration Control: Engineering Changes, Deviations,           (DoD).


ADDITIONAL READING

AR 200-1. 1997. Environmental Quality: Environmental           MIL-HDBK-881. 1998. Military Handbook—Work Break-
 Protection and Enhancement, Army Regulation, Depart-           down Structure. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
 ment of the Army. Washington, DC: Government Print-            (DoD).
 ing Ofﬁce.                                                    MIL-STD-961D. 1995. DoD Standard Practice for Defense
MIL-HDBK-470A. 1997. Designing and Developing Main-             Speciﬁcations. Washington, DC: Department of Defense
 tainable Products and Systems. Washington, DC: Depart-         (DoD).
 ment of Defense (DoD).
      Epilogue

The preceding chapters presented the key concepts, principles, and practices of System Analysis,
Design, and Development. Our purpose has been to provide insights that enable system analysts
and SEs to bridge the gap between a User’s abstract vision of a system, product, or service into
the physical realization that will satisfy their organizational or personal needs and objectives.
     Our discussions highlighted key topics and methodologies that apply to the multi-disciplinary
“engineering of systems.” As a structured problem solving/solution development methodology,
these concepts and practices enable us to develop systems ranging from simple to highly complex.
The ﬂexibility of the methodology facilitates application to any type of system, regardless of busi-
ness domain. These systems may range from institutional/organizational systems such as a banking
system, school, hospital system, et al. to the “engineering of systems” such as aircraft, ships, Space
Shuttle, or International Space Station (ISS).
     Equipped with a this new knowledge and insights for thinking about, organizing, analyzing,
designing, and developing systems, you are now ready to embark on applying and tailoring what
you have learned. With practical application, these practices should enable you to create a frame-
work that can be tailored to best ﬁt the needs of your business domain and line of business. With
seasoned experience, you are better prepared to lead collaborative engineering development efforts
to make informed decisions without having to take a quantum leap of faith to a point solution that
may or may not fulﬁll the User’s operational needs.
     With these points in mind, I extend best wishes to you in your quest for success through the
application of the concepts, principles, and practices of System Analysis, Design, and Development.

                                                                                  Charles S. Wasson




System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

788
Index




Note:                                                     Allocation(s)
  Boldface page numbers represent deﬁnitions                Performance budget 460, 598, 601
  Def. = deﬁnition                                          Requirements 221, 225, 358, 365, 641–642
                                                          Alternative(s)
Abstraction                                                 Analysis of (AoA) 674
  Deﬁned 67                                                 Viable (def.) 673
  Hierarchical levels of 414                              American Board of Engineering and Technology
  System levels of 76, 80–82                                   (ABET) 23
Acceptability                                             Analysis
  System 46                                                 Aggregation (Composition) 7
Accountability                                              Conclusions 583
  Technical 128                                             Deﬁned 574
Aggregation (Composition) 7                                 Effectiveness 575
Agreements                                                  Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) 577
  Non-disclosure/Proprietary 572                            Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) 577
Acquirer                                                    Engineering Reports 579, 612
  Contracting Ofﬁcer (ACO) 313, 493, 505, 717,              Error 535
    730                                                     Fault tree 577
  Furnished Equipment (AFE) 495, 675                        Findings 583
  Furnished Property (AFP) 481, 492, 493, 495               Finite element 577
Actions                                                     Gap 126, 781, 786
  Allowable/Prohibited 202                                  HFE task 526, 535, 603–611
  Corrective 265, 270                                       Human Factors Engineering (HFE) 535
Acceptance                                                  Lessons learned 581
  Tests 701                                                 Logistic Support (LSA) (def.) 774
  Testing (def.) 734                                        Mission 442
Acceptance Test Procedures (ATPs)                           Mission task 164
  Application 269, 271, 696                                 of Alternatives (AoA) 672, 674
  Deﬁned 734                                                Paralysis 574, 579, 632
  Derivation 742                                            Part/circuits tolerance analysis 644
  Developing 747                                            Rate Monotonic (RMA) 611
  Procedure-based ATPs 701, 748                             Recommendations 583
  Scenario-based ATPs 701, 748                              Reliability 641
  Types of 747                                              Resources 582
Accreditation 652                                           Sensitivity 673, 684
Accuracy and Precision 547, 577, 581                        Speciﬁcation 327
Actor (See UML)                                             Statistical 580
Adaptation                                                  System operational capability 237
  Deﬁned 147                                                System performance 603
  System 156                                                System Requirements (SRA) 329
Affordability 49                                            Task 526, 535

System Analysis, Design, and Development, by Charles S. Wasson
Copyright © 2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                                   789
790   Index

  Timeline 160                              System security considerations 427
  Transaction (def.) 452                    Trade studies 676
  Types of 577–578                          Transparency 469
  Use case 174                              View 411, 413, 414
  Worst case 644, 654                       Viewpoint 411, 413
ANALYSIS (Veriﬁcation Method)             Assessment
  See Veriﬁcation Methods                   Situational (def.) 122
Anomaly                                   Assumptions
  Deﬁned 734                                and caveats 582
  Challenges 755                            Failure to document 647
Anthropometry                               Poor or incorrect 687
  Deﬁned 525                                Speciﬁcation 311
Anthropometrics                           Atmosphere
  Deﬁned 525                                Standard 577
Architect                                 Attributes
  System 411, 412                           Deﬁned 28
Architecture(al)                            Physical / Functional (def.) 28
  Architecting 411                          System 30–33
  Attributes 414                          Audits
  Behavioral Domain Solution 453            Functional Conﬁguration (FCA) 56, 252, 255,
  Centralized 411, 418–420                     256, 260, 571, 696, 728, 752
  Client server 420                         Physical Conﬁguration (PCA) 56, 253, 255, 256,
  Concerns 411, 413                            260, 571, 696, 728, 752
  Conﬁguration redundancy 422               Requirements Traceability (RTA) 254, 718
  Decentralized 411, 420                  Authorized Access
  Deﬁned 411                                Deﬁned 563
  Description (AD) 411, 413               Availability
  Development 651                           Achieved (Aa) 537
  Entities 414                              Deﬁned 401
  ES&H considerations 425                   Design for 405
  Fault tolerant 421, 469                   Interface 521
  Fire detection and protection 425         Inherent (Ai) 637
  Flexibility 469                           Operational (Ao) 50, 637, 775
  Formulation 412                           System 636
  IEEE 1471–2000 413
  Item boundaries 500                     Baseline Concept Description (BCD) 447
  Logical 74, 415, 454                    Baseline(s)
  Network 420                               Allocated (def.) 490
  Open system 411, 469                      Conﬁguration 502
  Operational 415, 439                      Control and maintenance 306
  Operations Domain Solution 440            CSCI 490
  Physical 74, 415, 466                     Deﬁned 490
  Physical attributes 469                   Functional 504
  Physical Domain Solution 467              Management (def.) 490
  Power considerations 425                  Product 504
  Redundancy 422                            Production 504
  Representation 414                        Requirements (def.) 491
  Requirements 415                          Speciﬁcation 355
  Requirements Domain Solution 415, 432   Bathtub Curve
  Scalability 469                           Failure proﬁle 620–621
  Selection 425                           Behavioral Domain Solution
  Semantics 79                              Architecture 453
  Stakeholder concerns 413, 417             Challenges 461
  SOI system elements 87                    COIs / CTIs 461
                                                                                            Index    791

  Deﬁned 276                                            Processing 171
  Dependencies 453                                      Required Operational (ROC) 219
  Development 451                                       Reporting 235
  Introduced 243–245                                    Resource utilization 238
  Key elements 452                                      System operational 217
  Methodology 454                                     Case
  Need for 453                                          Test (def.) 735
  Objective 452                                         Use (def.) 168
  Optimization 282, 461                               Cautions and Warnings
  Responsibility 453                                    User 219
  SE Process Model 281                                Classiﬁcation of Defects
  Sequencing 453                                        Deﬁned 692
  V&V 461                                             Certiﬁcation
  Work products 463                                     Deﬁned 692
Benchmark                                               Model & simulation 655, 706
  System performance 780                                System 760
Bill of Materials (BOM)                                 Test equipment and tool 753
  Engineering (EBOM) 82, 642, 643                     Characteristics
Boards                                                  Aesthetic 35
  Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB) 432, 440,            Deﬁned 29
     453, 752                                           General operating 34
  Material Review (MRB) 752                             Operating or behavioral 34
  Software CCB (SCCB) 432, 453, 440, 752                Physical 34
Boehm, Dr. Barry 294, 296                               Required Operational 382
Box, George E. P. 648, 669                              Required Technical 382
British Engineering System (BES) 547                    System 34–35
Budgets                                               Command Media
  Performance 460                                       System design and documentation 565
  Performance allocation 598–599                      Commercial-Off-the-Shelf (COTS)
  Safety margin 460                                     COIs/CTIs 675
Build                                                   Deﬁned 481
  Conﬁguration 297–298                                  Driving issues 484
Business                                                Items 483
  Operational cycles 214                                Physical items 469
By-Products                                             Product (def.) 481
  Acceptable / Unacceptable 345                         Selection questions 484–487
                                                        Trade Studies 675
Calibration and Alignment                               Veriﬁcation 696
  Equipment and tools 753, 754                        Compatibility 150
Capability                                              Deﬁned 147
  Anatomy of 229                                        Versus interoperability 150
  Automated or semi-automated (def.) 230              Compensating Provision
  Bounding 230                                          Actions 646
  Construct 232                                         Deﬁned 616
  Deﬁned 27                                             Use case 173
  Derivation 220, 434                                 Completeness 414
  Equating to modes 203                               Complexity
  Force multiplier 142–143                              Reduction of 71
  Full operational (FOC) 62, 125, 140, 297, 414,      Compliance
     768                                                Certiﬁcate of (C of C) 483, 565, 695, 696,
  Gap 138                                                  698
  Initial operational (IOC) 62, 125, 140, 297, 414,     Consequences of non-compliance 155
     768                                                Deﬁned 545
  Level of urgency 125                                  Speciﬁcation 337–338
792   Index

Command and Control (C2)                       Deﬁned 490
  HSI 469                                      Developmental 61, 252, 502, 503
  Input/Output (I/O) devices 531–532           Effectivity 335, 491, 497
  Interactions 153                             Identiﬁcation responsibility 497
Common Support Equipment (CSE)                 Item selection 496
  See Equipment                                Management (def.) 491
Comply                                         Redundancy 422
  Deﬁned 147                                   Semantics 492, 494–495
Component                                    Conﬁguration Control Board (CCB)
  Deﬁned 466                                   Behavioral Domain Solution 453
  Design options 482                           Deviations and waivers 752
  External acquisition 493                     Operations Domain Solution 440
  Origins 493                                  Requirements baselines 432
  Selection methods 483                        SEIT function 309
Computer Software Conﬁguration Item (CSCI)   Conﬁguration Item (CI)
  Computer SW Component (CSC) 269              Applications 223, 493
  Computer SW Unit (CSU) 269                   Computer Software (CSCI)
  Deﬁned 490                                   CSCI boundaries 496, 500
  Implementation 493                           Hardware Conﬁguration (HWCI) 490, 491,
Concept                                           493–494, 495, 515, 666
  Deﬁned 4                                     Deﬁned 491
Concept of Operations (ConOps)                 Ownership 499
  Deﬁned 178                                   Logical (LCI) (def.) 491
  Description 179                              Ownership and control 499
  Operations Domain Solution 446               Physical (PCI) (def.) 491
  System Operations Model 179                  Identiﬁcation Responsibility 497
Concerns                                       Selection 496
  Architectural 413, 414                     Conﬂict of Interest
Conclusion(s)                                  V & V 705
  Analysis report 581                        Conform
  Prerequisite 36                              Deﬁned 147
  Trade Study Report (TSR) (def.) 673        Conformance
Conditions                                     Deﬁned 545
  Abnormal operating 233                       Speciﬁcation 337–338
  Environmental 170                          Consumables
  Initial operating 36                         Application 232, 406
  Speciﬁcation of operating Environment        MISSION RESOURCES 91–92
     312                                     Constraints
  System operating 321                         Boundary condition 576
Conference                                     Design and construction 217, 223
  Agenda 716                                   Operational 160, 170
  Minutes 711, 716                           Construct(s)
  Action Items 716, 721–730                    Behavioral interactions 153–155
Conﬁguration                                   Behavioral responses model 148
  As Allocated 503                             Phases and modes of operation 200
  As Built 260, 503                            Physical environment architecture 101
  As Designed 56, 260, 309, 503                System Entity 21
  As Maintained 503, 785                       System architecture 68–70, 99
  As Produced 503                              System capability 231
  As Speciﬁed 503                              System element architecture 87
  As Validated 56, 503                       Contract Data Requirement List (CDRL)
  As Veriﬁed 56, 260, 309, 503                 Deﬁned 563
  Baselines 502                                Description 564
                                                                                        Index   793

  Discussed 313, 717                               Maintenance (def.) 616
  Technical reviews 718                            Maintenance Frequency 635
Contract Line Item Numbers (CLINs)               Correlation
  Technical reviews 718                            Positive / negative data 594
Contract Logistics Support (CLS)                 Cost
  Implementation 630–631                           Effectiveness 52
Contract/Subcontract                               Life Cycle 23, 52, 53
  Statement of Objectives (SOO) 78, 126, 253,      Design to (DTC) 403
    254, 273, 279, 317, 327, 352, 674              Total Ownership Cost (TOC) 33, 470, 640
  Statement of Work (CSOW) 230, 313, 305, 354,   Cost as an Independent Variable (CAIV) 53,
    384                                               162, 593, 657
  Work Breakdown Structure (CWBS)                Countermeasure
  CWBS Dictionary 95                               Application 152
  Technical direction 717, 730                     Deﬁned 147
  Terms and Conditions (Ts & Cs) 61, 78, 257,    Counter-Counter Measure (CCM)
    267, 305, 331, 467, 493, 714                   Application 152
  Type 714, 762                                    Deﬁned 147
  References 78, 95, 310, 447, 468, 501, 502     Criteria
Control or Staging Points                          Decision 673
  Deﬁned 178                                       Fitness for use 131, 362
  Developmental conﬁguration 504                   Requirement validation 384
  Mission 162                                    Critical Issues
  Veriﬁcation 697                                  Deﬁned 391
Control                                          Critical Operational/Technical Issues
  Real-Time 611                                       (COIs/CTIs)
Convention(s)                                      COI (def.) 391
  Angular displacement 555–556                     CTI (def.) 734
  Assumptions 559                                  Domain solutions 244
  Body axis 551                                    Evaluation of alternatives 296
  Control ﬂow 209–210                              Integrated Process and Product Development
  Cycle Time 603–604                                  (IPPD) 713
  Data ﬂow 209                                     Modeling and simulation 697
  Decomposition 10                                 SME peer reviews 583
  Deﬁned 545                                       Speciﬁcation issues and tracking 336–337
  Lesson learned 558                               System deployment 768
  Observer’s frame of reference 549                System Design Process 267
  PITCH, YAW, ROLL convention 550, 551–554         System Design V & V strategy 259
  Right Hand Rule (RHR) 549                        System O & S 779
  Semantics frame of reference 79                  Technical review resolution 717–718
Coordinate System                                  Trade studies 672, 674–676
  Angular displacement 555–556                     Training device concurrency 785
  Deﬁned 545                                       Validation requirements 319
  Dimensional reference 554                      Cues
  Discussion 548–556                               Auditory 531
  Frame of reference 548                           Behavioral responses model 148
  Observer’s eyepoint 549                          External inputs 92, 172
  Right Hand Cartesian 549                         Modal transition 197
  Transformation 559                               Vibratory 531
  World Coordinate System (WCS) 550                Visual 531
Correction                                         Use case 172
  Error 592                                      Customer
Corrective                                         Needs, wants, can afford, willing to pay 49, 57,
  Action (def.) 265                                   360–361, 369
794   Index

  Perceptions 57, 125, 718           Decision Making
  Satisfaction 485                     Aids 653
Cycles                                 Delivery of analysis results 577
  Embedded or nested 214               Documentation format 581
                                       HSI 469
Data                                   Stakeholder participation 770
  Acquirer and vendor 571              Team-based 12–13
  Accuracy and precision 547           Timing 576
  Archival preservation 752          Decision Support
  Authentication 571, 752              Process 257
  Convergence 595                      SE Process Model 282
  Correlation 594                    Decomposition
  Deﬁned 563                           Decimal-based 11
  Deliverable 564                      Hierarchical 10
  Design and development 564           Rules 84
  Dispersion 591                       Tag-based 11
  Export control See ITAR            Defects
  Flow 209–210                         Classiﬁcation of (def.) 692
  Integrity 751                        Correction of 270, 705
  Item Description (DID) 564           Design errors / ﬂaws 62, 120, 233, 258, 270,
  Maintainability 635–636                 328, 753
  Operations & Support (O&S) 565       Latent 120, 233, 258, 328, 616, 669, 703, 705,
  Personal engineering records 565        753, 775, 782
  Proprietary 572                      Workmanship 62
  Regression 595                     Deﬁciency
  Released (def.) 563                  Deﬁned 692
  Source credibility 582               Discussions 258, 270, 669, 703, 775, 782
  Sources—failure to document 647    Demonstration
  Subcontractor, vendor, supplier      Proof of concept 262
     564                               Proof of principle 262
  System performance 780               Technical 701–702
  Technical (def.) 563               DEMONSTRATION (Veriﬁcation Method)
  Validation 571                       See Veriﬁcation Methods
  Validity 687                       Deployment
  Variability 587                      Challenges 769–771
  Vendor 572                           Decision making 770
  Working data 563, 565                Deﬁned 759
Data Accession List (DAL)              Design for 406
  Application 565                      Engineering considerations 768
  Deﬁned 563                           Environmental considerations 766, 769
  Description 566                      Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT) 771
Data Accession List (DAL)              Interfaces 761
  Deﬁned 563                           Mock 769
  Description 566                      Modes of transportation 761
Data Correlation                       Objectives 759
  Convergence/divergence 595           Production distribution 760
  Positive/negative 594                Roles and responsibilities 760–761
  Regression 595                       Safety and security 766
Data Flow Convention 209–210           SE application 761
Decision(s)                            SE roles 760
  Criteria 577, 673                    Security 766, 771
  Factor 673                           Shock and vibration 771
  Make vs Buy 473, 481                 Site selection 763
  Technical attributes 575–577         Workforce availability 771
                                                                                         Index   795

Description                                          Description 261
  Architectural (AD) 411, 413                        Risk mitigation 261
  Baseline Concept (BCD) 447                         System development overview 61
  Interface Design 462                               System Integration, Test, & Evaluation (SITE)
  System/Segment Design Description 462                 738, 745
Design                                               System veriﬁcation 704
  Cautionary range 588                             Development Conﬁguration
  Defects, deﬁciencies, errors, ﬂaws See Defects     Deﬁned 252
  Normal operating range 588                         System Development Process 256
  Rationale document 330                           Development Strategy
  Warning range 589                                  Evolutionary 291, 293–294
Design and Construction Constraints                  Incremental 291, 297–298
  Deﬁned 217                                         Grand Design 291
  Operational capability matrix 223                  Spiral 291, 294–296
  Speciﬁcation of 310, 311                           System 292
Design Criteria List (DCL)                           System versus component 299
  Deﬁned 563                                         Waterfall 291, 292–293
  Description 566                                  Deviation
Design To/For Objectives                             Deﬁned 303
  Availability 401, 405                              Applications 752
  Comfort 404                                      Diagram Types
  Cost (DTC) 403                                     Architecture Block (ABD) 414
  Deployment 406                                     Functional Flow Block (FFBD) 414
  Disposal 407                                       Interaction 9
  Effectiveness 407                                  N2 (N ¥ N) 417, 455, 456, 472
  Efﬁciency 401, 407                                 State 190
  Growth and expansion 405                           System Block (SBD) 6, 414, 458, 468,
  Integration, test, & evaluation 407                   739
  Interoperability 401, 404                          Sequence See UML
  Lethality 406                                      Use Case See UML
  Maintainability 401, 407                         Dictionary
  Maneuverability 405                                CWBS 95, 501
  Mission support 406                                System Operations 179, 184, 221
  Mobility 404                                     Dimension—System of Units
  Portability 401, 405                               Deﬁned 545
  Producibility 402, 405                           Discrepancy(ies)
  Reconﬁgurability 402, 407                          Deﬁned 692
  Reliability 402, 405                               Classiﬁcation of 743
  Safety 402, 408                                    Report (DR) 265, 743, 750
  Security and protection 408                        Reporting obstacles 753
  Single use / multi-use applications              Disposal (Waste)
     404                                             Deﬁned 759
  Survivability 406                                Distribution
  Training 406                                       Exponential 624
  Transportability 403, 404                          Logarithmic (LogNormal) 587, 617
  Usability 403, 404                                 Negative Distribution 617, 618
  Veriﬁcation 407                                    Normal (Gaussian) 587, 617
  Vulnerability 403, 406                             Weibull 620
  Value (DTV) 403                                  Documents
Development                                          Applicable versus referenced 580, 583
  Models 290                                       Documentation
  Speciﬁcations 303                                  Acquirer and vendor 571
Developmental Test & Evaluation (DT&E)               Assumptions and sources 697
  Deﬁned 252                                         Dates 582
796   Index

  Electronic signatures 572                Change Proposals (ECPs) 728
  Issues 571                               Deﬁned 23
  Planning 567                             Human Factors (HFE) 533
  Lessons learned 582–583                  Mechanics 553
  Levels of formality 569                  Models 739
  Level of detail 570                      Professional certiﬁcation 475
  Organizational command media 565         Release Records (ERRs) (def.) 563
  Performance budgets 602                  Specialty 474
  Safety margins 602                       System (SE) (def.) 24
  Sequencing 567                           Technical report format 580–581
  Speciﬁcation 568                       Entity
  System design 568                        Deﬁned 67
  Test 568                               Entity Relationships
  Veriﬁcation 697                          Deﬁned 67
Domain                                     Logical 9, 68, 71–73
  HIGHER ORDER SYSTEMS 99–100              Logical Conﬁguration Item (LCI) 476
  PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT 100–101             Operational capability 218
  Solution (def.) 276                      Organizational 129
DoD Handbooks/Standards                    Peer-to-peer 111, 154
  DoD 5000.2-R 535                         Phases, modes, and states 191
  MIL-HDBK-217 642                         Physical 9, 68, 73–74
  MIL-HDBK-470 632                         Physical Conﬁguration Item (PCI) 476
  MIL-HDBK-881 736                       Environment(al)
  MIL-HDBK-46855 533–534, 536–538          Atmospheric 103
  MIL-STD-822 525                          Biospheric 104
  MIL-STD-1908 540–541                     Conditions 170
Dynamics                                   Cosmospheric 102
  Free body 552                            Deﬁned 68
  Mission 36                               Geospheric 103
  State vectors 553                        Global 102
                                           Hazardous materials (HAZMAT) 766, 771
Effect(s)                                  Hydrospheric 103
  Cumulative performance 592               Induced 101–106
  Electromagnetic environment (E3) 120     Local 103
  End (def.) 616                           HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS 100, 104–105
Effectivity                                NATURAL 102
  Based speciﬁcations 335, 498             Open Systems (OSE) 411
  Conﬁguration 497–498                     Operating 68
Effectiveness                              Reclamation 767
  Cost 52                                  Remediation 186
  Design for 407                           Stress screening 647
  Measures of (MOEs) 47, 51                System Threat 151
  Operational 47, 51, 775                Environmental, Safety, and Health (ES&H)
  System 48, 53                            Issues 767
Efﬁciency                                  Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) 766
  Deﬁned 401                               NEPA (1969) 766
  Design for 407                           Physical Domain Solution considerations 475
  Organizational 128                       Site selection considerations 746
Electrostatic Discharge (ESD) 644        Equilibrium—System
Emulate                                    State of 36
  Deﬁned 741                             Equipment
Engineering                                Alignment 754
  Analysis reports 579                     Automated Test (ATE) (def.) 734
                                                                                 Index    797

  Calibration 754                              Internal 165
  Common Support (CSE) 89, 631, 769, 775       Qualiﬁcation 618
  Peculiar Support (PSE) 89, 769, 775          Rate 635
  Powered Ground (PGE) (def.) 774              Period of Decreasing Failures 619–621
  Support & Handing 90                         Period of Increasing Failures 619–621
  Support Equipment (def.) 775                 Period of Stabilized Failures 619–620
  Test and Measurement 736, 775                Root cause 662
  Test, Measurement, and Diagnostic (TMDE)     Service life proﬁles 619–620
    89                                         Single point of (SPF) 419, 423, 644, 645
  Versus human strengths 527–528             Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA)
EQUIPMENT System Element                       Deﬁned 616
  Description 88                               Interface failure mitigation 120
  Performance affecters 157                    System mission analysis 165
  System architecture element 87               Fault tolerant architectures 421
Ergonomics                                     Behavioral Domain Solution 461
  Deﬁned 525                                   Physical Domain Solution 474
Error                                          Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability
  Analysis 535                                    (RAM) 643–644
  Correction 424                               Simulation-based failure investigations 663
  Cumulative 587, 592                        Failure Reporting and Corrective Action System
  Latent defects 258                              (FRACAS)
  Transient 736                                Deﬁned 631
Evaluations                                    Implementation 779
  Operational Sequence 535                   Fidelity
Event                                          Model (def.) 652
  Deﬁned 652                                   Application 656
  System performance 781                     Figure of Merit (FOM)
  Triggering 190                               Deﬁned 391
  Unscheduled or unanticipated 445             Performance 677
Evidence                                     Finding
  Objective 582                                Analytical Report 581
Evolutionary Development Model                 Trade study (def.) 673
  Strategy (def.) 291                        Firmware 494
  Description 293–294                        First Article
EXAMINATION Veriﬁcation Method                 Deﬁned 252
  See Veriﬁcation Methods                      Deployment 760
Exception Handling 232                         Description 739
Expendables                                    Reliability 621
  MISSION RESOURCES 91–92                    Force Multipliers
  References 232, 406                          Capability 142–143
Export Control                               Form, Fit, and Function
  See ITAR                                     Deﬁned 28
                                               Discussions 28, 310, 740
FACILITY System Element                        Product 21
  Description 94–95                            System 18
  Performance affecters 157                  Frame of Reference 549
  System architecture element 87               Conventions 549
Failure                                        Observer’s 77, 549, 654
  Cause (def.) 616                             OPERATING ENVIRONMENT
  Classiﬁcation 647                               106
  Deﬁned 616                                   Right Handed Cartesian 549
  Effect (def.) 616                            Right Hand Rule (RHR) 549
  Frequency distribution 624                   Semantics 77
798   Index

Frequency                                        Issue areas 539–540
  Corrective Maintenance 634                     Performance improvement 782
  Distributions 624                              Subjects of concern 536–538
Firmware 494                                    Human
Function                                         Characteristics 530
  Cumulative failure PDF 625                     Factors (def.) 525
  Deﬁned 28                                      Factors 528, 530
  Hazard rate 623–624                            Factors Engineering (HFE) 533–536
  Operations (def.) 440                          Performance strengths 527
  Reliability 623                                Interface classes 528–529
  Response 149, 171                              In the Loop (HITL) 526, 542, 663, 784
  Survival 623                                   Issue areas 536, 539, 540
  Transfer (def.) 149                            Machine interfaces 111
  Transfer response 171                          Subjects of concern 536–538
  Utility 673, 681–684                           Survivability 534
Functionality                                    System Integration (HSI) 533
  Out of the Box 481                             System tasking 538, 540–541
                                                 Versus EQUIPMENT strengths 527–528
Gaps                                            Human Factors
  Operational capability 448                     Anthropometric factors 530
  Problem-solution space 142                     Cognitive factors 530
Generalization (UML) 8                           Deﬁned 525
Grand Design                                     Psychological factors 530
  Development Strategy (def.) 291                Physiological factors 530
Growth and expansion                             Prototypes and demonstrations 536
  Design for 405                                 Sensory factors 530
                                                HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS Element 100
Haptic(s)                                        Business 105
  Deﬁned 525                                     Cultural 105
HARDWARE System Element                          Deﬁned 100
  Common Support Equipment (CSE) 89              Description 104–105
  Description 89–90                              Educational 105
  Peculiar support equipment (PSE) 89            Entity relationships 101
  Support and handling equipment 90              Government 105
  System architecture element 87                 Historical or heritage 104–105
  Test, Measurement, and Diagnostic Equipment    OPERATING ENVIRONMENT domain element
    (TMDE) 89–90                                    99
HARDWARE Conﬁguration Item (HWCI)                Transportation 105
  Deﬁned 491                                     Urban 105
  Discussions 270, 493–494, 495                 Human Performance
HARDWARE System Element                          Deﬁned 525
  Composition and description 89                 Evaluation 774, 781
Hazard Rate                                      Improvements 782
  Function 623                                   Indicators 784
Health Hazards
  Environmental, Safety, & Health See ESH       IEEE
  HIS element 533–534                             Standard 1471–2000 412–413
HIGHER ORDER Systems Domain                     Incremental Development Model
  Deﬁned 100                                      Description 297–298
  Human Context 100                               Strategy (def.) 291
  Physical Environment 100                      Independent Test Agency (ITA)
Human-System Integration (HSI)                    Deﬁned 253
  Areas of concern 533, 534                       OT & E 253, 262
  Elements 533                                    Qualiﬁcation tests 702
                                                                                     Index   799

   System O & S 776                                Biological 117
   System validation 56                            Challenges 519–522
   Test data authentication 752                    Chemical 117
   TEMP implementation 744                         Command and Control (C2) 531–532
   V & V implementation 707                        Commitments 520
Independent Veriﬁcation and Validation             Compatibility 150, 520
     (IV & V)                                      Control (def.) 111
   Beneﬁts of 703                                  Control Document (ICD) 516–518
   Deﬁned 692                                      Control Working Groups (ICWGs)
   Findings and recommendations 705–706               516
INDUCED ENVIRONMENT System Element                 Coupling 508
   Deﬁned 101                                      Dedicated 117
   Description 106                                 Deﬁned 111
   Entity relationships 101                        Deﬁnition and control challenges 519
   OPERATING ENVIRONMENT Architecture              Design Description (IDD) 462, 516
     element 99                                    Design documentation 516, 518
   System Element 101                              Design solution 512
   Threat sources 151                              Development challenges 519
INSPECTION (Veriﬁcation Method)                    Devices (def.) 111
   See Veriﬁcation Methods                         Electrical 116
Inputs                                             Electronic data 117–118
   Acceptable 22, 345, 588                         Environmental 146, 509
   External 148, 170                               Failure 120
   Unacceptable 22, 345, 588                       Failure mitigation & prevention 120
Input/Output (I/O) Devices                         Generalized 510–511, 532
   Audio I/O 532                                   Human—Machine 111
   Data entry 531                                  Human—System 469, 528–529
   Electrical control 532                          Interactions matrix 509
   Mechanical control 532                          Integrity 521
   Pointing control 531                            Interoperability 150, 520
   Translation displacement control 532            Latency 120
   Sensory I/O 532                                 Logical 115
Integrated Product & Process Development           Maintainability 521
     (IPPD) 713                                    Man-Machine Interface (MMI) (def.)
Issues                                                525
   Speciﬁcation 336                                Methodology (def.) 511
   Technical resolution 717                        Methodology—design 116
Integration                                        Natural Environment 117
   Rules of 83–84                                  Mechanical 116
Integration Point (IP)                             Objectives (purpose) 112
   Deﬁned 266                                      Optical 116
   System Integration, Test, & Evaluation (SITE)   Ownership (def.) 111
     737                                           Ownership and control 508, 515
   System of Systems (SoS) 77                      Passive 114
Instructional System Development (ISD)             Physical 115
   Personnel training 784                          Point-to-point 111
Interchangeability                                 Reliability 521
   Deﬁned 111                                      Requirements Speciﬁcation (IRS) 514
Interface(s)                                       Specialized 510, 511, 532
   Access 118                                      Speciﬁcation 514–515
   Acoustical 116                                  Standardized 117, 519
   Active 114                                      Types of 114
   Attributes 513                                  User-Computer (UCI) (def.) 526
   Availability 521                                Vulnerability 120, 521
800   Index

International System (SI) of Units                 Life Cycle Phases
   Metric (mks) system 547                           Identiﬁed 60
International Trafﬁc & Arms Regulations (ITAR)       Life cycles within life cycles 63
   Export control 570–571, 572, 686, 716             System Deﬁnition Phase 60
Item                                                 System Development Phase 61–62
   Commercial-Off-the-Shelf (COTS) 481, 483, 675     System Disposal Phase 62–63
   Conﬁguration (CI) 491, 493–496                    System O & S Phase 62
   Deﬁned 491                                        System Procurement Phase 61
   Logical Conﬁguration (LCI) 491                    System Production Phase 62
   Non-Developmental (NDI) 481, 483                Life Cycle(s)
   Physical Conﬁguration (PCI) 491                   Cost 23, 52, 53
   Repairable (def.) 775                             Evolutionary 65
   Replacement (def.) 775                            System/product 60
   Reliability Critical (RCI) 643                    Within life cycles 63
Interaction(s)                                     Life Cycle Phase(s)
   Analysis methodology 156                          Life Cycle 60
   Architectural 414                                 System Deﬁnition 60, 253
   Diagrams 9, 458                                   System Development 60, 254–257
   Hierarchical (def.) 68                            System Disposal 60
   Levels of 156                                     System O & S 60
   Peer Level (def.) 111                             System Procurement 60, 253
   Peer-to-peer 154                                  System Production 60
   PERSONNEL-EQUIPMENT 531                         Line Replaceable Unit (LRU)
   Point-to-point 111                                Deﬁned 491
   Strategic 156                                     Corrective maintenance 631
   System 459                                      Logical Entity Relationship
   System element 95                                 Application 71–73
   System of Interest (SOI) 509                      Deﬁned 68
   Tactical 156                                    Logistic(s)
Interoperability                                     Delay Time (LDT) 633
   Deﬁned 111                                        Support Analysis (LSA) (def.) 774
   Design for 404
   Interface 150                                   Make-Buy-Modify Decision
   Versus compatibility 150                         Deﬁned 481
Investment                                          Introduced 473
   Return on (ROI) 780                             Maintainability
                                                    Computations 632
Key Performance Parameters (KPPs)                   Concept 630
  Deﬁned 391                                        Data sources 636
                                                    Deﬁned 401
Latency                                             Design for 407
  System 598                                        Interface 521
Lethality                                           System 630
  Design for 406                                   Maintenance
Levels of Abstraction                               Administrative Delay Time (ADT) 634
  Architectural 414                                 Condition-based (CBM) 631, 633
  ASSEMBLY 81, 84                                   Corrective (def.) 616
  PART 82, 84                                       Corrective implementation 630
  PRODUCT 81, 84                                    Deﬁned 774
  SEGMENT 81, 84                                    Downtime (MDT) 633
  SUBASSEMBLY 82, 84                                Factory 631
  SUBSYSTEM 81, 84                                  Field or organizational 631, 774
  SYSTEM 79, 81                                     Preventive 214, 631
                                                                               Index     801

 System operations 184                       Logical-physical architecture 73, 454
 Types of 630                                Mission deﬁnition 160–165
Malfunction 233, 234                         Operating environment requirements 106
Manpower and Personnel                       Operations Domain Solution 441–447
 HSI element 534                             Physical Domain Solution 470–475
 SUPPORT SYSTEM operations 93                Requirements derivation 362–365
Man-Machine Interfaces (MMIs)                Requirements Domain Solution 432–436
 Computer-Human Interfaces (def.) 539        SE Process Model 277
 Deﬁned 525                                  System interactions 156
 Human—machine (def.) 111                    Trade Study 680
 User-Computer Interfaces (def.) 526        Metrics (Refer to)
Maneuverability                              Administrative Delay Time (ADT)
 Design for 405                              Availability
Material Review Board (MRB)                  Corrective Maintenance (CMT)
 Corrective action disposition 752           Figure of Merit (FOM)
Matrix                                       Measures of Suitability (MOSs)
 I/F Interaction 509                         Measures of Performance (MOPs)
 Logical interactions 455                    Measures of effectiveness (MOEs)
 N ¥ N 417, 456                              Logistics Delay Time (LDT)
 Requirements Veriﬁcation (RVM) 375, 376,    Maintenance Down Time (MDT)
    378–379, 514                             Mean Active Maintenance Time (MAMT)
 System capability 217, 220, 223             Mean Corrective Maintenance Time (CMT)
Mean                                         Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF)
 Active Maintenance Time (MAMT) 636          Mean Time Between Maintenance (MTBM)
 Corrective Maintenance Time (CMT) 635       Mean Time To Failure (MTTF)
 Time Between Failures (MTBF) 624, 630       Mean Time To Repair (MTTR)
 Time Between Maintenance (MTBM) 636         Preventive Maintenance (PMT) 633
 Time To Repair (MTTR) 635, 638              Technical Performance Measures (TPMs)
Measurement                                 Mission
 Biased or aliased 751                       Analysis 159, 651
 Technical Performance (TPM) 392             Deﬁned 159
 TPM challenges 397                          Deﬁnition methodology 160–165
 TPM reporting 398                           Event Timeline (MET) 444
Measures of Effectiveness (MOE)              Needs Statement (MNS) 160
 Deﬁned 47                                   Objectives 127, 161
 Mission gap analysis 126                    Reliability 160, 161, 628
 Description 51                              Strategy 162
Measures of Performance (MOP)                Sustainment 164
 Deﬁned 47                                   Unreliability 622
 Design to 598, 599                         Mission Critical
 Organizational 124                          Component 618, 621, 644
 Speciﬁcation requirements 323               System (def.) 159
 TPM plots 396                              Mission Phase of Operation
 Trade space 677                             Objective 192
Measures of Suitability (MOS)               Mission Support
 Application 51–52                           Design for 406
 Deﬁned 47                                  MISSION SYSTEM
Methodology                                  Conﬁguration 500
 Behavioral Domain Solution 459–461          Introduced 40
 Component selection 483                     Modal operations and interactions 195–198
 COTS selection 483                          Organization roles and missions 130–133
 Interface deﬁnition 116                     Personnel Roles 88
 Interface design 511                        Roles 40, 88
802   Index

 System architecture element 69, 87        Issue arbitration 155
 Supply chain 130–132                      Open loop 153
 System elements 88                        Portability 669
MISSION RESOURCES System Element           Problem-solving / solution Development 277
 Description 91–92                         SE Process 275–289
 Performance affecters 157                 Status and health request 154
 System architecture element 87            Stochastic model 654
Mobility                                   System operations 179–186
 Design for 404                            Test environment stimulus 662
Mode(s) of Operation                       Undocumented features 669
 ABNORMAL operations 199, 233–234, 320     V-Model (def.) 256, 272
 ANALYSIS 199                              Validated (def.) 652
 CALIBRATE/ALIGN 199                       Validation (def.) 653
 CATASTROPHIC operations 321              Model-Test-Model 652
 CONFIGURE 199                            Modeling and Simulation (M&S)
 Construct 195                             Accreditation (def.) 652
 Deﬁned 190                                Architectural conﬁguration 643, 658
 Derivation 194                            Architecture selection example 658–659
 Description 194                           Certiﬁcation 655, 706
 EMERGENCY operations 320                  Certiﬁed (def.) 652
 Equating to capabilities 203              Challenges and Issues 668–669
 MAINTENANCE 199                           Characteristics 656
 NORMAL operations 199, 320                Deﬁned 652
 Operations Domain Solution 445            Deterministic 652, 654
 of transportation 761                     Documentation 669
 OFF 199                                   Event (def.) 652
 POWER-DOWN 199                            Examples 658–668
 POWER-UP/INITIALIZE 199                   Failure investigations 662–663
 SAFING 199                                Fidelity (def.) 652
 TRAINING 199                              Frequency distribution 617
Modal                                      Initial conditions (def.) 652
 Transitions 195–198                       Initial state (def.) 652
 Triggering events 196                     Monte Carlo algorithm (def.) 653
Model                                      Monte Carlo method (def.) 653
 6 Degree of Freedom (DOF) 551, 553        Performance allocations 659
 Application examples 658–668              Physical 643
 Assumptions and scenarios 668             Quick look reliability 642
 Behavioral response 148–149               Performance 642
 Business operations 213                   Reliability network 626
 Certiﬁed (def.) 652                       Simulation time 653
 Certiﬁcation 655–656, 706                 Simulation-Based Acquisition (SBA)
 Closed loop 153                              660
 Deﬁned 652                                SOI Operations 208
 Deﬁciencies and ﬂaws 668                  Stimulation 653
 Deterministic (def.) 654                  Stochastic process 653, 654
 Development 654                           System performance analysis 610
 Documentation 669                         Test beds 664–668
 Earth-Centered, Earth-Fixed (ECEF) 551    Time (def.) 653
 Earth-Centered Inertial (ECI) 551         Training 663–664
 Earth-Centered Rotating (ECR) 551         Validated (def.) 652
 Engineering 739                           Validation (def.) 653
 Fidelity 652, 656–657                     Validation description 655
 Hostile encounter 155                     Validation reasons 781
 Improper application 668                  Veriﬁcation (deﬁnition) 653
                                                                                    Index    803

 Veriﬁcation (description) 697                   Operations and Support (O&S) 775
 Virtual reality (def.) 664                      Phase 192, 444
Modes and states 445                             System 127
 Physical Domain Solution 474                   Open
MOE, MOS, MOP, TPM                               Standards 545
 Relationships 392                               Systems Environment (OSE) 411
Moments of Truth 126                            OPERATING ENVIRONMENT Domain
 Application x, xii                              Architecture 97
Monte Carlo                                      Scope 98
 Algorithm / Method (def.) 653                   System architecture 69
 Techniques 589                                 Operation(s)
                                                 ABNORMAL 233, 320
National Aeronautics and Space Administration    Abnormal recovery 234
     (NASA)                                      CATASTROPHIC 321
  Apollo Program 165, 457                        Concept of Operations (ConOps) 179
  International Space Station (ISS) 161          Computer resources support 93
  Space Shuttle 61, 198, 212, 235                Decision support 93
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT System Element               Deﬁned 5
  Classes 102                                    Dictionary 221
  Deﬁned 100                                     EMERGENCY 320
  Composition 102–104                            Function (def.) 440
  Entity relationships 101                       Manpower and personnel 93
  OPERATING ENVIRONMENT architecture             Mapping to phases 219
     element 99                                  Mode of 190
  Threat sources 151                             NORMAL 320
Need                                             Packaging, Handling, Storage, & Transportation
  Operational 55                                    (PHS&T) 93
  Prioritized 126                                Phase objectives 192
  Speciﬁcation of 311                            Publications support 93
Non-Developmental Items (NDIs)                   Recovery 234
  Certiﬁcate of compliance (C of C) 696          Shadow 768
  Deﬁned 481                                     State of 190
  Description 483                                System 179
  Driving issues 484                             System maintenance 93
  Realities 469                                  Supply support 93
  Selection questions 484–487                    Technical data 93
Notation                                         Training and training support 93
  Decimal-based 11–12                           Operations and Support (O & S)
  Scientiﬁc 547–548                              Objectives 775
  Tag-based 11–12                               Operational
Notes                                            Architecture (def.) 439
  Speciﬁcation 311                               Asset 439
Notebook                                         Availability 50, 57, 636–637, 775
  System Design 330                              Capability bounding 230
NPRD-95 642                                      Concept Description (OCD) 126, 180,
                                                    198
Operations and Support (O & S)                   Control ﬂow 209–210
 Focus areas 781–785                             Cycles within cycles 214
 Phase objectives 775–776                        Data ﬂow 209–210
Object                                           Domain Solution 439
 Deﬁned 68                                       Effectiveness 47, 51, 57, 390, 775
 Management Group (OMG) 6                        Need 55
Objectives                                       Need priorities 126
 Mission 127, 161                                Performance monitoring 777–780
804   Index

 Requirement document (ORD) 126, 253, 319,   Opportunity
    706                                        Location-based 137
 Scenario 167                                  Space (def.) 136
 Site activation 759                           SE Process implementation 278, 279
 States versus physical states 200–202         Targets of (TOO) 123, 133
 Suitability 48, 50, 57, 390, 775              Time-based 137
 Task sequence evaluations 535                 Types of 136
 Utility 57, 390, 775                          Understanding 279
Operational Requirements Document (ORD)      Optimization
 System development 253, 255                   Behavioral Domain Solution 282, 461
 System O & S 783                              Operations Domain Solution 282
Operational Test & Evaluation (OT&E)           Physical Domain Solution 282, 475, 477
 Deﬁned 253                                    System 575, 578, 611
 Risk mitigation 261–262                       System performance 461, 578
 System Development Phase 61                 ORGANIZATION System Element
 System performance monitoring 776             Deﬁned 100
 System validation 56                          OPERATING ENVIRONMENT architecture
 Validation requirements 319                     element 99
 V & V activity 704                          Organizational
Operating Condition(s)                         Accountability 128
 ABNORMAL operations 233                       Command media 565
 CATASTROPHIC operations 321                   Entity relationships 129
 Categories 321                                Roles and missions 130–133
 EMERGENCY operations 233                      System Elements (OSEs) 124
 Initial 36                                  Out-of-the-Box Functionality 481
 NORMAL operations 233                       Outputs
 Prerequisite 36                               Acceptable 21, 345, 738
 Speciﬁcation 321                              Unacceptable 21, 345, 738
OPERATING CONSTRAINTS System                 Outsourcing
    Element                                    Deﬁned 481
 Deﬁned 100
 OPERATING ENVIRONMENT architecture          Packaging, Shipping, Handling & Transportation
    element 99                                   (PHS&T)
 System use case 170                           Support operations 93, 94
Operations Domain Solution                   Paradigm(s)
 Baseline Concept Description (BCD) 447        Bathtub 619–620
 Challenges 448                                Deﬁned 122
 Critical Operational Issues (COIs) 447        Requirements derivation 362
 Critical Technical Issues (CTIs) 447        Parameters
 Deﬁned 276                                    Key Performance (KPPs) 391
 Dependencies 440                              Technical (Performance) (TPPs)
 Development 440                                 391
 Introduced 243–245                          Parts Program
 Key elements 440                              Reliability 646
 Methodology 441                             Peculiar Support Equipment (PSE)
 Objective 440                                 See Equipment
 Optimization 282                            PERSONNEL System Element
 Responsibility 440                            Description 88
 SE Process Model implementation 280–281       Equipment interactions 531
 Sequencing 440                                Equipment trade-offs 530
 Veriﬁcation and validation 447                HSI element 532
 Workﬂow sequences 443                         Performance affecters 157
 Work products 448                             Roles—MISSION SYSTEM 88
                                                                                          Index       805

  Roles—SUPPORT SYSTEM 88                          Physical Entity Relationships
  System architecture element 87                     Application 73–74
Performance                                          Deﬁned 68
  Analysis tools 578                               PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
  Deﬁned 28                                          Domain 100
  Expected or mean approximation 609                 Levels of abstraction 101
  Evaluation 776                                     System elements 102
  Human-System Integration (HSI) 782               Physical Domain Solution
  Human 774, 781                                     Challenges 476
  Improvements 612                                   COIs/CTIs 469, 475
  Level of 28                                        Deﬁned 276
  Measures of (MOP) 47                               Dependencies 467
  Monitoring 777–781                                 Development 465
  Objective 29                                       ESH Compliance 475
  Organization System Element (OSE)                  Introduced 243–245
     124                                             Key elements 466
  Pareto ranked 612                                  Methodology 470
  Personnel 88                                       Modes and states of operation 474
  Processing time 605                                Objectives 466
  Safety margins 460, 474                            Optimization 282, 475–477
  Subjective 29, 34                                  Performance budgets and margins 474
  Trends 781                                         Professional certiﬁcation 475
  Veriﬁcation and validation (V&V)                   Requirements allocation 471
     701–702                                         Responsibility 467
Performance Budgets                                  SE Process Model implementation 281
  Assignment 474                                     Veriﬁcation and Validation (V&V) 475
  Allocations 460, 598, 601–602                      Work Products 477
  Documentation 602                                Plan
  Ownership 474, 602                                 Environmental mitigation 766
Phases of Operation                                  Integrated Support (ISP) 630
  Allocation of mission operations 192               Integrated Master (IMP) 697, 705, 764
  Deﬁned 111                                         Operations and Support (O&S) 630
  Mission 192                                        Operational site activation 764–765
  Objectives 192, 444                                Strategic 122
  of Flight 193                                      System Integration & Veriﬁcation 744, 755
  Pre-Mission 192                                    System O & S 630
  Post-Mission 192                                   Tactical 123
  Entity relationships 191                           Technical management 567, 639
Phases, Modes and States                             Test & Evaluation Master (TEMP) 319, 744
  Entity relationships (ERs) 191, 200, 202         Planning
PHS&T                                                Facility engineering 764
  Description 93, 94                                 Destructive test sequence 745
  Implementation 778                                 Site survey 762
Physical Architecture                                Strategic 123–124
  Attributes 469                                     System deployment risk mitigation 769
  Baseline 475                                       Tactical 124
  Conﬁguration states 473                          Point
  Development 467                                    Critical staging or control 162, 178, 504, 697
  Formulation 470                                    Integration (IP) 77, 266, 737
Physical Conﬁguration                                of delivery 160
  Audits (PCA) 56, 253, 255, 256, 260, 571, 696,     of origination or departure 160, 193
     729, 752                                        of termination or destination 160, 193
  States 200–202                                     Point-to-point (def.) 111
806   Index

Portability                                  Product
  Deﬁned 401                                   Deﬁned 21
  Challenges 669                             Production Systems
Post-Mission Phase of Operation                Deployment 760
  Objective 192                                Low Rate Initial (LRIP) 621, 729
Power, Balance of 37                           Mass or full scale 620–621, 729
Practice                                     Proﬁle
  Best or preferred 5, 311                     Equipment characteristics 647
  Deﬁned 5                                     Failure rate 622
  SE speciﬁcation                              Service life 619
Precedented                                  Product Structure
  Systems 21, 266, 332, 457                    Deﬁned 77
Pre-Planned Product Improvements (P3I)         Tree 467–468
  Releases/upgrades 93, 293                  Pre-Mission Phase of Operation
Principle                                      Objective 192
  Deﬁned 4                                   Preservation, Packaging, & Delivery
Probability                                    Speciﬁcation of 312
  Circular Error (CEP) (def.) 587, 592–594   Producer-supplier
  Density Function (PDF) 587, 622, 625         Relationships 131–132
  of occurrence (use case) 172               Procedures
Problem                                        Operating 91
  Reporting 744, 774                           Standard Operating Procedures and Practices
  Statement 136, 139, 576                        (SOPPs) 91, 196, 565, 742
Problem Space                                Proof of Concept/Principle
  Boundaries 138, 279                          Demonstration 262
  Control 139                                Properties
  Deﬁned 136                                   Deﬁned 28
  Degree of Urgency 140                        Dimensional 546
  Dynamics 137                                 System 27
  Forecasting 138                            Prototypes & Demos
  Partitioning 140–141, 278                    Design veriﬁcation support 697
  Representation 141                           Human Factors Engineering (HFE) 536
  Semantics communications 78                  Technical demonstrations 701
  SE Process 278                             Provisioning 774
  Solving 71, 137
  Space 136, 279, 433, 786                   Quality
PROCEDURAL DATA System Element                Function Deployment (QFD) 408
  Composition 91                              System 564
  Performance affecters 157                  Quality Record(s)
  System architecture element 87              Deﬁned 253
Process(ing)                                  SE Process 283
  Deﬁned 4                                   Queue
  Decision Support 257                        Time 598
  SE 277
  Stochastic 653                             Rate
  System Design 267                            Failure 633
  Technical Management 257                     Hazard 624
  Time 598, 605                                Repair 635
  Trade study 679                            Recommendations
Producer—Supplier                              Analytical Report 581
  Relationships 132                            Deﬁned 673
Producibility                                Reconﬁgurability
  Deﬁned 402                                   Deﬁned 402
  Design for 405                               Design for 407
                                                                                Index   807

Records                                      System/component mortality 621
  Engineering Release (ERR) 563              Unreliability 622
  Personal engineering data 565            Repair
  Quality (QR) 253                           Deﬁned 775
Redundancy                                 Repairability
  Architectural conﬁguration 422, 645        Deﬁned 775
  Cold or standby 422                      Replenishment
  Component 645                              Expendables and consumables 183
  Compensating provisions 173, 646         Report
  Data link 424                              After Action/Follow-Up 779
  Improving reliability 644                  Analysis conclusions 581, 583
  K-out-of-n systems 423                     Discrepancy (DR) 265, 743, 750,
  Like 423                                      753
  Operational 422                            Engineering analysis 580
  Processing 423                             Findings 581, 583, 686
  Service Request 424                        Hardware Trouble (HTR) 744
  Unlike 423                                 Problem 774, 779, 782
Refurbishment/Reconditioning                 Recommendations 581, 583, 686
  Test article 754                           Test Incident 736
Regression                                   Trade Study 673, 678, 684–687
  Data 595                                 Report(ing)
  Testing 742                                System Analysis 612
Regulations See ITAR                         System capability 235
Reliability                                Request for Proposal (RFP)
  Bathtub curve 619–620                      Failure to research references 333
  Challenges 647                             Issues and clariﬁcations 336
  Compensating actions 173, 616, 646         Interface speciﬁcation requirements 514
  Critical items (RCIs) 643                  SE Design 267
  Deﬁned 402                                 Speciﬁcation analysis 327
  Design for 405                             System performance history 779
  Estimates 643                              System requirements 317
  Estimates versus predictions 629           System veriﬁcation 55
  Function 623                             Requirement(s)
  Hazard rate 624                            ABNORMAL operations 320
  Interface 521                              Allocation 221, 225, 358, 365, 641–642,
  Mission (def.) 160                            651
  Mission discussion 160–162, 629,           Baseline (def.) 491
     639                                     Capability 318
  Models 642–643                             CATASTROPHIC operations 320
  Parallel network conﬁguration 626          Categories 318
  Parts/circuits tolerance analysis 644      Common problems 323
  Parts program 646                          Compliance 337
  Period of Decreasing Failures 619, 620     Compound 382
  Period of Increasing Failures 619          Conﬂicting 230, 323–324
  Period of Stabilized Failures 619          Conformance 337
  Precepts 619                               Deﬁciencies 323–324, 331–335
  Resource allocations 646                   Deﬁned 316
  Series network conﬁguration 626            Derivation 35, 358, 359–365
  Series-Parallel network conﬁguration       Derivation methodology 362–365
     627                                     Derivation paradigm 362
  Service life proﬁles 619                   Development 340
  Single point of failure (SPF) 645          Development guidelines 381–383
  Software 648                               Duplicated 230, 324
  Survival function 623                      Elicitation (def.) 316, 317
808   Index

 EMERGENCY operations 320                             Validation 258, 316, 319, 359
 Flow Down 359, 365                                   Validation criteria 258, 383
 Good 371                                             Veriﬁcation 316, 319, 359, 754
 Hierarchy 322                                        Veriﬁcation Matrix (RVM) 375, 378–379, 514
 Interfaces 318                                       Veriﬁcation method selection 375–378
 Issues and Clariﬁcations 435                         Visual conﬁguration (graphics) 364
 Key characteristics 371–372                          Writing versus developing 230
 Leaf level (def.) 358                              Requirements Domain Solution
 Management tools 379                                 Architecture 432
 Meet 338                                             Baseline 436
 Minimization 385                                     Challenges 436–437
 Misplaced 323–324                                    Critical Operational Issues (COIs) 435
 Missing 230, 323–324                                 Critical Technical Issues (CTIs) 435
 Modes of operation 320                               Deﬁned 276
 MOEs, MOSs, MOPs 385                                 Dependencies 431
 Need for 305                                         Development 431
 Non-functional 316, 318                              Introduced 243–245
 NORMAL operations 320                                Key elements 431
 Objective 316, 319                                   Methodology 432
 Ofﬁcial (formalization) 372–373                      Objective 431
 Operational 316, 318                                 Responsibility 432
 Operational characteristics 382                      SE Process Model implementation 279
 Optimal 386–387                                      Sequencing 431
 Origin of 65–66                                      V&V 436
 Outcome-based 372                                    Work Products 437
 Performance (def.) 316                             RESOURCES System Element
 PERSONNEL 312                                        Deﬁned 100
 Performance characteristics 365                      OPERATING ENVIRONMENT domain element
 Phases of operation 320                                 99
 Primitive 374                                      Responses
 Priorities 319                                       Behavioral 92, 150
 Reliability, Availability, Maintainability (RAM)   Return on Investment (ROI)
    640, 642                                          Discussions 16, 18, 23, 41, 46, 48, 52, 128, 132,
 SE Process 359                                          161, 691, 780
 Singular 754                                       Review(s)
 Source or originating 303, 317                       Categories 712
 Stakeholder 316, 317                                 Common types of 719
 Stakeholder objectives 317                           Conference minutes 711, 716
 Statement challenges 590                             Contract requirements 713, 715
 Statement development 373–375                        Critical Design (CDR) 255, 259, 267, 287, 504,
 SUPPORT SYSTEM 312                                      711, 726
 TBDs and TBSs 349                                    Date driven 713
 Technical characteristics 382                        Entry/exit criteria 715, 716
 Testing 359, 383                                     Event driven 713
 Threshold 316, 319                                   Formal Qualiﬁcation (FQR) 504
 Time 160                                             Hardware/Software Speciﬁcation (SSR) 504,
 Traceability 128, 359, 365, 367–368, 462                711, 722–724
 Traceability audits 718                              In-Process Review (IPR) 711, 729–730
 Traceability veriﬁcation 697                         Items 718
 Types of 317                                         Integrated Baseline Review (IBR) 720
 Use case-based 371                                   Location 716
 Use of “all, and/or, etc.” 381–383                   Objective 712
 Use of “shall” and “will” 381                        Peer reviews 583, 711
                                                                                          Index   809

  Preliminary Design (PDR) 711, 723, 725              Iterative characteristic 276, 283
  Presentation / handout materials 259, 504, 711,     Methodology 277
    716, 723, 725                                     Objective 277
  Production Readiness (PRR) 504, 711, 728–730        Operations Domain Solution 280
  Quality records (QRs) 715                           Physical Domain Solution 281
  Ready-to-Ship Review (RTSR) 712, 728–729            Quality Records (QRs) 283
  Software Speciﬁcation (SSR) 259                     Recursive characteristic 276, 285
  System Design (SDR) 259, 504, 712, 721, 723         Requirements Domain Solution 279
  System Requirements (SRR) 331, 332, 336, 352,       Speciﬁcation development 350
    504, 712, 720–721                                 Work products 283
  System Veriﬁcation (SVR) 56, 504, 712, 728        Scenario
  Technical direction 717                             Consequences 171, 173
  Technical reviews 711, 727                          Operational (def.) 167
  Test Readiness (TRR) 504, 712, 727, 755             Use case (def.) 168
  Veriﬁcation 697                                     What if 219
  Work products 715                                 Schedule
Risk 711                                              Master Program (MPS) 705
  COIs/CTIs 461                                       Integrated Master (IMS) 417, 705
  Design 259                                        Security
  Mission 164                                         Communications 32
  Mitigation (DT&E and OT&E) 261–262                  Deployment 766
  Reducing 481                                        Design for 408
  System 164                                          System (def.) 402
  Speciﬁcation reuse 332                              Types of 32
  Trade studies 687–688                             Semantics
Roles                                                 Frame of reference 77
  MISSION SYSTEM 40                                   Levels of abstraction 76
  SUPPORT SYSTEM 40                                   Opportunity versus problem 137
ROLES AND MISSIONS System Element                   Sensitivity Analysis
  Deﬁned 100                                          Deﬁned 673
  OPERATING ENVIRONMENT domain element                Description 684
    99                                              Services
Rules                                                 Acceptable 345
  Operational capability analysis 237                 Unacceptable 345
  System decomposition/integration 81–83            Serviceability
                                                      Deﬁned 402
Safety                                              Similarity
  Critical (def.) 525                                 See Veriﬁcation Methods
  Design for 408                                    Simplicity
  HSI issue area 539                                  Deﬁned 402
  HSI subject of concern 538                        Simulate
  System (def.) 402                                   Deﬁned 741
Safety Margin                                       Simulation
  Application 599–602                                 Discussion 658
  Deﬁned 598                                          Failure investigation 662
Sanity Check 575                                      System 658
SE Process Model 277                                  Time (def.) 653
  Application 285                                     Virtual reality (def.) 664
  Behavioral Domain Solution 281                    Simulator
  Characteristics 283                                 Concurrency 783, 785
  Decision support 282                                Fixed/motion platforms 664
  Deﬁned 276                                        Single-use applications
  Entry criteria 277                                  Design for 404
810   Index

Site—Deployment                               Content 310
  Data collection 763                         Deﬁned 303
  Installation (def.) 759                     Design and construction constraints 311
  Operational Site Activation (def.) 759      Detail (def.) 303
  Preparation and development (def.) 765      Developer perspective 328
  Selection (def.) 759                        Development (def.) 303
  Survey (def.) 759, 762–763                  Development checklist 354
  Visits 763                                  Development paradigm 349–352
Software Conﬁguration Control Board (SCCB)    Development sequencing 313
  Behavioral Domain Solution 453              Deviation (def.) 303, 752
  Deviations and waivers 752                  Effectivity-based 335, 498
  Operations Domain Solution 440              Evolution 313
  Requirements baselines 432                  Facility Interface (FIS) 764, 770
SOFTWARE System Element                       Feasibility 307
  Change Requests (CRs) 744                   General attributes 306–307
  Description 90                              General standard outline 306, 332, 342–343
  System architecture element 87              Generalized structure 312
Solution(s)                                   Graphical analysis 329
  Behavioral Domain 451                       Hardware Requirements (HRS) 496
  Candidate 143                               Hierarchical analysis 329
  Domain (def.) 276                           Interface (def.) 303
  Generalized 406, 532                        Interface Requirements (IRS) 514–515
  Operations Domain 439                       Issues and concerns 336
  Physical Domain 465                         Key elements 310–312
  Requirements Domain 430                     Language 307, 371
  Specialized 406, 532                        Misplaced requirements 323–324
Solution Domains                              Missing requirements 323–324
  Introduced 244–245                          Model-based structured analysis 346–349
  Deﬁned 276                                  Model ﬁdelity 657
  Sequencing 244                              Modeling & simulation analysis 329
Solution Space                                Notes & assumptions 311
  Bounding 279                                Objectives of 304
  Deﬁned 136                                  Over/under 334
  Partitioning 278                            Ownership and accountability 306, 309, 318, 333
  Requirements Domain 433                     Packaging 312
  SE Process 278                              Performance (def.) 303
  System O & S 786                            Performance criteria 312
Space                                         PERSONNEL requirements 312
  Opportunity 136, 279                        References versus applicable docs. 333
  Problem 136–141, 278, 279, 433, 786         References 333, 335
  Solution 136, 141–142, 278, 279, 433, 786   Requirements categories 318–319
Speciﬁcation(s)                               Requirements duplication 324
  Acquirer perspective 328                    Requirements structure 371
  Ambiguity 333                               Requirements vs. CSOW tasks 305
  Analyzing 327                               Reviews 341, 355
  Applicable documents 333                    SE Practices 311
  Baseline control 306                        SE Process Model application 350
  Broad references 333                        Sections 352–353
  Change management 324, 325                  Sequencing 313
  Common deﬁciencies 323, 331                 Software Requirements (SRS) 496
  Compliance 337                              SUPPORT SYSTEM Requirements 311
  Conﬂicting requirements 323–324             Tailoring (def.) 303
  Conformance 337                             TBDs and TBSs 349
                                                                                 Index   811

  Technology analysis 329                   State Machine Deﬁned 190
  Traceability 307                            of operation 190, 199
  Traceability to CWBS 310                    Operational 200
  Types of 307, 308                           Physical conﬁguration 201, 473
  Use case relationship 175                   Physical versus operational 200–202
  Veriﬁcation method 311                    Statement
  Waivers (def.) 303                          Mission Needs (MNS) 126, 160, 253
  Writers versus developers 335               of Objectives (SOO) See Contract SOO
Speciﬁcation Development                      Problem 136, 576
  Architecture-based approach 341           Statics 36
  Feature-based approach 341, 343–344       Statistical Data
  Performance-based approach 341, 345–346     Application 590
  Reuse-based approach 341, 344–345           Dispersion 591
  Reuse risks 332                           Statistical Distributions
Speciﬁcation Tree                             Normal (Gaussian) 587
  Deﬁned 303                                  Logarithmic (LogNormal) 587
  Implementation 307, 309, 498                Variance 587
  Ownership and control 309                 Statistical Process Control (SPC) 587
  Tree alignment with CIs 498               Stimulate
Spiral Development Model                      Deﬁned 741
  Description 294–296                       Stimulation
  Strategy (def.) 291                         Deﬁned 653
Staging or Control Points 162, 178,         Stimuli
     504                                      Behavioral response model 148
Stakeholder                                   External inputs 92, 172
  Deﬁned 39                                   Modal transition dependency 197
  Requirements 317                            Test environment 661
  Roles 42–45                                 Use case 172
Standard(s)                                 Strategic
  Application 559                             Plan 122
  Atmosphere 557                              Planning 123
  Authorities 546                             Threats 147
  Conﬂicts 559                              Strategy
  Deﬁned 545                                  Evolutionary development 291
  Deviation 586                               Grand Design 291
  Informative clauses 546                     Incremental development 291
  Lessons learned 558                         Mission 162
  Normative clauses 546                       SE design 269
  Open (def.) 545                             System Integration, Test, & Evaluation 268, 745
  Speciﬁcation references 311                 Spiral development 291
  Subject matter 546                          System development V & V 253–261
  Technical (def.) 545                        System development workﬂow 251
  Weights and measures 546                    System Design Process 266
Standard Operating Practices & Procedures     System vs. component development 299
  (SOPPs) 91, 196, 565, 641, 742              Waterfall development 291
State(s)                                    Strengths
  Deﬁned 190                                  Human performance 527
  Diagram 190                                 Machine performance 527–528
  Entity relationships 202                  Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, & Threats
  Final 10, 170                                  (SWOT) 44, 122, 126, 133
  Initial 10, 36, 170                       Subcontract Data Requirements List (SDRL)
  Machine 190                                 Deﬁned 563
  of equilibrium 36                           References 565
812    Index

Suboptimization                                  System(s)
  Deﬁned 575                                       Abuse 168, 173
  Description 578                                  Acceptability challenges 48
Subphases                                          Adaptation 147
  of Operation 191, 193                            Affordability 49
Subsystems                                         Allowable actions 202
  Mission speciﬁc 500–502                          Analytical representation 22
  Infrastructure 500–502                           Application/misapplication 168, 173
Suitability                                        Application types 211–212
  Measures of (MOS) 51                             Attributes 30–33
  Operational 48, 50, 775                          Availability 636
Supply Chain                                       Balance of power 37
  Producer—supplier 130–132                        Benign 164
Support                                            Bounding 98
  and handling equipment 90                        Business 105
  Contract Logistics (CLS) 631                     Capabilities matrix 217
  Design for mission 406                           Capability construct 231
  Equipment 775                                    Certiﬁcation 760
  Supply 94                                        Characteristics 34–35
  System 92–94                                     Checkout 767
SUPPORT SYSTEM                                     Complexity reduction 71
  Computer resources support operations 94,        Concept of operations (ConOps) 446
     778                                           Context 20
  Decision support operations 93, 778              Cooperative 164
  Elements 87–88                                   Cost 481
  Facility operations 778                          Cultural 105
  Introduced 40                                    Deactivation 183
  Maintenance operations 93, 778                   Decomposition rules 81–83
  Manpower and personnel operations 93–94,         Dedicated use 211
     778                                           Deﬁned 18
  Organizational roles and missions 130–133        Deployment 758
  Performance affecters 157                        Educational 105
  Personnel roles 88                               Effectiveness 48, 53
  PHS&T operations 94, 778                         Element 68, 70
  Publications support operations 94, 778          End User/User 39
  Roles 40                                         Engagement 147
  Supply chain 131                                 Equilibrium 36
  Supply support operations 94, 778                Fault tolerant 421–422
  System architecture element 69, 87               Feasibility 49
  System elements 88                               Frame-based 611
  Technical data operations 94, 778                Friendly or cooperative 164
  Training and training support operations 94,     Government 105
     778                                           Historical or heritage 104
  Types of operations 93–94                        Hostile or adversarial 164
Supportability                                     Initial operating conditions 316
  Deﬁned 402                                       Installation 767
Survivability                                      Integration 767
  Deﬁned 402                                       Integration rules 81–83
  Design for 406                                   Introduced 70
Susceptibility                                     Latency 598
  Deﬁned 402                                       Legacy (def.) 481
Sustainability                                     Levels of abstraction 76
  Deﬁned 402                                       Life cycle phases 60
Symptom Solving 137                                Maintainability 629
                                                                                   Index   813

  Malfunction 234                                Reusable 211–212, 214
  MISSION 40                                     Single-use 211–212, 214
  Mission critical 159                           Types of system 211–212
  Mission dynamics 36                          System Documentation
  Objectives 127                                 Design 568
  of Interest (SOI) 40, 68                       Export control Refer to ITAR
  of Systems (SoS) 74, 77                        Integration and Test 568–569
  of Units 546                                   Issues 571–572
  Operational capability (def.) 217              Plans 567
  Operations (def.) 179                          Posting Acquirer / vendor data 571
  Operations dictionary (def.) 179, 184, 221     Sanity check 575
  Operations Model (def.) 179                    Speciﬁcations 568
  Optimization 575, 578, 611, 651              System Engineering
  Performance optimization 461, 578              Deﬁned 24
  Phase-out 183                                System Engineering and Integration Team
  Precedented 179, 266, 457                         (SEIT)
  Prohibited actions 202                         Performance budgets and margins 602
  Production deployment 760                      RAM reviews 646
  Quality 564                                    Speciﬁcation development 349
  Real-time 611                                  Speciﬁcation ownership 309, 349, 366
  Reliability 618                                V & V 701
  Repairability 775                            System Elements
  Resources 100                                  Classes 70
  Responses 92                                   Deﬁned 68
  Roles 40                                       EQUIPMENT 70, 88–90, 641
  Safety and security 402, 766                   FACILITIES 70, 94–95, 641
  Shadow operations 768                          HARDWARE 89
  Simulation 658                                 INDUCED ENVIRONMENT 101,
  Software 90                                       106
  Software intensive 412, 782                    Interactions 87, 91, 95
  Sphere of inﬂuence 30, 135                     Introduced 70
  Stabilization 37                               Higher Order Domain 69
  Stakeholders 39, 42–45                         HUMAN-MADE SYSTEMS 100,
  Statics 36                                        104–105
  State of equilibrium 36                        MISSION RESOURCES 70, 91–92, 641
  Suboptimization 578                            NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 102–104
  SUPPORT 40                                     PERSONNEL 70, 88, 641
  Tactics 152                                    Performance 610
  Threat 147                                     Physical Environment Domain 69
  Transportation 105                             PROCEDURAL DATA 70, 91, 641
  Types of 20                                    OPERATING CONSTRAINTS 70,
  Unanticipated/unscheduled events 445              100
  Unprecedented 21, 179, 266, 457                ORGANIZATION 70, 100, 124
  Urban 105                                      RESOURCES 70, 100
  Use/misuse 168, 173                            ROLES AND MISSIONS 70, 100
  Use cases 166–167, 444, 446                    SOFTWARE 90
  Veriﬁcation and Validation (V & V)             System 68, 70
     54                                          SYSTEM RESPONSES 70, 92, 641
  Validation 56–57, 260, 699                   System Integration, Test, & Evaluation (SITE)
  Veriﬁcation 55–56, 260, 694                    Activities 738
  Weights & Measures 546–547                     Challenges & issues 751
System Applications                              Data integrity 751
  General use 211                                Deﬁned 737
  Multi-purpose/use 211, 404                     Design for 407, 737
814   Index

  Deviations and waivers 752                   Tactics
  Elements of 739                                System 152
  Fundamentals 737                             Tactical
  Guiding philosophy 739                         Plan (def.) 123
  Objective 737–738                              Planning 124
  Planning 744, 762                              Threats 148
  Preparation 740                              Tailoring
  Procedures 742                                 Speciﬁcation (def.) 303
  Process strategy 745                         Targets of Opportunity (TOO) 123, 126, 133
  Selection 759, 762–764                       Task(ing)
  Tasks 749                                      Analysis 526, 535
  Task sequencing 738                            Attributes 540–541
  Time allocations 753                           Deﬁned 5
  Work products 744                              Human-System tasking 538, 540–541
SITE Roles                                       Mission 604
  Acquirer test representative 746               Modeling and simulation 610
  Lab manager 746                                Multi 607
  QA representative 746                          Post-Mission 604
  Security representative 746                    Pre-Mission 604
  Test director 745                              Order (def.) 160
  Test safety ofﬁcer 746                         Statistical characteristics 606
  Tester 746                                     System 603
System of Interest (SOI)                         Time approximation estimation 609
  Architecture construct 87                    Taxonomy
  Architectural system elements 87–95            Deﬁned 68
  MISSION SYSTEM role 40, 87                   Technical/Technology
  Specifying 311                                 Demonstrations 701–702
  SUPPORT SYSTEM role 40, 87                   Technical Data Package (TDP)
System Operations                                Deﬁned 563
  Deﬁned 179                                   Technical Performance Measurement (TPM)
  Dictionary (def.) 179                          Challenges 397–398
  Dictionary description 184, 221                Deﬁned 392
  Model (def.) 179                               Plotting 396
  Model description 180–186                      TPM selection 397
System Performance                             Technical Performance Parameters (TPPs)
  Acceptability 588                              Deﬁned 391
  Affecters 157                                Test & Evaluation (T&E)
  Analysis 603                                   Deﬁned 735
  Benchmark 780                                  Developmental (DT&E) 252, 261–262, 738, 745
  Cumulative effects 591                         Operational (OT&E) 253, 262, 738, 776
  Evaluation 776–780                             Working Group (TEWG) 735, 755
  Monitoring 778                               Test(ing)
  V & V 701–702                                  Acceptance 734
System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)            Alignment 754
  Deﬁned 303                                     Alpha (def.) 734
  Discussions 78, 307                            Alignment 754
System Requirements Document (SRD) 225, 254,     Anomaly 734, 755
    317, 327, 352                                Article 735
SYSTEM RESPONSES Element 92                      Beta (def.) 734
  Description 92                                 Case (def.) 735
  Performance affecters 157                      Challenges and issues 751–755
  System architecture element 87                 Conﬁguration (def.) 735
SysML 6                                          Conﬂicts 755
                                                                                       Index   815

  Coverage (def.) 735                               TEST (Veriﬁcation Method)
  Criteria (def.) 735                                 See Veriﬁcation Methods
  Data 751, 752                                     Testability
  Daily Operational Readiness (DORT)                  Deﬁned 402
     233                                            Testbed
  Data correlation 594–595                            Application 664–668
  Data dispersion 591                                 Environment 664
  Deﬁned 735, 736                                   Threat(s)
  Destructive 735, 741, 745                           Alliances 151
  Discrepancy Reports (DRs) 743, 750–751              Behavior 152
  Environment (def.) 735, 741                         Countermeasures 152
  Equipment and tools 753                             Counter-countermeasures (CCM) 152
  Equipment calibration 753, 754                      Encounters 152
  Field trails 702                                    Environment 151–152
  Formal (def.) 735                                   Sources 151
  Functional 741                                      Strategic (def.) 147
  Incident report (def.) 736                          System 147
  Instrumentation (def.) 736                          Tactical (def.) 148
  Independent Test Agency (ITA) 56, 61, 253, 262,     Types of 151
     702, 707, 752, 776                             Time
  Issue resolution 755                                Administrative Delay (ADT) 633
  Markets 702                                         Corrective Maintenance (CMT) 634
  and measurement equipment 736                       Delay (def.) 616
  Multiple requirements 742                           Estimate approximation (nominal) 609
  Non-destructive 735, 741                            Logistics Delay (LDT) 634
  Operating environment 740, 741                      Maintenance Down (MDT) 633
  Organization 745                                    Mean Active Maintenance (MAMT) 636
  Personnel qualiﬁcation 742                          Preventive Maintenance (PMT) 633
  Personnel roles 745–747                             Process(ing) 598, 605
  Qualiﬁcation 702, 735, 741                          Queue 598, 605
  Range (def.) 736                                    Requirements 160
  Readiness Review (TRR) 727                          Simulation (def.) 653
  Regression (def.) 735, 742–743                      Transport 598, 605
  Repeatability (def.) 736                            Turn around (def.) 775
  Responsibility 742                                Timeline
  Resources (def.) 736                                Analysis (def.) 160
  Scenarios 755                                       Event-based 170
  Sequence planning 745                               Mission Event (MET) 129–130, 163, 279, 444,
  System Veriﬁcation (SVT) 56, 61, 260, 269, 313,        460
     702                                            Tool
  Transient error 736                                 Deﬁned 21
  Types of 741                                        Requirements management 379
  Unit Under (UUT) 739                              Traceability
  Veriﬁcation method (def.) 693                       Audits 254, 718
  Work products 742                                   CWBS 463
Test Article                                          Speciﬁcation requirements 128, 307,
  Deﬁned 735                                             462
  Discussions 687, 739, 752                         Trade Space
  Failure 687                                         Cost—schedule 678
  Hooks 755                                           Deﬁned 673
  Refurbishment / reconditioning 754                  Performance—cost 678
  Unit Under Test (UUT) 739                           Performance—schedule 678
  Utilization 752                                     Utility 673
816   Index

Trade Study                            Transportability
  Analysis of alternatives (AoA) 672     Deﬁned 403
  COIs/CTIs 675                          Design for 404
  Conclusion (def.) 673                Tree
  Conclusions 686                        Speciﬁcation 303, 309–310
  Decision areas 674                     Product structure 467–468
  Decision criteria 673                Triggering
  Decision factors 673, 680–681          Event 190
  Deﬁned 673                             Transition 195–196
  Dependency sequencing 676
  Findings (def.) 673                  UML™
  Findings 686                           Activation box 10
  Methodology 680, 688                   Activity 10
  Objectives 674                         Actor 11, 174
  Outline 685–686                        Decision block 10, 11
  PERSONNEL-EQUIPMENT Trade-Offs         Event 10
    530                                  Final State 10, 11
  Process 679                            Fork 11
  Recommendation (def.) 673              Interaction diagram 9, 458
  Recommendations 686                    Initial State 10
  Report 673                             Lifeline 174
  Resource constraints 688               Join 11
  Risk areas 687                         References 6, 8, 172, 177, 453–463, 470
  Selection criteria 688                 Sequence diagrams 10, 167, 172–173, 463
  Semantics 674                          Swimlane 174
  Sensitivity analysis (def.) 673        Synchronization bar 10, 11
  Suggestions 688                        Use case diagram 168, 172
  Trade space (def.) 673               Units
  Report (TSR) 575, 673, 684–687         British Engineering System (BES) 547
  Utility function 681, 681–684          International System (SI) of 547
  Utility space (def.) 673               Metric System (mks) 547
  Viable alternative (def.) 673          System of 546
Trade(s)                               Unprecedented
  Cost—schedule 678                      Systems 21, 266, 457
  Performance—cost 678                 Usability
  Performance—schedule 678               Deﬁned 403
  Space 54, 673, 677–679                 Design for 404
Training                               Use Case(s)
  Challenges 783–784                     Analysis 174
  Design for 406                         Attributes 169–173
  Devices 783                            Consequences 171
  Device concurrency 785                 Deﬁned 168
  Operator 781, 782                      Event-based timeline 170
  Scoring 784                            Diagram (def.) 168
  Task Lists (TTL) 784                   Operational use cases 512
  Levels of 784                          Optimal quantity 175
  HSI element 533–534                    Priorities 170
Transaction                              Preceding circumstances 170
  Analysis (def.) 452                    Problem of occurrence 172
  Deﬁned 452                             Resources 170
Transitions                              Scenario 168, 444
  Triggering event based 195–196         Speciﬁcation requirements 175
  Modal 197–198                          System 167, 444, 446
                                                                                          Index   817

  System interactions 156                             Challenges and issues 704–706
  Thread 366                                          Classiﬁcation of defects 692
User/End User                                         Component Procurement/Dev. 259
  Deﬁned 39                                           Deﬁned 693
  Moments of truth ix–x, 126                          Independent 692
  System 77                                           Introduced 54
  Training 767                                        Myth 693
Utility                                               Operations Domain Solution 447
  Bounding value ranges 682                           Physical Domain Solution 475
  Function 673, 681–684                               Practices 694, 699–700
  Operational 50, 775                                 Requirements Domain Solution 436
  Space (def.) 673                                    Responsibility 700
                                                      SE Design strategy 259
Validation                                            Solution to program challenges 694
  Deﬁned 693                                          System 54, 260, 691
  Methods 700                                         System IT&E strategy 259
  Model 655                                           SPS strategy 258
  Requirements 258                                    System performance 701
  Responsibility 700                                V & V Strategy
  System 56–57, 699–700                               Authenticate System Baselines 260–261
  V-Model 266                                         Component Procurement and Development
Value                                                    259
  Design to (DTV) 403                                 SE Design 259
Variance (Statistical)                                System Development Phase 254–255
  Deﬁned 587                                          System Integration, Test, & Evaluation (SITE)
  Deviation, waiver, departure 491, 693, 752             259–260
Veriﬁcation                                           System Performance Speciﬁcation (SPS)
  Acceptance Test Procedures (ATPs) 742                  258
  Acceptance Test(ing) 701, 734                       System Procurement Phase 253–254
  Authenticate System Baseline 695                    Validate system 260
  Simulation (Method) 699                           Veriﬁcation Method(s)
  Component procurement and development               ANALYSIS (def.) 692
     695                                              ANALYSIS method description 698
  Control points 697                                  ANALYSIS method selection 377
  Deﬁned 693                                          Cost factors 699
  Design for 407                                      DEMONSTRATION (def.) 692
  Methods 269, 698                                    DEMONSTRATION method 698
  Modeling and simulation 697                         DEMONSTRATION selection 377
  Multi-level application 696                         INSPECTION / EXAMINATION 693
  OT&E 695                                            INSPECTION method description 699
  Requirements 375–378                                INSPECTION method selection 377
  Requirements traceability 697                       Method selection process 376
  Responsibility 696                                  TEST (def.) 693
  SITE 695                                            TEST method description 698
  System 55–56                                        TEST method selection 377
  System Design 695                                   Similarity 377, 693, 698
  System Veriﬁcation Test (SVT) 56, 61, 260, 269,     Validation of records 699
     313, 702                                       View
Veriﬁcation & Validation (V&V)                        Architectural 411, 413
  Authenticate System Baseline 260–261                Logical/Functional 415
  Behavioral Domain Solution 461                      Operational architecture 415
  Beneﬁts 694, 707                                    Physical architecture 415
  Certiﬁcation 706                                    Requirements architecture 415
818    Index

Viewpoint                                           Waypoint
  Architectural 411, 413                             Deﬁned 160
Vulnerability                                        Mission timeline 162
  Deﬁned 403                                        Weibull Distribution 620
  Design for 406                                    Weights and Measures 546–547
  Interface 521                                     Work Product(s)
  System success 97                                  Behavioral Domain Solution 463
                                                     Physical Domain Solution 477
Waiver                                               Operations Domain Solution 448
 Deﬁned 303                                          Requirements Domain Solution 437
 Variance, deviation, waiver, departure 491, 693,    Review 715
    752                                              SE Process 283
Wasson’s                                             System Integration, Test, & Evaluation 744
 Law 335                                             Testing 742
 Task Signiﬁcance Principle 689                     Workﬂow
Waterfall Development Model                          System development 251
 Application 267                                    Working Groups
 Development strategy (def.) 291                     Interface Control (ICWG) 516
 Description 292                                     Test & Evaluation (TEWG) 735
