Nonlinearity, Chaos, and Complexity
This page intentionally left blank
Nonlinearity, Chaos,
and Complexity
The Dynamics of Natural and Social Systems



Cristoforo Sergio Bertuglia
Franco Vaio
Polytechnic of Turin, Italy




1
                              3
                  Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
    Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
 It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
                  and education by publishing worldwide in
                               Oxford New York
         Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
          Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
                    New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
                               With ofﬁces in
     Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
      Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
      South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
       Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
                 in the UK and in certain other countries
                      Published in the United States
                 by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
            ß Cristoforo Sergio Bertuglia and Franco Vaio 2005
             The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
              Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
                       First published in English 2005
   First published in Italian by Bollati Boringhieri Editore, Torino, 2003
     All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
  stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
     without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
    reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
   outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
                 Oxford University Press, at the address above
      You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
        and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
              British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
                                Data available
            Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
                                Data available
                                 Typeset by
                 SPI Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
                           Printed in Great Britain
               on acid-free paper by Biddles Ltd., King’s Lynn
              ISBN 0 19 856790 1 (Hbk) 9780198567905
              ISBN 0 19 856791 X (Pbk) 9780198567912
                         10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
To Federico, Maria, Alessandro and Maddalena
  To Paola, Francesca, Fulvio and Ludovico
This page intentionally left blank
Preface


Since the birth of modern scientiﬁc thought, there have been numerous
attempts to build up mathematical models able to describe various phe-
nomena in the many different sectors of science. However, in a great
number of cases that attempt has turned out to be unsuccessful. Neverthe-
less, the path followed by scientiﬁc research has often passed through the
construction of mathematical models. In the past, mathematical models
were intended as formulae (i.e. the mathematical laws of the so-called
‘hard’ sciences, such as physics) containing in themselves ‘the whole reality’
of the phenomenon described. They were considered instruments that could
enable us to forecast the future. On the contrary, in contemporary science,
the role of mathematical models is far less ambitious. In general they are
intended as research instruments which can be used for describing only a
subset of all the characteristic aspects of a phenomenon and as an instru-
ment to organize data and to stimulate the development of and in-depth
study of ideas.
   In recent years, contemporary science has been making determined ef-
forts to tackle themes such as chaos and complexity, which were overlooked
by classical science. To deal with these, mathematical modelling has become
an increasingly relevant instrument. Chaos, on one hand, means that a
model is unable to see far enough into the future, despite being based on
deterministic laws that are well understood in their details, at least theor-
etically, and are able to give correct short-term forecasts. Complexity, on
the other hand, does not mean a confused forecasting: it simply means that
it is impossible to build up a model which can account for the sudden and
(most of all) unexpected ‘changes’ that sometimes take place during the
evolution of a system, even though the evolutionary path between one
change and the next can be well described by deterministic laws. The
point is that these deterministic laws cannot account for (or ‘explain’, as
is currently said) the fact that sudden unexpected changes of the system
state appear in the evolution of the system at certain points and under
certain conditions.
   These laws turn out to be insufﬁcient when confronted with a reality
which is too nuanced and too complicated to be summarized within a
limited set of rules. This is true not only from a practical standpoint. In
viii   Preface


       fact, the rationale for this impossibility is intrinsic and rooted in theoretical
       grounds, because the laws are known, but they do not allow us to ‘see’ very
       far into the future.
          Discussion of modelling is the central subject of this book. Particular
       emphasis is given to the aspects of modelling which concern the relation-
       ships between the sciences of nature and the sciences of society (i.e. analo-
       gies, transfer of concepts, techniques etc.). Modelling is seen as evolving
       from the ﬁrst linear forms, typical of the natural sciences, to the richer forms
       giving birth to richer and richer dynamics, up to the limit where the
       techniques of mathematical modelling are insufﬁcient or modelling itself
       is even impossible.
          Part 1 deals with the mathematical model as an instrument of investiga-
       tion. The general meaning of modelling and, more speciﬁcally, questions
       concerning linear modelling are discussed. We outline here the linear origin
       of modelling, whose meaning, scope and bounds will be discussed in detail.
       We present some of the most typical examples of linear models in the
       sciences of nature, namely models of linear oscillations. The parallel be-
       tween the sciences of nature and the sciences of society is taken up again
       here by describing a few models (some linear and some nonlinear) built to
       describe phenomena of society which are similar in form to those used to
       describe certain natural phenomena. Among these are the linear model of
       two interacting populations and the Volterra–Lotka model, which is de-
       scribed with some of its variants and applications to biology and to regional
       science.
          Part 2 deals with the theme of chaos. The question of stability of systems
       is discussed as well as the forms by which chaotic dynamics manifests itself
       in systems. After a brief mention of the question of detecting chaos in real
       systems, we illustrate in detail one of the most elementary growth models:
       the logistic law, both in its continuous and discrete versions. The discrete
       logistic model, known as the logistic map, is discussed at length, being one
       of the simplest models at the origin of chaotic dynamics.
          Finally, Part 3 deals with the theme of complexity: a property of the
       systems and of their models which is intermediate between stability and
       chaos. We discuss here some cases where the modern approach of complex-
       ity is proposed as a new and effective means for interpreting phenomena. As
       the mathematical modelling of those phenomena that we ascribe to the
       category called ‘complexity’ is for the moment far from adequate, our
       discussion goes further, and, in the last chapters, touches on a new point
       concerning the central role of mathematics in building models, with par-
       ticular attention to the limitations of mathematics as an instrument, to its
       meaning and to its foundations. After a short discussion on the meaning of
                                                                         Preface   ix


mathematics and on its foundations, the last chapters of Part 3 are dedi-
cated to some reﬂections concerning future research on the very foundation
of mathematics: possibly the way towards the construction of effective
models of complex phenomena will pass through the study of new areas
of mathematics itself, which are likely to give new general conceptions and
new tools and modelling techniques.
   This book was ﬁrst published in Italian in 2003 with the title ‘Non
linearità, caos, complessità: le dinamiche dei sistemi naturali e sociali’, by
Bollati Boringhieri, Turin. The English edition includes some small changes
and additions with respect to the Italian edition, which were considered
constructive following the numerous reviews published and discussions
with Italian and non-Italian academics, the names of which are too numer-
ous to mention here; many of these, however, are scholars with whom the
authors have successfully worked over the years, and who are thus often
cited in the book.
   The authors would particularly like to express their gratitude for the
contribution of Professor Roberto Monaco, who has followed the develop-
ment of this book from the outset, with valuable suggestions.
   Finally, a very special thank you goes to Michelle Johnson for her invalu-
able contribution to preparing the English text, which she undertook with
both great professionalism and good grace.

                                                     Cristoforo Sergio Bertuglia
                                                                    Franco Vaio
This page intentionally left blank
Contents


PART 1 Linear and Nonlinear Processes                                         1

   1   Introduction                                                           3
       What we mean by ‘system’                                               3
       Physicalism: the ﬁrst attempt to describe social systems
         using the methods of natural systems                                 5
   2   Modelling                                                              10
       A brief introduction to modelling                                      10
       Direct problems and inverse problems in modelling                      12
       The meaning and the value of models                                    14
   3   The origins of system dynamics: mechanics                              19
       The classical interpretation of mechanics                              19
       The many-body problem and the limitations of classical mechanics       22
   4   Linearity in models                                                    27
   5   One of the most basic natural systems: the pendulum                    32
       The linear model (Model 1)                                             32
       The linear model of a pendulum in the presence of friction (Model 2)   35
       Autonomous systems                                                     37
   6   Linearity as a ﬁrst, often insufﬁcient approximation                   39
       The linearization of problems                                          39
       The limitations of linear models                                       42
   7   The nonlinearity of natural processes: the case of the pendulum        46
       The nonlinear pendulum (Model 3 without friction, and Model 3’
         with friction)                                                       46
       Non-integrability, in general, of nonlinear equations                  47
   8   Dynamical systems and the phase space                                  49
       What we mean by dynamical system                                       49
       The phase space                                                        50
       Oscillatory dynamics represented in the phase space                    54
xii   Contents


           9     Extension of the concepts and models used in physics to economics    60
                 Jevons, Pareto and Fisher: from mathematical physics to
                   mathematical economics                                             60
                 Schumpeter and Samuelson: the economic cycle                         62
                 Dow and Elliott: periodicity in ﬁnancial markets                     64
          10     The chaotic pendulum                                                 67
                 The need for models of nonlinear oscillations                        67
                 The case of a nonlinear forced pendulum with friction (Model 4)      68
          11     Linear models in social processes: the case of two interacting
                   populations                                                        71
                 Introduction                                                         71
                 The linear model of two interacting populations                      72
                 Some qualitative aspects of linear model dynamics                    73
                 The solutions of the linear model                                    76
                 Complex conjugate roots of the characteristic equation: the
                    values of the two populations ﬂuctuate                            84

          12     Nonlinear models in social processes: the model of
                   Volterra–Lotka and some of its variants in ecology                 93
                 Introduction                                                         93
                 The basic model                                                      94
                 A non-punctiform attractor: the limit cycle                          98
                 Carrying capacity                                                   101
                 Functional response and numerical response of the predator          103

          13     Nonlinear models in social processes: the Volterra–Lotka
                   model applied to urban and regional science                       108
                 Introduction                                                        108
                 Model of joint population–income dynamics                           108
                 The population–income model applied to US cities and to Madrid      113
                 The symmetrical competition model and the formation of niches       118


        PART 2 From Nonlinearity to Chaos                                            123

          14     Introduction                                                        125
          15     Dynamical systems and chaos                                         127
                 Some theoretical aspects                                            127
                 Two examples: calculating linear and chaotic dynamics               131
                                                                    Contents   xiii


    The deterministic vision and real chaotic systems                   135
    The question of the stability of the solar system                   137

16 Strange and chaotic attractors                                       141
   Some preliminary concepts                                            141
   Two examples: Lorenz and Rössler attractors                         146
   A two-dimensional chaotic map: the baker’s map                       150
17 Chaos in real systems and in mathematical models                     154

18 Stability in dynamical systems                                       159
   The concept of stability                                             159
   A basic case: the stability of a linear dynamical system             161
   Poincaré and Lyapunov stability criteria                            163
   Application of Lyapunov’s criterion to Malthus’ exponential
     law of growth                                                      168
   Quantifying a system’s instability: the Lyapunov exponents           171
   Exponential growth of the perturbations and the predictability
     horizon of a model                                                 176
19 The problem of measuring chaos in real systems                       179
   Chaotic dynamics and stochastic dynamics                             179
   A method to obtain the dimension of attractors                       183
   An observation on determinism in economics                           186
20 Logistic growth as a population development model                    190
   Introduction: modelling the growth of a population                   190
   Growth in the presence of limited resources: Verhulst equation       191
   The logistic function                                                194

21 A nonlinear discrete model: the logistic map                         199
   Introduction                                                         199
   The iteration method and the ﬁxed points of a function               201
   The dynamics of the logistic map                                     204
22 The logistic map: some results of numerical simulations
     and an application                                                 214
   The Feigenbaum tree                                                  214
   An example of the application of the logistic map to
     spatial interaction models                                         224

23 Chaos in systems: the main concepts                                  231
xiv   Contents



        PART 3 Complexity                                                         237

          24     Introduction                                                     239
          25     Inadequacy of reductionism                                       240
                 Models as portrayals of reality                                  240
                 Reductionism and linearity                                       241
                 A reﬂection on the role of mathematics in models                 243
                 A reﬂection on mathematics as a tool for modelling               246
                 The search for regularities in social science phenomena          249

          26     Some aspects of the classical vision of science                  253
                 Determinism                                                      253
                 The principle of sufﬁcient reason                                257
                 The classical vision in social sciences                          259
                 Characteristics of systems described by classical science        261

          27     From determinism to complexity: self-organization, a new
                   understanding of system dynamics                               266
                 Introduction                                                     266
                 The new conceptions of complexity                                268
                 Self-organization                                                271
          28     What is complexity?                                              275
                 Adaptive complex systems                                         275
                 Basic aspects of complexity                                      277
                 An observation on complexity in social systems                   280
                 Some attempts at deﬁning a complex system                        281
                 The complexity of a system and the observer                      285
                 The complexity of a system and the relations between its parts   286
          29     Complexity and evolution                                         291
                 Introduction                                                     291
                 The three ways in which complexity grows according
                   to Brian Arthur                                                291
                 The Tierra evolutionistic model                                  295
                 The appearance of life according to Kauffman                     297
          30     Complexity in economic processes                                 301
                 Complex economic systems                                         301
                 Synergetics                                                      304
                 Two examples of complex models in economics                      307
                 A model of the complex phenomenology of the ﬁnancial markets     309
                                                                       Contents   xv


    31 Some thoughts on the meaning of ‘doing mathematics’                 315
       The problem of formalizing complexity                               315
       Mathematics as a useful tool to highlight and express
         recurrences                                                       320
       A reﬂection on the efﬁcacy of mathematics as a tool to
         describe the world                                                323
    32 Digression into the main interpretations of the foundations
         of mathematics                                                    329
       Introduction                                                        329
       Platonism                                                           330
       Formalism and ‘les Bourbaki’                                        331
       Constructivism                                                      336
       Experimental mathematics                                            340
       The paradigm of the cosmic computer in the vision of
         experimental mathematics                                          341
       A comparison between Platonism, formalism, and constructivism
         in mathematics                                                    343
    33 The need for a mathematics of (or for) complexity                   348
       The problem of formulating mathematical laws for complexity         348
       The description of complexity linked to a better
         understanding of the concept of mathematical inﬁnity:
         some reﬂections                                                   351

References                                                                 356

Subject index                                                              375
Name index                                                                 380
This page intentionally left blank
 PART           Linear and Nonlinear
  1             Processes


Philosophy is written in this grand book – I mean the universe – which stands
continually open to our gaze. But the book cannot be understood unless one ﬁrst
learns to comprehend the language and read the characters in which it is written. It
is written in the language of mathematics, and its characters are triangles, circles
and other geometrical ﬁgures without which it is humanly impossible to understand
a single word of it; without these one is wandering about in a dark labyrinth.
                                                Galileo Galilei, The Assayer (1623)
‘My good Adso’ my master said ‘during our whole journey I have been teaching you
to recognize the evidence through which the world speaks to us like a great book
Alanus de Insulis said that
   Omnis mundi creatura
   Quasi liber et pictura
   Nobis est in speculum
And he was thinking of the endless array of symbols with which God, through His
creatures,
   speaks to us of the eternal life.
But the universe is even more talkative than Alanus thought, and it speaks not only
of the ultimate things (which it does always in an obscure fashion) but also of closer
things, and then it speaks quite clearly.’
                                      Umberto Eco, The Name of The Rose (1980)
This page intentionally left blank
                  Introduction
    1

What we mean by ‘system’
In our picture of reality, we almost always focus our attention on the
description of the evolution over time of objects that we identify with
respect to their surrounding environment and which we call systems, mostly
in an attempt to predict their future behaviour.
   Systems are objects with varying degrees of complexity, although they are
always acknowledged as containing different elements that interact with
one other. Various kinds of relations may also exist between the system and
the external environment, but these are either of a different nature or of a
lesser intensity with respect to those that are encountered inside what we
identify as ‘system’ and that contribute to its deﬁnition.1
   When we create models of reality, we identify, or at least we attempt to
identify, the elements that constitute it: this makes the description of reality
easier, as we perceive it to be. We often acknowledge such elements, such
systems, in their turn, as being made up of subsystems, or as being com-
ponents of larger systems, and so forth. The identiﬁcation of systems is
common to all sciences, whether natural or social: from the mechanical
systems of classical physics, whose basis is, or at least appears to be,
relatively simple, such as a planetary system, to those of quantum physics,
whose basis is more elaborate, such as an atomic nucleus, an atom or a
molecule, to systems of biological sciences, such as cells, apparatus, organ-
isms, and again to those of social sciences, such as economic environments,
populations, cities and many more. Thus attempts to transfer the concepts
and methods of natural sciences to social sciences seek speciﬁc similarities
between natural and social systems (Cohen, 1993).



  1
     The same Greek etymology of the word ‘staying together’ is already in itself an explica-
tory deﬁnition: a system is something made up of elements that ‘stay together’, so much so
that they can be clearly distinguished from all the rest.
4   1 : Introduction

       The description of a system’s dynamics, namely its evolution over time, is
    particularly interesting. From this point of view, the concept of a system’s
    state is fundamental, to describe which we utilize the measurement of
    appropriate magnitudes. A system’s state means the set of values, at a
    given point in time, of all the magnitudes that we consider relevant to that
    system and that are measurable in some way. In some cases, the magnitudes
    in question are measurable in a strict sense, as occurs in the so-called ‘hard’
    sciences, those that best adapt to a mathematical language; in other cases,
    however, said magnitudes can only be deduced or observed on the basis of
    various types of considerations, such as what happens when not just quan-
    titative magnitudes come into play. This is, more speciﬁcally, the situation
    that arises in social sciences, an area in which the application of mathemat-
    ical language is less immediate than that of the majority of natural sciences.
       The speciﬁc interest in the dynamics of a given system is mainly justiﬁed
    by the fact that when, on the basis of acquired experience, we succeed in
    identifying typical reoccurrences in its behaviour, we can then attempt to
    make predictions about the future behaviour of said system. Obviously we
    can only do this by assuming that what has occurred in the past will be
    repeated in the future, an assumption that is often not justiﬁed by experi-
    ence and is sometimes completely arbitrary.
       Nevertheless, in some cases this assumption is sound: these are the
    simplest cases, in which such recurrences are relatively obvious, and we
    often hear reference to ‘laws’, generally stated using mathematical formu-
    lae, in particular differential equations. Sometimes, in fact, the evolution of
    the simplest systems presents characteristics that render them easily under-
    standable on the basis of their phenomenological aspects, and also, at least
    partly, predictable. This is the case, in particular, of numerous systems that
    are studied in physics.
       In describing a system and its dynamics, we use a language made up of
    symbols and of relations between the latter that you could say we are
    familiar with (or at least almost always). The language used improves, the
    more accurate the description that it is able to provide of the observed
    phenomenology. Mathematics, to be precise, is a language that is often
    particularly suited to the formulation of laws or, more generally, to descrip-
    tions of observations of reality, in particular those relating to physics.2 Over
    the course of the last three centuries, a speciﬁc formalism has been devel-
       2
         The idea that the ‘book of nature’ was written in mathematical language is not a new
    concept, as it was already proposed by Galileo Galilei at the beginning of the seventeenth
    century as one of the distinguishing elements of the ‘new science’ against the vacuity of
    traditional knowledge and the authority of the Sacred Writings (see the quotes at the
    beginning of this Part).
                                                                     Physicalism   5

oped in mathematics to describe dynamic processes, that of differential
equations: equations whose unknown element is actually the function,
deﬁned in an appropriate space, that describes the evolutive trajectory of
the system within that speciﬁc space.
   The interest in the dynamics of processes observed in real life has been
helped considerably by mathematical techniques developed from the end of
the seventeenth century, such as the birth of differential calculus, initially,
and subsequently, the notable development of analytical mechanics and
mathematical physics, areas which made extensive use differential equa-
tions and that from early on, gave a great boost to their study. Later, the
mathematical concepts of dynamic analysis were transferred to disciplines
other than physics.
   In economics, in particular, the ﬁrst attempt to use differential equations
dates back to Léon Walras (1874) and, later, to Paul Anthony Samuelson
(1947), who was the ﬁrst person to introduce the concept of dynamic
analysis to this sector/area alongside the more standard one of static analy-
sis (Zhang, 1991).



Physicalism: the ﬁrst attempt to describe social systems
using the methods of natural systems
The application of concepts and methods that originated in the ﬁeld
of physics, particularly in mathematical physics, to disciplines other than
physics, is an approach that is generally known as physicalism. It is a well
known fact (Weidlich, 1991; Crépel, 1999) that the ﬁrst attempts to de-
scribe social systems in terms of social physics, on the wave of the successes
achieved in physics, date back to the seventeenth century and took hold in
the nineteenth century. They involved the more or less direct transfer of the
ideas, the models and the equations that described the behaviour of physical
systems, at least of those that were known and that had been studied up
until then, to the ﬁeld of social sciences. These represent attempts to
describe the behaviour of a society by means of something similar to the
equation of the state of perfect gases, by means of concepts similar to those
of pressure, temperature, density, etc.
   The ﬁrst considerations on the use of mathematics in social sciences date
back to Jean-Antoine de Caritat de Condorcet, a ﬁrm supporter of the idea
that social sciences could be treated mathematically. In his Essai sur l’ap-
plication de l’analyse (1785), Condorcet considered problems of demo-
graphics, political economics, insurance, law and more besides; more
speciﬁcally, he also dealt with the theory of electoral voting, and in this
6   1 : Introduction

    regard, the difﬁculties of logic that arise when passing from a set of indi-
    vidual opinions to the collective opinion of an assembly.3 Condorcet pro-
    posed a legitimate new programme of application of the science that
    was called, at that time, political arithmetic and that thus became social
    mathematics. This occurred after several decades of discussions on
    the possibility of combining mathematics with social, political and
    moral sciences, supported by the likes of Daniel Bernoulli, an idea that
    was viewed with extreme scepticism by scholars such as Jean Le Rond
    d’Alambert, who disputed the use of calculus techniques, particularly the
    calculus of probability, and criticized the too superﬁcial and direct applica-
    tion of algebra.
       Pierre Crépel (1999) observed how the desire to introduce measurements
    and to apply calculus to the sphere of social sciences was evident in the
    numerous encyclopaedias of that century, as well as in newspapers and
    letters among others. However, when it came to actually applying the
    mathematics that was enjoying such enormous success in physics, to con-
    structing a coherent theory of social mathematics and transforming these
    general ambitions into concrete facts, such attempts, made mostly by a few
    French and Italian scholars, achieved only a limited success, and none of
    them were comparable to those conducted by Condorcet several decades
    earlier. According to Crépel, this illustrates one of the characteristic traits of
    the Age of Enlightenment: great scientiﬁc projects were being conceived,
    but neither the means of calculation of the era, nor the availability of data,
    enabled them to be put into effect. The ideas were often brilliant, but their
    realization was almost always inadequate.
       The situation changed in the early nineteenth century. Scholars engaged
    in political activities, such as Pierre-Simon de Laplace, Jean Baptiste Fourier
    and Gaspard Monge, applied mathematical methods that they had person-
    ally developed and that were the result of their scientiﬁc beliefs, to social
    sciences. Even though romanticism erected a barrier between that which
    regarded man and the sphere of application of mathematics in the ﬁrst half
    of the century, mathematics, particularly the calculus of probability, was
    often used in the study of social problems. The scholars of that period were

      3
        Condorcet’s paradox is well known as regards the situation that can arise with majority
    voting when there are more than two candidates to choose from, i.e. when each voter
    expresses his vote in the form of a ranking of preferences between the alternatives proposed.
    For example, imagine a situation in which there are three voters, A, B and C, each of which
    must rank three candidates x, y and z: A might vote x, y, z, while B might vote y, z, x, and C
    might vote z, x, y. In this case, it would be impossible to draw up a ﬁnal ranking that takes the
    majority into account, because: x beats y 2 to 1, y beats z 2 to 1 and z beats x 2 to 1 (Blair and
    Pollack, 1999).
                                                                                     Physicalism    7

struck by the regularity of statistical data with regard to the social sphere
and used very strict parallels with the natural world.
   The Belgian mathematician and astronomer, Adolphe-Lambert Quetelet
(1835), was a ﬁgure of some importance at that time. He developed and
applied the abstract concept of the ‘average man’, namely a man for whom
each characteristic, taken individually, was calculated as the average of
identical characteristics of real men (Devlin, 1998). The concept of the
average man was staunchly disputed by famous scholars, even though
these same scholars belonged to the school of thought that wanted to
apply the methods and concepts of physics to social sciences, such as the
economist Antoine Augustin Cournot, the ﬁrst to apply inﬁnitesimal analy-
sis to economics (Cohen, 1993) and the sociologist Émile Durkheim, the
author of a so-called ‘law of gravitation of the moral world’, proposed in
parallel to Newton’s law of universal gravitation. The objection raised was
that the study of the average man was senseless, because the calculation of
averages of said measurements did not have any concrete meaning, insofar
as the resulting average man did not correspond to any real case and was
simply outrageous.4 Quetelet was to be the teacher of François Verhulst,
who, adopting a physicalist approach, proposed a famous model of popu-
lation development, the logistic function, that he obtained by starting from
a strict analogy with the equation of the motion of a body in the presence of
friction (see chapter 20).
   A physicalist approach like those cited, in reality, works only if there is a
strict structural isomorphism in the interactions between the elements that
make up one type of system (material points, elementary particles, atoms,
molecules, planets, galaxies, etc.) and those that make up the other type of
system (individuals, families, businesses, social groups, populations, etc.).
Such isomorphism, in general, does not appear to exist, therefore the
analogy can only be phenomenological and totally superﬁcial: in most
cases it almost appears to be strained interpretation dictated by the desire
to ﬁnd associations between totally different situations at all costs.
   Apart from theoretical issues regarding the different foundations of the
disciplines, the development of a description of social systems along the
lines of natural ones encounters various kinds of insurmountable obstacles.
Firstly, we come up against the difﬁculty of identifying all of the signiﬁcant
variables within the social systems followed by the difﬁculty of actually
   4
     To clarify the objection raised, we can observe that in a set of right-angled triangles that
are not all similar, the arithmetic average of the measurements of the longest sides, the
shortest sides and the hypotenuses do not satisfy the Pythagorean theorem. In other words,
the ‘average’ triangle, i.e. the triangle whose sides are represented by the averages calculated,
is not actually right-angled.
8   1 : Introduction

    measuring the majority of these variables; lastly, and more importantly,
    social systems are not something that can be experimented with in a
    laboratory. This does not mean, however, that the search for similarities
    between the social and natural sciences has always been useless or even
    detrimental. In this regard, the physicist Ettore Majorana, in a pioneering
    moderately popular article published in 1924, edited by Giovanni
    Gentile Jr., son of the philosopher of the same name and friend of Major-
    ana, four years after the mysterious disappearance of the author, acknow-
    ledged the fundamental analogy between the statistical laws applied in
    physics and those of social sciences. The transfer of a proposition formu-
    lated in one disciplinary ﬁeld to another disciplinary ﬁeld, in which it was
    able to make progress, is by no means a new concept. However, in the new
    disciplinary ﬁeld it then had to ﬁnd the appropriate justiﬁcation, ﬁrmly
    rooted in the new disciplinary ﬁeld (Bertuglia and Rabino, 1990). In recent
    years, for example, this has occurred with the theory of spatial interaction:
    William Reilly (1931) transferred Newton’s law of universal gravitation to
    the ﬁeld of location–transport interrelations to acquire details of consumer
    goods (‘the law of retail gravitation’); later, Alan Wilson (1967, 1970,
    1974) found justiﬁcation for it within the speciﬁc disciplinary ﬁeld, thus
    illustrating the fertility of Reilly’s5 intuition (we will return to the theory of
    spatial interaction in Chapter 22).
       The mathematical models used in a discipline, or at least some of their
    elements, as well as the resulting concepts generated by reﬂections that the

      5
         Reilly’s model assumes: (1) that a consumer is ‘attracted’ to a particular market centre by
    a ‘gravitational force’ that is inversely proportional to the square of the distance that he has to
    travel to reach said centre; (2) that the consumer is willing to travel distances that increase
    with the value of the goods he is looking for and with the variety of the offer of a market (the
    alternatives of choice), i.e. with the size of the speciﬁc market, but only up to a certain limit
    (no consumer, for example, will travel one thousand kilometres just to be able to choose
    between 20 different types of milk). The balance that is established between the constraint
    due to the distance and the appeal exercised by the size of the market centre, according to
    Reilly, permits the establishment of market areas and their borders to be deﬁned. Even in
    more recent years than those in which the gravitational theory of spatial interaction was
    developed, there have been frequent attempts to propose or ‘construct’ varying degrees of
    similarity between various natural sciences, physics in particular, and various social sciences:
    see for example Dendrinos (1991b), and Isard, (1999). Nevertheless it should be noted that
    there have also been frequent cases in which the attempt to transfer and apply certain
    concepts of physics to social sciences has been made in an improper, erroneous or arbitrary
    way, or is even intentionally misleading, simply to give a scientiﬁc air to the theories
    proposed, using erroneous or irrelevant reasoning; this is often due to a substantial incom-
    prehension of the physical–mathematical concepts of the person applying the transfers and/or
    analogies. In these cases, obviously, we are not dealing with physicalism, but as the title of a
    book by Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont (1997) says, bona ﬁde ‘impostures intellectuelles’.
                                                                     Physicalism   9

same models stimulate, may be taken as a cue for developments in discip-
lines other than the original one. On the other hand, the mathematical
model itself is an abstraction constructed from real situations and, as
such, it should not come as a surprise that abstractions conducted in
different ﬁelds possess areas of overlap. We are still dealing with abstrac-
tions, not of direct transfers from one disciplinary ﬁeld to another.
   Mechanics is a typical, perhaps the most typical, certainly the oldest,
example of science that deals with the description of the evolution of a
system over time, achieving, at least in several cases, extremely important
results. It represents one of science’s greatest achievements in the last few
centuries and a cornerstone of the civilization that has developed in the
Western world in the last three centuries. The impressive development of
mechanics since the eighteenth century has undeniably had fundamental
effects on many other cultural ﬁelds: for example it has had an enormous
inﬂuence on philosophy and the general vision of the world. It is therefore
natural to refer to mechanics and to its schemes of reasoning, if not actually
to its methods of modelling and calculus, in particular to those developed in
the classic era.
   In Chapter 2 we will look at the fundamental concept of a model: the idea
that underlies the entire discussion of this book. In Chapter 3 we will then
enter into the merit of what we mean in mathematics by linearity, the
concept at the origins of the linear models that have enjoyed immense
success, particularly in eighteenth and nineteenth century science. Subse-
quently, (Chapters 4–10), we will brieﬂy illustrate several simple methods
and models that originate in classic mechanics, highlighting in particular, in
Chapter 6, some of the intrinsic limitations of linear modelling. Finally, in
Chapters 11–13, we will deal with several important models developed in
the sphere of social sciences that describe the evolution of interacting
populations. More speciﬁcally, in Chapter 11 we will take an in-depth
look at the properties of a simple linear model, while, in Chapters 12 and
13 we will illustrate the Volterra–Lotka nonlinear model, today recognized
as a classic, which attempts to describe the dynamics of two populations
that interact in a closed environment, some of its developments and its
numerous applications.
               Modelling
   2

A brief introduction to modelling
During our entire lives we learn to construct mental models of the world
that surrounds us. Catching a falling object by anticipating where it is going
to fall before it gets there, understanding the thoughts of an interlocutor
before he speaks on the basis of a few signs, deciphering the intentions of an
opponent before he acts; these are just a few examples of how we read a
situation and its various aspects, something that we all do constantly,
constructing models based on our store of previous experiences as well as
our attempts or mistakes.
   As we said in Chapter 1, in science, the study of systems that evolve over
time, i.e. of systems whose state changes over time, is particularly interest-
ing. The swinging of a pendulum, the radioactive decay of a substance, the
movement of the planets in the solar system, the growth of a plant, the trend
in the number of individuals of a particular population in a deﬁned terri-
tory, the ﬂow of road trafﬁc along a street or that of telephone communi-
cations in a channel and the trend of a stock exchange index, are just some
examples of what we mean by a system that evolves over time. In each of the
above examples, as in many others, we have a set of states at various points
in time and we seek a law of motion that reproduces the succession of these
states over time. A large part of scientiﬁc work, from the very origins of
science onwards, has concentrated on establishing the ‘right’ law of motion
to describe the evolution of a system over time, based on observations of a
limited set of successive states (Casti, 2000). When these activities lead to
the formulation of recurrences (laws) in a mathematical language, then we
have a mathematical model.
   Obviously, the more complex the system we want to describe, the more
difﬁculty we have in grasping its working mechanisms and its dynamic
aspects. The experiments and measurements conducted on both natural
and social systems provide results that have to be organized and analysed
in order to be used constructively and to permit any subjacent mechanisms
                                                     A brief introduction to modelling   11

to be identiﬁed. This is why in natural and social sciences, mathematical
models are often used as tools to describe the evolution of their systems.
A mathematical model thus becomes a useful instrument to give the sys-
tematic observation of data a qualitative leap: from the collection and
organization of the data observed, to the analysis, interpretation and pre-
diction of the system’s future behaviour, using a mathematical language
(Bellomo and Preziosi, 1995).
   In the past, as we said in Chapter 1.1, mathematical modelling was
essentially linked to physics, a sphere in which the ﬁrst models were devel-
oped, and this discipline provided all the basic models of mechanics in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Today, mathematical modelling is a
discipline that plays a fundamental role in many sciences, both natural and
social.
   The events that we observe in reality and that constitute the subject of
dynamic modelling are generally complicated, made up of numerous elem-
ents and are faceted into numerous different aspects, in which an event is
linked to other events. It is extremely difﬁcult, therefore, if not impossible,
to gain an in-depth understanding of them.
   Just as we use tools to extend the capacity of our senses, in the same way
we can use dynamic simulation to extend the ability of our minds to
conceive working models of reality (Hannon and Ruth, 1997ab). In fact,
one of the main differences between so-called instinctive modelling and so-
called scientiﬁc modelling is actually the extensive, if not exclusive, use of
mathematical tools in the latter. Naturally, the use of electronic computers
is fundamental to these activities. The latter represent tools that enable us to
vastly extend our capabilities, although we should always be aware of their
potential and of their limitations.
   Generally, models consider certain magnitudes that are dependent on
time, called state variables, and describe their evolution over time using
either systems of differential equations, in which time varies with continu-
ity, or systems of ﬁnite difference equations, in which time varies at discrete
intervals. In this regard, we refer to dynamic models, that are constructed
on the basis of certain hypotheses and that, in general, are integrated
numerically. With regard to models in continuous time, it should be noted
that they can almost always only be integrated numerically, implicitly
transforming them into models in discrete time, partly distorting their
conception in continuous time and, sometimes, even considerably altering
their dynamics. We will come back to this point in Chapters 20–22 where
we will describe the model representing the growth of a population called
‘logistic’: we will see how the dynamics in the version of the model in
continuous time (the ‘logistic function’) is considerably different from that
12   2 : Modelling

     envisaged by the version of the same model in discrete time (the ‘logistic
     map’).
        Dynamic modelling is therefore a process that enables us to extend our
     knowledge of reality, and the computer is its main tool because it allows the
     user to trace the evolution of the dynamic system represented by the model,
     integrating the equations numerically. The main aims of dynamic modelling
     are, therefore, to describe the ‘ﬂow’ of a situation and to predict its future
     evolution.
        When constructing a model, we necessarily have to overlook several
     aspects that are considered secondary and focus on a single part of a larger
     picture, on a speciﬁc set of characteristics of the system that we want to
     describe. The models are all necessarily abstractions of the situation. There-
     fore, their importance is not based on how accurately they reproduce a
     situation that is too complicated to be described in depth, but rather on
     providing us with results for the assumptions that we make and, in the ﬁnal
     analysis, also in enabling us to deal with the implications of our own
     opinions (Israel, 1986).



     Direct problems and inverse problems in modelling
     In the construction and use of models, two opposing perspectives can be
     identiﬁed. On one hand, there is the so-called direct problem, namely the
     problem, based on a given model, of reproducing the properties observed
     empirically using calculus. On the other hand, we have the inverse problem,
     namely the actual construction of the model based on observations, or
     rather the search for an abstract representation of a set of causes and
     relationships, the consequences of which lead to a reproduction of the
     observations of the phenomenology. Often, where the direct problem is
     relatively simple, the inverse problem is generally more complicated: the
     latter, in fact, is essentially the search and the formalization of causes and
     mechanisms that have led to a known result. From this point of view, we
     could say that all problems related to the interpretation of observed data are
     inverse problems. The main difﬁculty that arises with inverse problems,
     therefore, is actually evaluating the compatibility or otherwise of the model
     with the experimental data: we are dealing with a fundamental issue that
     warrants careful examination and that can lead to the modiﬁcation of the
     model itself (Tikhonov and Goncharsky, 1987).
        Whilst on the subject, it could be interesting to interpret the concept of
     modelling in accordance with that proposed by the mathematician Jacques
     Hadamard (1932). Let us assume that u is a vector deﬁned by the set of the
                                                         Direct problems and inverse problems   13

values of the magnitudes observed in a space U and that the model is made
up of a vector z in a certain space Z. Let us also assume that space U and
space Z are both so-called metric spaces, i.e. that it is possible to deﬁne and
calculate distances within them; in our case this means that we assume that
we can say ‘how far’ a set of data (a vector) is from another set of data
(another vector). We then deﬁne an operator A that relates z to u, i.e.

                                          Az ¼ u

Usually, the values that make up vector z, which is the fruit of our supposi-
tions, ideas, attempts, etc., cannot be measured and, in addition, we are only
in possession of the approximate values of the components of u, which is the
data obtained from measurements. The direct problem is the passage from
z to u through operator A, while the inverse problem regards identifying
z from u, through the operator A1, the inverse of A, namely identifying the
relationships that are at the source of the observations that make up u.
   There are numerous cases in which we are faced with inverse problems;
for example, in the sphere of applied natural sciences, the measurement of
the anomalies of gravitational and magnetic ﬁelds on land surfaces (the u
variables), with the aim of making suppositions (the z variables) as to what
is under the surface (Glasko, Mudretsova and Strakhov, 1987), or the
processing of diagnostic data in medicine through the use of mathematical
techniques to formulate models and to identify pathologies (Arsenin, 1987).
Extending the ﬁeld somewhat, the inverse problem arises in social sciences
every time that, for example, on the basis of demographic and/or economic
data (empirical data u), we want to abstract a model, namely a theoretical
scheme that takes this into account (whose parameters are the z variables).
This is the case, one example of many, of the entire series of spatial
interaction models, in which we assume the existence of functional relations
between geographical areas (the u variables), which manifest themselves in
the form of regularities in the ﬂow structure (the z variables) (Campisi,
1991; Rabino, 1991).
   Without going into the details, which are of a rather technical nature, we
shall limit ourselves to pointing out that the main mathematical difﬁculty
that arises, when we try to resolve the inverse problem, is that the inverse
operator A1 could present discontinuities and/or not be deﬁned in the
entire space U; in this case, the problem is known as an ‘ill-posed problem’.6

  6
    In this regard, one also talks about a well-posed problem if the problem is characterized
by the existence, uniqueness and continual dependence of the solution z on u data. The
concept of a well formulated problem is different: a problem is well formulated if the
14   2 : Modelling

     More often than not inverse problems are ill posed: i.e. they do not have
     unique dependent solutions with data continuity. This means that different
     solutions have to be identiﬁed, each valid in a particular subset of the
     available data; in other words, there are different abstractions that can be
     made based on the analysis of the data; a mathematical model, in fact, is just
     an abstract approximation of a concrete system that necessarily implies a
     number of variables lower than that of the object that it wants to represent.
        Again according to Hadamard (1932; see Goncharsky, 1987), to be well-
     posed, a problem must satisfy several conditions: (1) the solution has to
     exist, at least for the time interval considered; (2) the solution must be
     unique; (3) the solution must be stable with respect to small disturbances, in
     other words it has to depend continuously on the initial data, so that, if a
     small error is committed in the description of the current state, the limited
     effect of such can be estimated in its future evolution.
        As we have already said, in modelling we make simpliﬁcations and
     approximations and, inevitably, errors are committed in deciding what to
     approximate and how to make the simpliﬁcations. For this reason, it is
     useful to have an estimation of the difference between the solutions of
     similar models and this is why we have mentioned metric spaces, in which
     distances can be deﬁned in accordance with the appropriate criteria.7



     The meaning and the value of models
     Well-posed problems, as we have said, lead us to develop a model, which in
     turn poses new questions: in fact, we observe what we call ‘real events’, we
     extract a version to which we add our point of view, i.e. the model, and we
     draw conclusions that allow us to compare our explanation of the events
     with reality. If we are good at constructing models, we therefore get

     equations are associated with a number of initial and/or boundary conditions that enables it
     to be solved (Bellomo and Preziosi, 1995). We will not go into the technical details, for which
     the reader should refer to the cited reference; we will simply observe that a well formulated
     problem doesn’t necessarily imply the existence of a solution in a given time interval. Various
     problems of optimal control, linear algebra, the sum of Fourier series with approximate
     coefﬁcients are, in reality, ill-posed problems.
       7
          Starting in the 1960s, mathematical techniques have been developed that have proved
     useful in the search for approximate solutions to ill-posed problems, in particular the work of
     the Russian mathematician Andrei Nikolaevich Tikhonov, who was awarded the Lenin prize
     in 1966 for his work in this ﬁeld. We will not be going into the details of this rather technical
     subject; we recommend interested readers to consult the vast amount of speciﬁc literature
     available, for example Tikhonov and Arsenin (1979), Tikhonov and Goncharsky (eds.)
     (1987), Bellomo and Preziosi (1995) and the reference cited herein.
                                                         The meaning and the value of models   15

increasingly closer to an effective representation of reality, which we can use
as a tool to identify the consequences of the assumptions that form the basis
of the model in the future. All models, in fact, are necessarily the result of
partial visions of reality; we could say that they constitute projections of it
made starting from different points of view; some of these projections are
too simple, others too complicated. According to John Casti (1987), good
models can be deﬁned as the simplest ones that are able to ‘explain’ the
majority of the data, but not all, leaving room for the model itself, and the
theory on which it is based, to improve further.
   One of the fundamental steps for the construction of a model is the
identiﬁcation of the state variables: the magnitudes that ‘bring with them’
our knowledge of the system, during the step-by-step evolution of the model
over time. Spatial coordinates and speed are examples of state variables, as
we will see in our discussion of the pendulum, as well as the number of
individuals in a population, as we will see in models of interacting popula-
tions, and also temperature, pressure and volume in models of the dynamics
of gas, macroeconomic variables in models of economic systems, etc. Con-
trol parameters then have to be deﬁned, i.e. those magnitudes that act on the
state variables, such as external forces in mechanical systems, rates of
development in economic systems and populations ﬂows in demographic
systems, etc.
   The different components of a model often interact through retroactive
cycles, also called feedback cycles. Basically, they are processes according
to which component A of the model generates changes in another compon-
ent B, which, in turn, generates a further change in component A, which, in
return, acts on B, and so on. Feedback cycles can be negative if a change in
component A results in a change in component B that contrasts with that of
A that generated it, and positive in the opposite case. In general, a negative
cycle generates a situation of stability or stasis (depending on the situation
and on how it is interpreted). This could be the case, for example, of an
economic system that distributes little wealth to workers that produce little
and badly because they are demotivated due to the little wealth received in
exchange for their work, which, in turn, is due to the fact that the workers,
as a consequence of their demotivation, produce little wealth.8 Positive
feedback, on the other hand, generally gives rise to situations of increasingly
rapid growth, namely situations of instability. A typical example of posi-
tive feedback is the price–wage spiral that has established itself in certain

  8
    An ironic example of negative feedback is provided by a renowned aphorism of several
years ago according to which in a system described as being real socialism, workers ‘pretend
to work for a state that pretends to pay them’.
16   2 : Modelling

     socio-economic and political circumstances and that acts like one of the
     mechanisms that generates inﬂation. An increase in the cost of labour (or of
     raw materials or of taxes) that affects production translates into an increase
     in prices, because businesses, to safeguard their proﬁts, tend to ofﬂoad cost
     increases on prices. This leads to a general increase in prices that reduces
     real wages. This drives workers to demand wage increases and so on, in a
     situation in which inﬂation ends up feeding itself.9
        It is clear that the more dynamic, many-faceted, or even vague and
     conﬂictual the system we are attempting to describe is, the larger the
     distance between the model and reality. For example, while situations of
     stationarity can be modelled in a relatively simple way, other more compli-
     cated situations, in which internal relations abound that render the system
     unstable through positive feedback cycles, are difﬁcult to model. As we will
     see in Chapter 5, in the case of oscillations of a small amplitude of a
     pendulum around a state of equilibrium, it is easy to obtain the equation
     of motion on the basis of linear approximations, obtaining sound results. In
     the same way one can apply linear approximation, obtaining results that are
     also plausible, to describe situations of relative stability in social systems,
     such as those of scarce demographic variation, low inﬂation, limited
     economic inequality, reduced competition for resources, low social con-
     ﬂict, etc.
        Generally, however, in the case of social systems, we ﬁnd ourselves faced
     with situations that are extremely difﬁcult to describe, both because in-
     stability is practically the norm, and because very often the situations are
     different from each other, which makes the determination of regularities or
     laws, in natural science terms, very hard, if not impossible. In any event,
     using the appropriate simpliﬁcative hypotheses, models can be constructed
     for social systems similar to those used in natural science, in particular in
     those used in classical physics.
        Just as in natural sciences, also and above all, in social sciences, the mean-
     ing attributed to models is not, therefore, a strictly predictive one, typical
     of the vision of classical sciences indicated with the term ‘determinism’ (see

       9
          Naturally, we are over-simplifying; recognizing the cost–price spiral as the unique cause
     of inﬂation is a reductive and fundamentally wrong viewpoint. There are a variety of theories
     on the causes of inﬂation that are much more complex than our example; they can be grouped
     mainly into monetary theories, typical of neoclassical schools of thought, according to which
     inﬂation originates from the excessive quantity of money in circulation, and non-monetary
     theories, typical of Keynesian tradition, according to which we should not look to the mone-
     tary sphere for the causes of inﬂation, but in so-called real phenomena, present on the demand
     side (for example a surplus of demand in situations of full employment) and on the supply side
     (for example, the price–wage spiral, ﬁscal inﬂation, imported inﬂation, etc.).
                                                 The meaning and the value of models   17

Chapter 3). Models play other, multiple roles. On one hand, the observation
of the evolution over time of a model enables us to experiment, by examining
copies of real situations, approximated according to certain assumptions, in
the laboratory; models are, in other words, tools used to formalize hypoth-
eses and to examine their consequences (so-called scenario analysis). On the
other hand, models enable the effects of ﬂuctuations, or the effects of the
approximations introduced to be highlighted. Basically a model is a tool that
is useful to organize and stimulate ideas and knowledge on a given aspect of
reality and to make it, so as to speak, ‘come alive’.
   The hypotheses at the basis of any model, as can be inferred from the
above, are never a strict, complete and objective reﬂection of the real world,
neither the natural, nor the social one. Inevitably, these hypotheses reﬂect
our incomplete knowledge of reality (or better, the inaccessibility of full
knowledge), the opinions (and the prejudices) of their authors and, lastly,
the choices as regards the approximations that have to necessarily be taken.
In addition, numerical integrations make the model evolve from its initial
conditions made up of necessarily imprecise and, at times, incomplete data.
This means that the evolutive trajectory of the model, almost always an
unstable trajectory (we will discuss the concept of the stability of an orbit in
Chapters 17–19), is, in reality, only an approximate indication of what
would happen if the base hypotheses were true, if the approximations
introduced didn’t have any effect and if the data entered were complete
and exact.
   In Chapters 5–10 we will consider a series of examples on modelling in
physics, the ﬁeld of science that right from its origins has been best disposed
to mathematization. We will be tackling several aspects of the problem of
describing the oscillations of a system, a topic that has been studied at
length in classical physics, whose importance is such that it surpasses the
borders of the territory denoted as belonging to physics. In many areas of
science, in fact, oscillations are observed (or sometimes postulated) in
systems in which certain magnitudes demonstrate dynamics whose period-
icity is more or less pronounced; we adopt the methods used in physics to
describe them, in line with the discussions we touched upon in Chapter 1
regarding the transfer of the methods and the concepts of physics to other
disciplinary ﬁelds. First of all, we will formulate some extremely simple
hypotheses: those that lead to the so-called linear pendulum; then we will
reﬁne the initial hypotheses, introducing new aspects and new details to the
problems in question and thus making their mathematical treatment more
complicated. Lastly, we will examine descriptions of the oscillations of
systems that are more complicated than a pendulum, such as biological
and economic ones.
18   2 : Modelling

        Before entering into the merits of the discussion of examples of model-
     ling, we will examine some preliminary areas. First of all (Chapter 3), we
     will take a brief look at several historic aspects of the problem of modelling
     the dynamics of systems, taking a cue from classical mechanics, the ﬁrst
     area in which models began be constructed; then (Chapter 4), we will
     examine several mathematical concepts regarding linearity, which we
     will repeatedly be using hereinafter.
               The origins of system
   3           dynamics: mechanics



The classical interpretation of mechanics
Classical mechanics started to emerge at the end of the seventeenth century,
drawing its origins from the study of the movements of the planets, within
the grandiose and revolutionary framework created in Newton’s Philoso-
phiae naturalis principia mathematica (1687). The resulting vision of the
natural processes is strictly deterministic: the knowledge of the present state
of a system enables calculation of the system’s state in any future (or past)
time without any ambiguity. Classical mechanics enjoyed considerable
success right from the start, and for a long period of time it was considered
to be of extreme importance, so much so that scientists (or better experts in
natural philosophy) gave it their wholehearted support, reinforcing the
conviction that Newton’s classical mechanics was able to provide complete
descriptions of reality, and above all, its future evolution.
   For a long time, classical mechanics was seen as an indisputable
and extremely effective model of natural reality: it was attributed the
role of a key to interpretation, a framework in which reality, or at least
many of its various aspects, could be organized and interpreted on the
basis of observed data. In the almost ontological vision developed from
Newton’s time onwards, which in Laplace found its most complete expres-
sion (we will come back to this point in chapter 26), classical mechanics
possesses several fundamental characteristics that qualify it in a distinct
way: (1) it is reductionist, i.e. it breaks down the systems that it
analyses into simple elements and it sets itself the objective of describ-
ing the behaviour of the system solely on the basis of the behaviour of
the elements it is comprised of; (2) the models that it provides are
reversible in time and in space; (3) it is, as we have already said, determin-
istic, i.e. the calculation of dynamics uses equations (equations of
motion) that recognize unique solutions that permanently depend on the
initial state and on the values of the parameters that describe the systems’
state (Bohm, 1957).
20   3 : The origins of system dynamics: mechanics

        The enormous success achieved by the work of Newton10 led to numer-
     ous repeated attempts to transfer the most important elements of Newton’s
     theory to ﬁelds other than mechanics, in particular the law of universal
     gravitation which was founded on the idea of the existence of an attractive
     force between one body and another, whose intensity decreases by the
     inverse square of the distance between them. ‘The inverse square law’,
     whether taken literally, or considered more generically as a simple meta-
     phor, when seen outside the rigid determinism that characterizes Newton’s
     schema, became a full-ﬂedged scientiﬁc paradigm (Cohen, 1993). This took
     place immediately following the publication of Newton’s Principia, starting
     with Archbishop George Berkeley, who, although a harsh critic of the
     mathematical methods used by Newton (see p. 317, note 140), was the
     ﬁrst to attempt to construct a social analogy of Newton’s law (Boyer, 1968;
     Cohen, 1993). Later, various studies by well-known philosophers, econo-
     mists and sociologists such as David Hume, John Craig, Léon Walras and
     Émile Durkheim were made, right up to the construction, in more recent
     years, of gravitational models of spatial interaction (Sen and Smith,
     1995).11
        Over the years, various elements have come to the attention of experts
     that have put the ambitious claim that seventeenth–eighteenth century
     mechanics is an effective tool for the complete description of the world,
     back into perspective. Numerous criticisms of this vision have emerged,
     above all in the last century and a half, with speciﬁc reference to
     the ontological claim implied in the cited characteristics, which present
     themselves as the bona ﬁde principles at the basis of classical mechanics.
     These criticisms have often been expressed in terms of alternative theories
     that have led to mechanics being reassessed under perspectives other
     than the original one, less rigid than the latter, but also, necessarily, less
     optimistic.
        Several stages in the historic evolution of the discipline can be identiﬁed,
     through which we pass from the trusting certainties typical of the mechan-
     istic vision to the progressive acknowledgment of the intrinsic difﬁculties.
     The following is a very brief outline of the appearance of speciﬁc concep-
     tions in the history of scientiﬁc thought:


       10
           Gullen (1995) contains a popular description of the ﬁgure and the work of Newton,
     which we highlight due to the particular originality of the portrayal.
       11
           To be precise, we should distinguish, as Cohen (1993) does, between applications of the
     Newtonian paradigm to social science, made through the formulation of analogies, i.e.
     functional similarities, and homologies, i.e. the identity of shapes or structures, or through
     the formulation of metaphors.
                                               The classical interpretation of mechanics   21

(1) determinism, namely classical mechanics in the strict sense of the word
    (Newton, Leibniz, Lagrange, Euler, Laplace: from 1687, the year in
    which Newton’s Principia was published, to the ﬁrst few decades of the
    nineteenth century);
(2) statistical indetermination (Clausius, Lord Kelvin and Boltzmann, in
    the second half of the nineteenth century);
(3) quantum indetermination (Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger, Dirac and
    many others, starting from the ﬁrst few decades of the twentieth cen-
    tury);
(4) deterministic chaos (ﬁrstly Poincaré, at the end of the nineteenth century,
    then it was abandoned, and resumed by Lorenz, Smale, Yorke, Prigogine
    and others in the last few decades of the twentieth century).

   Points (1)–(3) represent events that followed each other, real historic
phases of scientiﬁc thought. Point (3), which emerged in an era following
that of the ﬁrst two discoveries on chaos by Henri Poincaré, is still today the
subject of scientiﬁc research (just think of the important developments in
the study of the physics of elementary particles, which started after the
Second World War and is still fully underway) and part of its development,
from the 1960s onwards, has occurred in parallel with the renewed interest
in the concept of chaos, point (4).
   We will not be directly discussing the ﬁrst three stages here, as they are
more strictly linked to physics. We will be focusing on deterministic chaos,
and on one of the elements that is part of a more general phenomenology,
characteristic of many natural and social systems, the name of which is
complexity. The science of complexity, which takes a global view of the
world, regards the intricate and unpredictable interrelations between sys-
tems and the elements that they are made up of and focuses on the system,
the aspects that regard its organization and its entirety, sets itself the
objective of understanding a situation in a holistic sense, surpassing the
strictly reductionist point of view adopted by classical mechanics, whose
roots are in the Cartesian philosophy, and placing it in a more general
framework (Israel, 1999).
   It is widely accepted that the reductionist and analytical approach that
presents itself as the foundation of classical mechanics, in the years between
the end of the seventeenth century to the end of the nineteenth century,
produced extremely important theoretical and applicative results; more
speciﬁcally, it led to the development of mathematical techniques that
we would be justiﬁed in calling prodigious, and supported the diffusion of
newly formulated scientiﬁc thought, which had not existed in previous
centuries. However, this approach, although extremely effective in some
22   3 : The origins of system dynamics: mechanics

     environments, is unable to produce results in other environments; in actual
     fact its application to some problems of mechanics itself is totally ineffective.



     The many-body problem and the limitations of classical
     mechanics
     The ﬁrst important problem that reductionism encounters and where it fails
     is the historic so-called many-body problem (or the problem of n bodies),
     the description of the dynamics of a system made up of more than two point
     masses in reciprocal gravitational interaction (for a general introduction to
     the problem see, for example, Birkhoff, 1921, Arnold, 1987). In brief, the
     problem can be described thus. Let us imagine a system of n point bodies of
     any mass, with n > 2, subject to an attractive force, each of them towards
     each of the others, of decreasing intensity proportional to the inverse of the
     reciprocal distance squared, in accordance with Newton’s law of universal
     gravitation. If the initial speeds are all nil, the bodies fall towards the
     system’s centre of mass, which represents the simplest solution; but if the
     initial speeds are not zero, what will the positions and speeds of the n bodies
     be at a given time? The problem has obvious origins in astronomy and refers
     to the description of the dynamics of a planetary system; it can be trans-
     formed into the question: given sufﬁcient observational data on the current
     celestial conﬁguration, and given Newton’s gravitational mathematical
     model, what will the sky look like in say one billion years?
        From Euler’s era onwards, the problem, even then limited to three bodies
     only, was tackled numerous times without success: the formulation of the
     mathematical model is simple, but its integration poses almost insurmount-
     able difﬁculties, so much so that the search for a general solution is considered
     one of the most difﬁcult problems in mathematics. Towards the end of the
     eighteenth century, Louis Lagrange managed to simplify the problem, trans-
     lating it into a search for solutions in the form of inﬁnite series and transfer-
     ring the problem of the existence or otherwise of solutions to the problem of
     the convergence of such series. In this regard, the particular solution that
     Lagrange demonstrated the existence of is renowned, in the case of three
     bodies of equal mass: there is a closed stable orbit, in the form of a circum-
     ference, that each of the three bodies, placed at the tips of an equilateral
     triangle inscribed in the circumference itself, travels along (Bottazzini, 1999).
        In addition to the trivial solution of the bodies that all fall towards
     the system’s centre of mass and Lagrange’s solution, numerous other par-
     ticular solutions have been found to the problem of n bodies, but to date no
     general solution has been identiﬁed (Barrow-Green, 1997).
                                                         The limitations of classical mechanics   23

  Recently, many classes of stationary solutions have been calculated nu-
merically, consisting of closed stable orbits common to all the n bodies of
the system, assumed to be of equal mass, for different values of n (Simó,
2000). Figure 3.1 shows several examples of these orbits calculated for a
system of ﬁve bodies. We must point out, however, that this does not mean
that the problem of n bodies has been solved: they are simply speciﬁc




Figure 3.1 Examples of closed stable orbits in a system of ﬁve bodies in gravitational
interaction.
Source: Simó (2000)
24   3 : The origins of system dynamics: mechanics

     solutions, referred to clearly deﬁned conditions. To date we still do not have
     a general solution that can be applied to any gravitational system: the
     reductionist approach, which has always been used in the formulation of
     the mathematical model of a system, fails.
        If one wants to extend this consideration of the description of system
     dynamics to non-mechanical systems, such as, for example, social systems,
     where the term ‘social’ means biological, economic, regional, etc., even more
     so than in the problem of n bodies, a uniquely reductionist approach is even
     more ineffective and has to be reassessed and placed in a wider context.
        Everyday life is full of examples of situations in which the reductionist
     approach is not effective. Think, for example, of the description of the
     dynamics of the Earth’s atmosphere, an aspect that is commonly described
     as weather forecasting: even though conducted with very sophisticated
     techniques, no forecast manages to be reliable when it is pushed over the
     period of a few days. At the basis of the impossibility of making reliable
     predictions for systems such as the atmosphere, there is a phenomenon
     known today as the butterﬂy effect. This deals with the progressive limitless
     magniﬁcation of the slightest imprecision (error) present in the measure-
     ment of the initial data (the incomplete knowledge of the current state of
     each molecule of air), which, although in principle negligible, will increas-
     ingly expand during the course of the model’s evolution, until it renders any
     prediction on future states (atmospheric weather conditions when the fore-
     cast refers to more than a few days ahead) completely insigniﬁcant, as these
     states appear completely different from the calculated ones.
        The intrinsic unpredictability of a system’s evolution contrasts sharply
     with the deterministic vision of Laplace (1814), a direct consequence of
     Newton’s revolutionary theories and, in Laplace’s era, still almost univer-
     sally accepted. In Laplacian determinism, in fact, it was acknowledged that
     with the full knowledge of the initial states and the equations of motion it is
     always possible to univocally predict future states with arbitrary precision
     (see chapter 26).
        Poincaré12 had already sensed the existence of a phenomenon that amp-
     liﬁed the disturbances in the model of n bodies in 1889, but the matter was

        12
           Poincaré’s ﬁrst great success originated from his previous unsuccessful attempts regard-
     ing the problem of n bodies. This occurred when, in 1889, he won the prize that two years
     before, Oscar II, King of Sweden and Norway, had promised to award on the occasion of his
     sixtieth birthday, the 21st January 1889, to the person that solved this age-old problem.
     Poincaré did not solve the general problem, but he still received the prize, in consideration of
     his fundamental general study of the differential equations of dynamics and his in-depth
     analysis of the problem of three bodies in gravitational interaction (this is the speciﬁc, most
     interesting case, which refers to the Sun–Earth–Moon system). In the work he presented,
                                                            The limitations of classical mechanics   25

resumed only in more recent years by Enrico Fermi, in a publication that did
not receive much attention (Fermi, Pasta and Ulam, 1955).13 Only some
years later, completely independent of Fermi, Edward Norton Lorenz, in a
famous article (1963), which this time attracted the attention of scholars,
even though not immediately (Gleick, 1987), focused considerable atten-
tion on the phenomenon of the progressive magniﬁcation of disturbances
that he had by chance observed in the integration of a mathematical model
of the dynamics of the Earth’s atmosphere. Times had changed in the few
years since the article by Fermi, Pasta and Ulam: electronic computers were
becoming increasingly widespread, making very efﬁcient means of calcula-
tion available to scholars like Lorenz, and allowing a totally new approach
to mathematical research.
   A new perspective, called holistic, was thus conﬁrmed in the study of
systems. According to this perspective, each system should be considered in
its entirety: the analytical approach of reductionism is not always effective;
reductionism therefore saw its role as absolute protagonist that it had
played since the end of the seventeenth century lose ground. This also
imposed a review of Leibniz’s renowned principle of sufﬁcient reason, a
tenet that had ﬁrmly established itself in Western philosophy.
   We will be looking at Laplacian determinism and Leibniz’s principle of
sufﬁcient reason in more depth in chapter 26. First, however, in the remain-
ing chapters of the ﬁrst part and in the second part we propose to take a
closer look at situations whose dynamics, even if such have originated from
deterministic laws, are unpredictable. In Chapters 5–10 we will examine
one of the ﬁrst greatest themes that classical mechanics tackled successfully,
namely the description in analytical terms of the oscillating movement of a
pendulum, from the most simple abstract models, dynamic linear models, to
those that envisage the introduction of corrective elements that make them
less abstract, more realistic and increasingly remote from linearity. Later we
will see several examples of how certain elements of models of oscillations,


Poincaré developed a new approach to the problem, establishing a new basis and revealing
the ﬁrst weakness in Laplace’s rigid determinism. Of Poincaré’s numerous publications, the
work entitled ‘Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste’, published in three volumes
between 1892 and 1899, is particularly important: it summarizes a good part of Poincaré’s
fundamental contributions to mathematics – including that conducted on the matter of n
bodies – that qualify him as one of the greatest mathematicians of all time (Bottazzini, 1999).
  13
     In the biography he wrote about Enrico Fermi, his master, colleague and friend, the
physicist Emilio Segrè describes the studies made by the latter as ‘an ingenious application of
computers to a theoretical example of solving a nonlinear problem’ (Segrè, 1971, p. 186). The
contribution cited in the text, recalls Segrè, was one of Fermi’s last works, written a few
months before he died, in 1954, and was published posthumous the following year.
26   3 : The origins of system dynamics: mechanics

     both linear and nonlinear, can be usefully transferred to the ﬁeld of social
     science. In Chapter 4, however, before entering into the merits of the cited
     models, we will continue to examine what is meant by the linearity of a
     model, with the assistance of some technical details.
                  Linearity in models
       4

A vast quantity of different system dynamics can be found in both natural
and social sciences. However, they all have several common characteristics
which enable them to be described in fairly simple and, above all, very
general mathematical terms. We are referring to the dynamic processes
typical of systems close to a conﬁguration of stable equilibrium. Such
systems tend towards equilibrium by means of a process that, to a good
approximation, can be described by a so-called linear model. In other
words, we can approximate the description of the evolution of these sys-
tems towards equilibrium by means of a calculable evolutive trajectory, if
we know the initial conditions, using a law of motion expressed in the form
of an extremely simple differential equation: a linear differential equation.
   Linear differential equations are equations in which the unknown func-
tion and its derivatives appear only summed together or multiplied by
continuous functions of the independent variable. They are therefore the
following type of equation:
                                                               0
   x(n) þ an1 (t)y(n1) þ an2 (t)x(n2) þ . . . þ a1 (t)x þ a0 (t)x ¼ b(t)            (4:1)

where the ai (t) and b(t) are continuous functions of the sole independent
variable t (they might also be constants, which considerably simpliﬁes the
resolution of the problem) and the x(i) are the i-th derivatives of the un-
known function x(t).14 The ﬁrst member of (4.1) is a linear combination of

  14
     Note that the presence of nonlinear functions in a model does not necessarily mean that
the equation is nonlinear. Consider for example:

                                  x_ ¼ sin vt and x_ ¼ sin x

The ﬁrst is a linear equation (non-autonomous, as we will see in chapter 5, because time also
appears as an independent variable in the second member function, as well as being present in
the derivative of the x(t)); on the contrary, the second equation (autonomous, because time
does not appear explicitly) is nonlinear, as the sole unknown function x(t) is the argument of
the nonlinear function sin x.
28   4 : Linearity in models

     x and its subsequent derivatives, according to coefﬁcients that are only
     functions of t (independent variable) and not of x (dependent variable,
     unknown function of t).15
        The case of the homogeneous equation is particularly important, in
     which we have b(t) ¼ 0. Homogeneous linear differential equations, in
     fact, have a very speciﬁc property, which makes the search for their general
     solution relatively simple: if in some way we are able to determine any two
     solutions, called x1 (t) and x2 (t), then we have that the sum of x1 (t) and x2 (t),
     even if multiplied by arbitrary coefﬁcients c1 and c2 , is still a solution to the
     given equation. In other words, any linear combination whatsoever
     c1 x1 (t) þ c2 x2 (t) of two functions that satisfy the equation is still a solution
     of the same: this property is known as the principle of superposition.
     Without entering into a discussion on the theory of the solutions to a linear
     equation and without being too rigorous, we can limit ourselves to observ-
     ing that, by virtue of this principle, the general solution that describes the
     dynamics of a process according to a linear model (an equation) can be seen
     as a function that can be broken down into parts, all of which evolve
     individually over time. At each point in time, any linear combination of
     these parts provides a solution to the equation. The principle of superpos-
     ition, therefore, expresses and summarizes the reductionist point of view
     (see chapter 3), which, therefore, closely links it to the concept of linearity.
        A physical process that clearly exempliﬁes the above is that of constructive
     or destructive interference between low amplitude waves. For example, it
     can easily be observed that disturbances of a low amplitude spreading from
     different points on the surface of a liquid overlap simply by summing their
     amplitudes. It is easy to recognize a phenomenon of this type by observing
     the overlapping at a point of two waves, generated, for example by two
     stones thrown into two different points on the surface of the water. The
     equation that describes, in a ﬁrst approximation, the motion of the point of
     the surface is a linear equation; the phenomenon of the interference between

       15
           Equation (4.1) can also be condensed in the form L(x) ¼ b(t), having deﬁned the linear
     differential operator L(x) as:
                                                                                         0
                    L(x) ¼ x(n) þ an1 (t)x(n1) þ an2 (t)x(n2) þ . . . þ a1 (t)x þ a0 (t)x

     A fundamental property of L(x) is expressed by the following relation, in which c1 and
     c2 are two constants:
                                                                                                    0
                               L(c1 x1 (t) þ c2 x2 (t) ) ¼ c1 L(x1 (t) þ c2 L(x2 (t) )          (4:1 )

     by virtue of which we can say that the operator L(x) is a linear operator, which justiﬁes calling
     equations like (4.1) linear equations.
                                                                         Linearity in models   29

the two waves is mathematically reﬂected in the fact that even though the
two waves have, so as to speak, independent lives, if considered together
they represent a new disturbance that develops in accordance with the same
differential equation that governed the single waves. If, however, the waves
on the surface of the water are of high amplitude, then the linearity of the
description ceases to be an acceptable approximation. This happens, for
example, with a wave on the surface of the sea that is moving towards the
shore, which, when it becomes too high with relation to the distance be-
tween the surface and bottom, becomes a roller and breaks.
  A second basic example of linear dynamic evolution can be seen in the
growth of a sum of capital invested at a constant rate of interest where, to
make things simpler from a mathematical point of view, we assume that the
growth of the total amount occurs by means of a continuous process,
namely that the interest is capitalized instantaneously.
  A process of this type, where the interest continuously and instantan-
eously generates further interest, is commonly called compound interest.
Simple considerations of a general nature lead us to deﬁne the differential
equation that governs the system’s dynamics as a function of time t:

                                     x_ (t) ¼ k x(t)                                 (4:2)

where x(t) represents the total amount and k is the growth rate.
 Equation (4.2), solved, provides a simple exponential law:

                                    x(t) ¼ x(0)ekt                                   (4:3)

where x(0) indicates the initial capital.
   This example regards the growth of a sum of capital, but extending the
concept a little, the situation described could also be interpreted in other
ways: the model, for example, could represent the growth of a population
whose initial value is x(0), and which increases at a constant growth rate k,
in the presence of unlimited environmental resources, i.e. without any
element that intervenes to slow down growth. Equation (4.3) expresses
the continuous growth of a magnitude (capital, population or other)
according to an exponential function whose limit, over time, is inﬁnity.16

   16
      The version of (4.3) in discrete form is a simple geometric progression and is the
tendency to grow at a constant rate which, according to Thomas Malthus (1798), a popula-
tion demonstrates in the presence of resources that grow directly in proportion to time
(therefore not at a constant rate). We will return to Malthus’ law in chapter 20, where,
furthermore, we will also discuss the variation introduced by Pierre-François Verhulst to
30   4 : Linearity in models

        In (4.3) the time dependency only affects the exponential, which contains
     the growth rate k; the value of the total amount at a certain point in time,
     moreover, is directly proportional to the initial value of the capital x(0).
     Consequently, two separate amounts of capital invested at the same rate
     produce, after a certain time, two amounts of interest that, summed, are
     equal to the interest produced by an initial amount of capital equal to the
     sum of the two separate amounts of capital: it follows the same pattern as
     the linearity illustrated in (4.1’). This conclusion, in reality, could be pos-
     sible for small sums of money; for large amounts of capital, on the other
     hand, other aspects may intervene that alter the linear mechanism de-
     scribed. It is unlikely, for instance, that an investor who has a large amount
     of capital to invest, would content himself with the same rate of interest
     obtained by those with small sums of capital, for which, presumably, lots of
     small amounts of capital invested separately would together obtain a lower
     amount of interest than that obtained by a single large amount of capital
     equal to the sum of the former. Alternatively, after a certain period of time,
     variations in market conditions may intervene that give rise to variations in
     interest rates or other aspects still.
        The dynamics of a linear model are obviously not a mathematical ab-
     straction made on the basis of the observation of the evolution of a system
     in certain speciﬁc conditions: linear abstraction can be acceptable (but not
     necessarily) in cases in which the magnitudes in question undergo ‘small’
     variations, like the small disturbances to the surface of the water or like the
     effects that the low growth rates have on a small amount of capital over a
     short period of time. Similarly, the dynamics of any system that is brought
     towards a state of stable equilibrium by a return force can be considered
     linear, if we can assume that the intensity of the force is directly propor-
     tional to the distance of the system in question from the state of equilibrium.
     This, for example, is the case of a horizontal beam that supports a load at its
     centre: for small loads, the extent of the deformation that the beam under-
     goes is proportional to the load, whereas for heavy loads this is no longer
     true, to the extent that for too large a load, the beam will break. This is also
     the case of a particular set of oscillating systems such as, for example, the
     previously cited movement of a point on a surface of water, or that of a
     pendulum, when it makes small oscillations.
        If the system’s distance from equilibrium is not ‘small’, then it is not
     realistic to assume that the return force is proportional to the distance, just
     as it is not realistic to assume that the growth of an amount of capital does

     represent a more realistic case in which the limited nature of resources hinders the unlimited
     growth of the population.
                                                                                   Linearity in models    31

not depend on its initial value, or that a population continues to grow
according to Malthus’ model even when it reaches high values, i.e. very
high growth rates or very long periods of time. In cases such as these, we
cannot talk of linearity: the linear model provides an unacceptable approxi-
mation of the dynamics in question.
   We will return to the concept of linearity in Chapter 25, where we will
extend our discussion on its meaning, its value and its limitations. In
Chapter 5 we will apply the linear hypothesis to the description of the
oscillation of a pendulum. Linearity is the simplest hypothesis to apply to
oscillations, it was the ﬁrst to be formulated and is the most studied, so
much so that it has almost become a metaphor applicable to other areas of
science, as we mentioned in Chapter 3. Occasionally, in fact, we also speak
of periodic oscillations in economic and social systems, which often we
attempt to describe as if they were real physical systems that are oscillat-
ing.17 The discussion will occasionally touch on some technical elements,
which are useful to clarify how we can construct and reﬁne a model of a
phenomenon that, although basic, is of fundamental importance in terms of
the frequency with which it is used, through analogies, to interpret other
more complicated phenomena.

  17
      In this regard, and particularly in economics, it would be more correct to talk about the
cyclicity of change, rather than periodicity in its strictest sense. It could be argued, in reality, if
the alleged oscillations in historic series of data of economic systems were effectively com-
parable to those of a mechanical system, or if, when attempting to describe systems with
extremely complicated evolutions over time and with hardly any repeat patterns, one wanted
to establish an unjustiﬁed homology with the laws of mechanics. We already mentioned in
Chapter 1 the risks that the direct application of the theories and the schemas of physics to
social systems may involve in terms of the correct and effective interpretation of the phenom-
ena of social sciences.
               One of the most basic
   5           natural systems: the
               pendulum



The linear model (Model 1)
Let us start by illustrating the model of an oscillating pendulum, basing
ourselves on the simplest assumption: a pendulum that makes small oscil-
lations in obviously completely theoretical conditions, in which there is no
form of friction.
   Let us imagine that we strike the pendulum, initially still in a position of
stable equilibrium, with a small force: it distances itself from equilibrium,
but, as it does so, it starts to undergo the action of a restoring force, which
increases with the size of the open angle with respect to the vertical (Figure
5.1). The speed of the pendulum decreases until it cancels itself out, when
the restoring force becomes equal to the force applied initially that moved
the pendulum from equilibrium.
   The linear hypothesis is in the assumption that the restoring force
and the size of the angle are directly proportional at any given moment
during oscillation. This means, for example, that if we hit the pendulum
with double the force, then the maximum amplitude of the oscillation,
as long as it does not become ‘too’ large, doubles; in this way, we
can assume that the oscillation consists of the sum of two oscillations
caused by two equal initial forces, applied separately, that are summed
together.
   It should be borne in mind that the linear hypothesis, namely this direct
proportionality between the action, the force initially applied, and the
response, the amplitude of the oscillation, or between the restoring force
and the oscillation angle, is more accurate the smaller the angle by which
the pendulum distances itself from the vertical. Therefore, we consider the
approximation acceptable only for ‘small’ angles. To be more precise, the
linear hypothesis is valid within a limit in which the maximum amplitude of
the oscillation tends to zero; if on the other hand the angles and the
                                                                           The linear model   33


                                 Unstable equilibrium: J = π




                                            l     J




                        Stable equilibrium: J=0

                          Component of the force
                                                  Force of gravity:
                          of gravity that acts as
                                                  F=mg
                          restoring force:
                            ~
                          F=mgJ

Figure 5.1 Diagram of a pendulum that makes small oscillations in the absence of
friction.


restoring forces are both large, other aspects of the oscillatory phenomenon
come into play which make the response disproportional to the action and
which we will discuss in Chapter 7.
  Assuming that the system is linear, i.e. that the action and effect are
directly proportional, the equation that describes the dynamics of the
pendulum can be extracted from Newton’s second law of dynamics,
F ¼ ma, the ﬁrst real example of effective mathematical modelling of a
dynamic process in the history of science,18 that we now rewrite as:

                                       F ¼ m€
                                            x(t)                                     (5:1)

in which we use the symbol x     €(t) to indicate the second derivative of x(t)
with respect to time, i.e. the acceleration. Equation (5.1) is an actual
example of a second order differential equation, which can be either linear,
if the force F is a linear function of x and/or of its ﬁrst derivative or it does

  18
      We are obviously setting aside the observations of Galileo Galilei on the motion of a
pendulum and on the fall of bodies, which, however, were not formulated in terms of
differential equations (introduced much later by Newton) and therefore did not lead to a
real dynamical system, such as (5.1).
34   5 : The pendulum

     not depend on x, or nonlinear, if the force F is a nonlinear function of x and/
     or of its ﬁrst derivative. In the linear case that we are about to discuss (the
     simplest model of oscillation), the pendulum is subjected to a restoring force
     that only depends on its position and that therefore, in a given position, is
     constant over time. The mathematical model of a linear oscillation of this
     type is known in mathematical physics as a ‘harmonic oscillator’.
        We therefore have an object with a mass m, whose barycentre distances l
     from a centre of rotation to which it is connected by a rigid rod of a
     negligible mass, as shown in Figure 5.1 q(t) indicates the angle, a function
     of time, that the rod of the pendulum forms with respect to the vertical
     (position of stable equilibrium) and g indicates the acceleration of gravity.
     As we have said, the oscillations are assumed to be of a small amplitude,
     where by ‘small’ we mean that they are such that the arc described, whose
     maximum amplitude is q1 , can be considered to have a negligible length
     with respect to the length of the pendulum l. This implies, and it is here that
     the linear hypothesis takes shape on a technical level, that one approximates
     sin (q) ﬃ q. The law of dynamics (5.1), therefore, can be transformed as
     follows:

                                       mlq€(t) ¼ mgq(t)                                   (5:2)

        The ﬁrst member of (5.2) is none other than the term m€     x(t) from New-
     ton’s equation (5.1): lq€(t) is obtained by deriving the length lq(t) of the arc
     travelled by the mass m during oscillation twice with respect to time,
     expressing the angle q(t) in radians (see Figure 5.1). The second member
     of (5.2), on the other hand, is the component of the force of gravity that acts
     in a perpendicular direction to the rod of the pendulum: it is the restoring
     force that pushes the pendulum towards the position of equilibrium and,
     therefore, is directed in the opposite direction to that of the growth of the
     angle q, which is why it has a minus sign. The linear hypothesis lies really in
     the fact that, for small angles, the restoring force is assumed to be propor-
     tional to the amplitude of the angle.19
        Equation (5.2) is a homogeneous linear differential equation with con-
     stant coefﬁcients, whose integration leads to a combination of exponentials
     in a complex ﬁeld, which translates into simple sinusoidal oscillatory dy-
     namics. Simplifying and assuming v2 ¼ g=l, we obtain:


       19
          In practice, if we limit ourselves to considering an angle of 1 degree as the maximum
     amplitude of the oscillation, assuming that the intensity of the restoring force is directly
     proportional to the angle of oscillation, the error that we introduce is around 1 per cent.
                                                    Pendulum in the presence of friction   35

                               q(t) ¼ q0 cos (vt)                                (5:3)

where the constant of integration q0 indicates the initial amplitude of the
oscillation, in the case that the pendulum is initially moved away from
equilibrium and then left to oscillate. The solution of (5.2) is a periodic
function q(t), whose period T is constant, as can be obtained from (5.3)
with some simple operations:
                                              sﬃﬃ
                                  2p           l
                               T¼    ¼ 2p
                                   v           g

Therefore it represents a dynamics which is stable over time.
  We will now attempt to improve our model of a pendulum, making the
description of the phenomenon more plausible, on the basis of different,
more realistic initial hypotheses, while remaining within linearity.



The linear model of a pendulum in the presence
of friction (Model 2)
Let us ignore for the moment the hypothesis according to which there is no
form of friction present in the motion of the pendulum and let us introduce
an element into (5.2) that describes the effect of friction. In this case, taking
into consideration that friction manifests itself as a force that opposes
motion, the intensity of which, at low speeds, is proportional to the speed
of the latter, we can correct equation (5.2) by inserting a term that is added
to the restoring force. The speed with which the pendulum moves can be
obtained by differentiating the expression s(t) ¼ lq(t) with respect to time,
obtaining s_ (t) ¼ lq_ (t).
  Therefore, (5.2), which is still Newton’s renowned law, is now corrected
by the addition of a term proportional to lq_ (t):

                          mlq€(t) ¼ klq_ (t)  mgq(t)                           (5:4)

   The minus sign, in front of the ﬁrst term of the second member, repre-
senting the force of friction, is justiﬁed by the fact that such force manifests
itself by acting in the opposite direction to the peripheral speed lq_ (t), in the
same way as the restoring force has a minus sign before it.
   Equation (5.4), like (5.2), is a second order linear differential equation
with constant coefﬁcients. The solution of (5.4) depends on the values of the
36   5 : The pendulum

     coefﬁcients: for certain sets of values, the pendulum makes damped oscil-
     lations, whose amplitude decreases exponentially over time; for other sets
     of values, it can bring itself to the vertical position, the state of equilibrium,
     at a speed that decreases exponentially over time, without oscillating. Nil
     amplitude, i.e. when the pendulum is still, is a position of equilibrium that is
     called asymptotically stable (we will give an initial deﬁnition of the concept
     of asymptotic stability in Chapter 8; several aspects of the concept of
     asymptotic stability will then be examined in greater detail in Chapters
     17–19).
        We observe at this point, without going into the mathematical details,
     that the case of the forced pendulum also merits consideration: the motion
     of a pendulum subjected not only to the force of gravity and the force of
     friction, but also to another force which is a function of time. There are a
     great number of examples of oscillating systems that are similar to that of a
     forced pendulum: all of those in which a system is subjected to the action of
     a restoring force that makes it make periodic oscillations, but also under-
     goes the action of another external variable force. Consider the example of
     a forked branch of a tree, whose two parts (forks) are able to oscillate; if you
     make one oscillate and you observe the overall motion of the two parts: the
     stem of the fork, oscillating, acts on the second stem (fork), making it
     oscillate; it, in its turn, acts in return on the ﬁrst fork. Basically you will
     observe that the motion of oscillation passes alternately but without inter-
     ruption from one fork to another. This represents a system made up of two
     coupled pendulums.
        We can also consider, as a second example of forced oscillation, the
     phenomenon of resonance: what we observe, for example in an oscillating
     system that receives a ﬁxed intensity impulse at constant intervals, integer
     multiples of the period of oscillation.
        Let us return to the model of the pendulum. The equation of the motion
     of the forced pendulum can generally be written in the following form:

                           mlq€(t) ¼ klq_ (t)  mgq(t) þ F(t)                   (5:5)

        In (5.5), the force F(t) directly acts on the oscillating mass, summing
     itself algebraically to the return component of the pendulum due to the
     force of gravity and to friction. In Chapter 10, when we touch upon
     the chaotic pendulum (Model 4), we will write yet another form of
     the equation for a particular forced pendulum, in which the force F(t)
     doesn’t act directly on the oscillating mass, as in (5.5), but on the oscillation
     pivot.
                                                                           Autonomous systems       37




Autonomous systems
With a system that makes forced oscillations of the type illustrated by (5.5),
we meet our ﬁrst example of a particular type of system, called non-
autonomous. A system is non-autonomous if it is described by equations
that contain a term in which a direct and explicit dependence on time
manifests itself, like that caused by an external force F(t) in (5.5), whereas
the mechanism that determines the evolution of an autonomous system
does not directly depend on time.
  Let us clarify what we mean by explicit dependence on time with an
example. The concept is important and far-reaching and does not only
apply to a pendulum but to any system. It is true nevertheless that in a
pendulum that makes small oscillations, the restoring force is not constant,
but depends directly on the position of the pendulum itself and it is the latter
that depends on time. If we held the pendulum still, out of equilibrium, with
our hand, we would feel a constant restoring force (the weight component
perpendicular to the rod). However, in the case of a non-autonomous
system, like a forced pendulum, we would feel a variable restoring force,
as if the pendulum was a live ‘pulsating’ being, due to the effect of the
restoring force that now depends (commonly referred to as ‘explicitly’) on
time. It is evident that the description of the motion of an autonomous
system is, in general, much simpler than that of a non-autonomous system,
because the equations used to describe it are generally simpler.
  In an autonomous system, therefore, time does not appear directly among
the variables in the equations that describe the dynamics of the system,
which not only makes its analytical treatment much simpler, it also gives
the system certain properties that characterize it in a particular way. If the
forces in play do not depend explicitly on time, then every time that
the system assumes a given conﬁguration, namely a given speed at a given
point in space, the dynamics that ensue immediately afterwards are always
the same. Basically, the subsequent evolution at a given moment in time is
determined with no uncertainty, as the forces, for that given conﬁguration,
are known and constant.20 For example, a certain pendulum is subjected to

  20
      By using a slightly stricter language and anticipating the contents of Chapter 8 regarding
the phase space, we can rewrite the sentence in the text, saying that at a given point in the
phase space the conditions are stationary. This means that, when passing at different times
through the same point, the orbit always passes there ‘in the same way’, i.e. the trajectory has
the same geometric characteristics, i.e. at that point it has the same tangent. Stationary orbits
basically only exist in the case of an autonomous system, as it is only in this case that the
conditions for the validity of the theorem of existence and uniqueness of the solutions of a
38   5 : The pendulum

     the same restoring force, every time that the angle that it forms with respect
     to the vertical position, by oscillating, assumes a given value.
        Returning to equation (5.5), we observe that the solution obviously
     depends on the form of F(t). Apart from speciﬁc cases in which the expres-
     sion of F(t) is particularly simple, such as the case in which F(t) has a
     sinusoidal trend, as in the cited example of the two coupled pendulums,
     and the period of oscillation of the pendulum has a rational relationship to
     that of F(t), in general the evolution of the pendulum can no longer be
     ascribable to regular periodic oscillations and cannot be calculated in exact
     terms, but only through numerical integrations.
        It is evident that a description of the dynamics of a system as simple as
     that of a pendulum, that has some claim of resembling an observed situ-
     ation, cannot be based on the simpliﬁed hypotheses presented here, unless
     as a mathematical abstraction. If we wanted to be more realistic, we would
     at least need to take into account the fact that the amplitude of the oscilla-
     tions, although low, is not negligible. The linear model described, both in
     the form of (5.2) and in the form of (5.4) basically needs to be corrected, by
     introducing oscillation amplitudes that are not ‘small’. Considering ampli-
     tudes that are not ‘small’, however, forces us to abandon the condition of
     linearity: a problem that warrants further examination. In Chapter 7, we
     will see how to alter the model of the pendulum, making it nonlinear; but
     ﬁrst in Chapter 6, we will continue our exploration of the meaning and the
     limitations of linearity.

     differential equation are satisﬁed. The equations that describe the oscillating systems that we
     are discussing, as we have said, are variants that originate from Newton’s equation F ¼ ma;
     therefore, if the system is autonomous, the forces in play only depend on the position
     (technically, they are referred to as conservative forces) and the system can be described in
     terms of energy conservation.
                Linearity as a ﬁrst, often
    6           insufﬁcient approximation



The linearization of problems
The perception that we have of reality and, in particular, of the dynamic
processes that we observe therein, is such that rarely, if at all, do we witness
a direct and strict proportionality between cause and effect (in more speciﬁc
contexts, other expressions could be used, such as proportionality between
input and output, between stimulus and response, between action and
reaction, and more besides). In fact, at times actions of relatively small
intensities produce consequences that appear to be disproportionately large
with respect to the size of the action, or, vice versa, actions that we consider
to have a large intensity have unexpectedly little effect with respect to our
expectations. Situations of this nature are very frequent and typical to our
perception of reality.
   With reference to the examples cited in Chapter 5, we have repeatedly
insisted on the use of the adjective ‘small’ (small oscillations, small forces,
small amounts of capital, etc.). In the case of the pendulum, as we have said,
this expression should be understood as ‘the smaller the amplitude of the
arc traced in the oscillation is with respect to the length of the pendulum,
the more precise are the predictions of equation (5.2) [or (5.4) or (5.5)] with
respect to the motion actually observed’.
   In more general terms, the attribute ‘small’ depends on the more or less
arbitrary choice, even if based on common sense, of a threshold above
which we no longer want to retain the linear approximation that we
make acceptable. Essentially, with linear approximation we are simply
ignoring everything that we consider negligible, describing the evolutionary
process, when we wish to remain within the scope of a direct proportion-
ality between action and effect (which is portrayed in the linearity of the
differential equation that describes the process). Strictly speaking, the con-
dition that we create with linear approximation is not realistic, certainly,
but it is the simplest to perceive and facilitates calculations: if reality was, in
actual fact, linear, then we would be able to formulate predictions on the
40   6 : Linearity as a ﬁrst approximation

     future evolution of a system solely on the basis of the differential equations
     that model its (linear) dynamics.
        The simplest description of the phenomena in question actually entails
     taking into account only the preponderant terms of the magnitudes in play,
     ignoring those of lesser importance, which are considered to be corrective
     terms. In actual fact, this method, called linearization, has enabled us to
     recognize many invariant elements and a great deal of regularity in natural
     phenomena. Above all in classic physics, linearization has enabled us to deal
     with various phenomena with a high degree of approximation, even if other
     numerous, fundamental problems remain unsolved. The idea is simply that,
     as the terms that were ignored by linearizing the equations were small, the
     difference between the solutions of the linearized equation and those of the
     nonlinear equation assumed ‘true’, but unknown, ought to be small as well;
     however, this is not always the case.
        During the classical era of science there were no, and to date still are no,
     analytical techniques able to handle the problem of nonlinearity in general
     terms. Several methods of numeric integration were well-known; ﬁrst of all
     Euler’s method, that, in principle, enables a particular integral of an equa-
     tion to be constructed, step by step; these methods, however, applied to
     nonlinear equations, often gave rise to situations in which the calculations
     became too lengthy to be made by hand. This not only made the process of
     linearization of phenomena natural, but it imposed it, at times, as the only
     direction in which to proceed. This process was pushed to such a degree
     that, often, one sought to immediately impose a linear equation, even before
     having completely understood whether the phenomenon that one wanted to
     describe displayed the characteristics required to make a description in
     linear terms acceptable.21
        It is worth observing, even at this early stage, that linear approximation
     becomes increasingly unacceptable, the further away we get from a condi-
     tion of stable equilibrium. In general, in the history of science, we have
     always preferred to tackle the study of the dynamics of systems when
     the latter are in a condition that is close to stable equilibrium because
     there the forces in play are small and therefore the linear approximation
     can be considered acceptable, which means that the evolution of the systems
     is generally fairly easy to predict. It is abundantly clear that the study of the
     dynamics of systems, when the latter are in a condition in which their
     treatment is relatively easy, leads to more satisfying results than when we
     are dealing with the description of conditions that are difﬁcult to treat and

       21
          So much so that in the jargon, the expression ‘to linearize a problem’ has become
     synonymous with ‘to simplify a problem’.
                                                                  The linearization of problems   41

where formulating predictions becomes virtually impossible. Nevertheless,
as has already been shown by Poincaré and, more recently by a number of
other scholars (Prigogine, 1962, 1980, 1993; Prigogine and Stengers, 1979,
1988; Nicolis and Prigogine, 1987), a system that is far from equilibrium,
and therefore in a condition in which its evolution is characterized by
considerable nonlinearity, presents aspects that make its evolution of par-
ticular interest due to the unpredictable new situations that may arise.
   The world of classical science has shown a great deal of interest in linear
differential equations for a very simple reason: apart from some exceptions,
these are the only equations of an order above the ﬁrst that can be solved
analytically. The simplicity of linearization and the success that it has at
times enjoyed have imposed, so to say, the perspective from which scientists
observed reality, encouraging scientiﬁc investigation to concentrate on
linearity in its descriptions of dynamic processes. On one hand, this led
to the idea that the elements that can be treated with techniques of
linear mathematics prevail over nonlinear ones, and on the other hand, it
ended up giving rise to the idea, which was widespread in the past, that
linearity is intrinsically ‘elegant’, because it is expressed in simple, concise
formulae, and that a linear model is aesthetically more ‘attractive’ than a
nonlinear one.
   One consequence of this approach was that the aspects of natural phe-
nomena that appeared to be more ‘worthy’ of the attention of scholars were
actually the linear ones. In this way, the practice of considering linearity as
elegant encouraged a sort of self-promotion and gave rise to a real scientiﬁc
prejudice: mainly (or only) linear aspects were studied, as they were easier
to describe. The success that was at times undeniably achieved in this ambit
increasingly convinced scholars that linearization was the right way for-
ward for other phenomena that adapted badly to linearization, but none-
theless that they attempted to treat with linear techniques, sometimes
obtaining good results, but other times obtaining bad, if not totally unsuc-
cessful ones.
   However, an arbitrarily forced aesthetic sense led them to think (and at
times still leads us to think) that ﬁnding an equation acknowledged as
elegant was, in a certain sense, a guarantee that nature itself behaved in a
way that adapted well to an abstract vision such as mathematics.22

  22
      In this regard the following case is exemplary. On 2 January 1928, the theoretical
physicist Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac presented an equation to the Royal Society of London
that soon became one of the mainstays on which quantum physics is based, and for which he
was awarded the Nobel Prize for physics in 1933 at the age of just 31. The solution of the
equation envisaged the existence of a particle, at that time unknown, of an equal mass to that
of an electron but with a positive charge: the positive electron (or positron). This, as was
42   6 : Linearity as a ﬁrst approximation

        On one hand, therefore, the relative simplicity of linearity and its effect-
     iveness in some cases encourages us to use linear methods and to consider
     them elegant; on the other hand, the idea of associating the elegance of a
     mathematical description in linear forms to its effectiveness as a model
     ended up creating a prejudice of a philosophical–methodological nature.
     There was a tendency, therefore, to force nature towards linear mathemat-
     ics, insisting that the former necessarily reﬂected the latter, rather than
     adapting the mathematical tool to nature, ignoring the fact that mathemat-
     ics, in reality, is nothing more than the fruit of our mental processes. This
     meant that scholars sought linear evolutionary trajectories because they
     were often what was observed in a ﬁrst approximation, because they are
     easier to treat and because they provide valid predictions for systems that
     are close to conditions of stable equilibrium.23



     The limitations of linear models
     Just as eighteenth century scientists believed in a deterministic world,
     regulated like clockwork, scientists in the nineteenth century and in the
     ﬁrst half of the twentieth century believed in a linear world (Gleick, 1987;
     Stewart, 1989). A long tradition, therefore, has been created on the terrain
     of linear modelling, while precious little attention has been focused, more
     or less in all branches of science and until relatively recently, on nonlinear
     modelling, both due to the increased mathematical difﬁculty its treatment
     objectively entails, and due to the widespread aesthetic and methodological
     prejudices cited above. The reﬂection on the use of linear mathematics as a
     tool of investigation should be extended and put into a more general


     acknowledged shortly afterwards, was the actual discovery of antimatter, from a theoretical
     point of view, in the solution of a linear differential equation with partial derivatives; this
     occurred four years before the positron was observed experimentally in 1932 by Carl David
     Anderson, as an effect of the interactions of cosmic rays in the atmosphere (Anderson
     received the Nobel prize for physics in 1936 for this experimental discovery, he too at the
     age of 31). Dirac, much later, conﬁrmed that it was his ‘acute sense of beauty’ that enabled
     him to obtain the equation and to convince him that it was correct (Dirac, 1982). In this case,
     Dirac was right, because the experimental observation conﬁrmed his theory, but other times,
     ‘the sense of beauty’ of a technique or of a mathematical form has led scholars to construct
     theories that have then proved to be failures, as in the case, for example, of Landau and
     Liftshitz’s theory of turbulence (see p. 43–44 following).
       23
          In this regard, James Gleick observes how, in the mid-twentieth century, there was no
     lack of scientists who understood ‘how nonlinear nature’s own soul is. Enrico Fermi, once
     exclaimed: ‘‘It does not say in the Bible that all laws of nature are expressible linearly!’’ ’
     (Gleick, 1987, p. 71).
                                                     The limitations of linear models   43

framework that regards the relationship between mathematics, all of math-
ematics whether linear or not, and sciences, a framework in which the most
constructive approach is based not on forcing nature towards mathematics
but just the opposite: forcing mathematics towards nature.
   Without entering into the merits of the foundations of mathematics, we
would like to make some observations. Mathematics is an abstract discip-
line, the result of the speculations of the human mind, even if very often it
has originated and been encouraged by problems connected to reality
(Changeux and Connes, 1989; Granger, 1993; Boncinelli and Bottazzini,
2001; Lolli, 2002). It involves entities that are objective, but they are not
real in the usual sense of the term (Giusti, 1999). The use of the tool of
‘mathematics’ has certainly demonstrated itself to be one of the most
effective methods that we can apply to describe many of the phenomena
observed. However, we must not forget the fact that, if it comes naturally to
us to use mathematics because it ‘works’, this doesn’t necessarily mean that
nature (that is concrete) has to totally follow our mathematics (which is
abstract). All we can say is that, if the evolution of the human mind has led
to the development of what we call ‘mathematics’, this means that math-
ematics is, in some way, one of the most effective tools that man possesses to
operate successfully in the environment (we will return to this point in
chapter 31).
   We have to be careful not to let ourselves get carried away in our attempts
to dogmatically and assertively impose mathematics and its criteria on the
description of phenomena, as much to those of natural science as to those of
social science. In doing this, we actually run the risk that the criteria
currently used in mathematics (formal coherence, logical rigour, coherence
and completeness of postulates, etc.) may transform themselves, when
applied to science, into real methodological prejudices.
   In science too, just as in other ﬁelds, we may end up considering as
‘elegant’ all that is in harmony with the norm, with deep-rooted points
of view or with expectations. Thus the tendency to apply linear models
has led to a desire to recognize the presence of cycles, namely of various
types of periodicity, in dynamic processes, even in situations where they do
not exist.
   A well-known example of this was the ﬁrst complete theory formulated
by Lev Davidovich Landau and Evgeny Mikhailovich Lifshitz (1959)
regarding the phenomenon of turbulence in ﬂuids, a problem that had
been tackled without success for over two centuries. According to Landau
(Nobel prize for physics in 1962) and Lifshitz (after the death of the master
and colleague, Landau prize, in the Soviet Union), the onset of turbulence in
a ﬂuid was described as being due to the successive linear superposition of
44   6 : Linearity as a ﬁrst approximation

     periodic waves that were generated in the movement of the ﬂuid in certain
     speciﬁc conditions. The theory of Landau and Lifshitz, the conception of
     which was truly ingenious and which was technically very well constructed,
     was accepted even in the absence of in-depth experimental validation,
     because it appeared that it could work, in line with the expectations of
     the current era, and because it was ‘elegant’, since it was based on linear
     mathematical techniques that had been recognized for some time and used
     with great skill (essentially Fourier series and integrals). It was only later,
     thanks to a closer examination of the so-called Taylor–Couette ﬂow, i.e. of
     the dynamics of a viscous ﬂuid between two coaxial cylinders rotating at
     different speeds (a relatively simple experiment conducted by Geoffrey
     Ingram Taylor in 1923, long before the work of Landau and Lifshitz),
     that Landau and Lifshitz’s model was rejected and a totally different theory
     was formulated, a theory conceived by David Ruelle and Floris Takens
     making use of new techniques and new mathematical concepts, such as
     that of chaos (Ruelle and Takens, 1971; see Bayly, 1990, and Ruelle,
     1991).24
        The same applies to the tendency to want to recognize the presence of
     periodicity in economics, and more generally in social sciences, as a struc-
     tural unchangeable characteristic, where historic series of data also reveal
     repeated structural changes in addition to the presence of cyclical phenom-
     ena (Barkley Rosser, 1991; Mandelbrot, 1997ab).
        Linear dynamical models are able both to provide stable solutions and to
     predict situations of instability, but the solutions of such models can be
     reduced to just four very general types, some examples of which will be
     illustrated in the remaining paragraphs of this section: (1) stable oscilla-
     tions, (2) exponentially growing (explosive) oscillations, (3) asymptotical
     stability, (4) limitless (explosive) growth. These can account for short or
     medium term changes, but are not able to encompass the whole scope of
     possible long-term developments within the ﬁeld of natural science and,
     even more so, given the increased conceptual difﬁculties of modelling,
     within that of social sciences.

       24
          There is a well-known saying according to which turbulence is a ‘cemetery of theories’
     (Ruelle, 1991). Numerous mathematicians and physicists, long before Landau and Lifshitz
     (from Euler and Daniel Bernoulli in the eighteenth century, to Poincaré and to Werner
     Heisenberg in the twentieth century) had tackled the subject, using classic mathematical
     techniques, but without achieving signiﬁcant results. Interested readers can ﬁnd in-depth
     discussions of the problems linked to Taylor–Couette ﬂow and an illustration of the (still
     imperfect) current theories on the origin and on the description of turbulence in Pomeau and
     Manneville (1980); Manneville and Pomeau (1980); Swinney (1983, 1985); Mullin (1991);
     Chossat and Iooss (1994); Meyer-Spasche (1999).
                                                      The limitations of linear models   45

   It is important to observe that linear models enable us to formulate
precise predictions about the future of a system, while nonlinear models,
in general, only enable such with a degree of approximation which worsens
the further into the future we try to predict; essentially, the predictions that
nonlinear models provide can, at most, after the event has occurred, tell us
why the evolution was of a certain type, why it followed a certain course
characterized by particular changes in direction, rather than others, but
predictions before the event are more unreliable the larger the intervals of
time being considered. The dynamics of natural systems, just as those of
social systems, are not linear; therefore, the more distant the future, the
more unpredictable they are. We cannot make long-term predictions, for
example, about turbulence that manifests itself not only in the movement of
a ﬂuid, but also, for instance, in the ﬁnancial markets, in the changes of
mass opinions and in demographic and macroeconomic developments.
   Interest in long-term modelling started a few decades ago, at the end of
the 1960s, with the development of the theory of dynamical systems. The
ﬁrst models that belonged to this new ﬁeld were mostly simple numeric
simulations that speciﬁcally focused on the effects that feedback cycles
exercised on a system’s stability. This, in particular, was made possible,
and actually stimulated, by the increasing proliferation of electronic com-
puters and by the enormous development of their power of calculation.
These models, in reality, were no longer made up of systems of differential
equations, equations that are by deﬁnition in continuous time, but by
programs for computers, that essentially consisted of recursive and discrete
calculations. In contrast with linear models, these dynamical models were
able to generate evolutionary schemes other than the four schemes typical
of linear models and to predict, for certain parameter values, the possibility
of structural changes. An example of one of the simplest and most re-
nowned nonlinear models is that of the logistic map (May, 1976; Feigen-
baum, 1978), which is the version in discrete time of Verhulst’s continuous
law of growth. While the general integral of the differential version in
continuous time can be calculated without difﬁculty and gives rise to a
continuous and regular curve (see Chapter 20), the version in discrete time
shows a very particular, articulated and varied evolution (see Chapters 21
and 22).
   We will now return to our analysis of the model of the oscillations of a
pendulum that we have examined up until now only in linear approxima-
tion. We will see in Chapters 7–10 how, abandoning the assumption of
linearity, this model can be improved and can come closer to the object that
we want to describe.
               The nonlinearity of natural
   7           processes: the case of the
               pendulum



The nonlinear pendulum (Model 3 without friction,
and Model 30 with friction)
A closer analysis of the dynamics of the pendulum, still starting from
Newton’s law, leads to a different formulation of the equation of motion,
less rough in its approximation and more articulated in its details. Ignor-
ing the approximation introduced in Chapter 5 regarding the consid-
eration of small oscillations only, we have, depending on whether we
do or do not take friction into account, equation (7.1) and (7.2) respect-
ively:

                          mlq€(t) þ mg sin q(t) ¼ 0                      (7:1)

                     mlq€(t) þ klq_ (t) þ mg sin q(t) ¼ 0                (7:2)

   The similarity between equations (7.1) and (7.2) and between equations
(7.2) and (5.4) is immediately apparent. The only difference, in both cases, is
that the component of the force of gravity that recalls the pendulum
towards the position of equilibrium, when the pendulum is distanced
from it, represented by the last terms in the sums in the ﬁrst members, is
no longer proportional to the angle that the pendulum forms with the
vertical, but to its sine. It is actually the presence of the term sin q(t), in
this case, that makes the equation nonlinear with respect to the unknown
function q(t).
   In the case that we are discussing, Figure 5.1 that describes the geometry
of the system is transformed into Figure 7.1.
   If we replace the function sin q, that appears in (7.1) and (7.2) with its
development in a Taylor series around the value q ¼ 0, i.e.
                                                       Non-integrability of nonlinear equations   47


                         Unstable equilibrium: J = π

                                       C




                                                J2

                                   l       J1
                                                       B  Component of
                                                          the force of
                                                          gravity cancelled
                                            A             by the constraint
                                                     mg reaction:
                Stable equilibrium: J = 0                 F = mgcosJ2
                                              Restoring force in the
                                          mg case of oscillations of
             Restoring force in the case      a non-negligible
             of small oscillations:           amplitude:
             F=~ mgJ1                         F = mgsinJ2

Figure 7.1 Diagram of a pendulum that makes oscillations of a non-negligible amplitude.




                                           q3 q5 q7
                        sin (q) ¼ q         þ     þ ...
                                           3! 5! 7!

we see that for small values of q, i.e. for oscillations of an amplitude close to
0, we can ignore the terms of an order higher than ﬁrst, which become
increasingly smaller as the exponents that appear there increase. Equations
(7.1) and (7.2) can thus be traced back to (5.2) and (5.4) respectively, i.e.
they can be linearized. In this way, for small angles, the linear case appears
to be a limit case of the general case.



Non-integrability, in general, of nonlinear equations
As we have said, while it is always possible to solve a linear differential
equation, a nonlinear differential equation can only be solved in exact
terms, i.e. without using approximations, in a limited number of cases
only: the list of functions in which the solutions are usually expressed
(polynomials, exponentials, etc.) is too limited to be able to adapt itself to
the huge variety of nonlinear differential equations that we could be faced
48   7 : The nonlinearity of natural processes

     with in practice. Often, the attempt to write general solutions leads us to use
     integrations by series or integral functions, but methods of this nature are
     difﬁcult to treat, are not always effective and can rarely be read intuitively.
     We need to focus, therefore, on other methods to qualitatively describe a
     phenomenon, after the differential equation has been formulated, methods
     that do not require the calculation of the general solution of the equation
     itself or methods that give an approximated solution (Jordan and Smith,
     1977; Bender and Orszag, 1978). Each individual case should be studied in
     its own right; there are no general methods that can be applied to all the
     situations that we meet in models.
        Given the historical importance of the problem of oscillations, and given
     the relative simplicity of the model that we are using as an example, we will
     see, for this case only, how it is possible to get around the difﬁculty of the
     lack of explicitly exact solutions25 and make, in any event, several obser-
     vations on the dynamics of the system.
        We would like to immediately clarify that, even though we do not obtain
     exact solutions, it is still always possible to integrate (7.1) and (7.2) numer-
     ically, obtaining approximated solutions with arbitrary precision, at least in
     principle, for any set of initial conditions. What we are interested in is not so
     much giving life to a model, whose evolution is followed step by step (which
     we will do, however, for the logistic map in chapters 21 and 22), but rather
     in being able to formulate some general predictions on the future state of the
     system, at least where possible, even without a formula that provides the
     exact evolutionary trajectory of the system in question.
        We will return to this point shortly. Before embarking on a discussion of
     oscillating systems, however, in chapter 8 that follows, we would like to
     make a digression of a more technical nature, where we will better clarify
     the two concepts that we have already used on bases that are little more
     than intuitive: the concepts of dynamical system and of phase space.


        25
            Technically, the solution of (7.1) and (7.2) is ascribable to the calculation of so-called
     elliptic integrals, a class of integrals that is frequently applied in mathematical physics, that
     cannot be expressed by means of algebraic, logarithmic or circular functions, but that can
     only be calculated approximately, using an integration by series.
               Dynamical systems and
   8           the phase space



What we mean by dynamical system
Let us reconsider a point that was introduced in chapter 2, but specifying
the terms better: we want to deﬁne what is meant by dynamical system.
When we describe the evolution of a system we use several state variables,
i.e. a set of magnitudes, chosen appropriately, functions of time, the values
of which deﬁne everything we know about the system completely and
unambiguously; let us indicate them, just to be clear, with xi (t). Thus the
evolution of a system is given by the evolution of the set of n state variables,
each of which evolves according to a speciﬁc deterministic law. In this sense,
we can speak of a dynamical system, identifying a system of this nature with
the system of equations that deﬁnes the evolution of all of the state vari-
ables.
   A dynamical system, therefore, is deﬁned by a set of state variables and by
a system of differential equations, of the following type:

                    d
                       xi ¼ Fi (x1 , . . . ,xn ,t)   i ¼ 1, . . . , n       (8:1)
                    dt

  In this case the dynamical system in continuous time is called a ﬂow.
Alternatively it can be deﬁned by a set of state variables and by a system of
ﬁnite difference equations, which make the system evolve at discrete time
intervals:

               xi (k þ 1) ¼ fi (x1 (k), . . . , xn (k) ) i ¼ 1, . . . , n   (8:10 )

  In this second case, the value of the variable xi at instant k þ 1 depends on
that of all of the n variables at instant k; a dynamical system deﬁned thus is
called a map (occasionally also cascade) (Ansov and Arnold, 1988).
  A mathematical model is usually written in the form of a dynamical
system, i.e. in the form of (8.1) or (8.1’). In addition to these, there are
50   8 : Dynamical systems and the phase space

     also other forms in which dynamical systems and models can be formu-
     lated: for example, cellular automata, which are essentially dynamical
     systems in which, similar to ﬁnite difference equations, where time is
     considered discrete, the set of values that the state variables can assume is
     also assumed to be discrete (Wolfram, 1994), or in the form of partial
     derivative equations or integral equations.
        Speaking in general terms, as we have already observed in Chapter 7,
     rather rarely can we integrate a dynamical system such as (8.1) analytically,
     obtaining a law that describes the evolution of the set of the state variables.
     The set of all of the possible dynamical systems (8.1) is in fact much more
     vast than the set of elementary functions such as sine, cosine, exponential,
     etc., that are used, in various ways, to integrate equations and to provide
     solutions expressed by means of a single formula (this is called at times ‘in a
     closed form’) (Casti, 2000).
        We almost always need to use numerical integrations that transform the
     continuous form (8.1) into the discrete form (8.1’), or we need to use
     mathematical tools that enable us to study the qualitative character of the
     dynamical system’s evolution (8.1). This has given rise to a sector of modern
     mathematics expressly dedicated to the study of dynamical systems and to
     the development of speciﬁc techniques for this purpose.



     The phase space
     The phase space (also called the space of states) is one of the most important
     tools used to represent the evolution of dynamical systems and to provide
     the main qualitative characteristics of such, in particular where the com-
     plete integration of a system is impossible. It is an abstract space, made up
     of the set of all of the possible values of the n state variables xi (t) that
     describe the system: for two variables the space is reduced to a plane with a
     pair of coordinate axes, one for x1 (t), the other for x2 (t); for three variables
     we would have a three-dimensional space and a set of three Cartesian axes,
     and so on for higher dimensions. In the case of the oscillation of a pendu-
     lum, for example, two state variables are needed to deﬁne the state and the
     evolution of the system: the angle q(t) and the angular speed q_ (t).
       Everything we know about the state of a dynamical system is represented
     by the values of the n coordinates in the phase space: knowing the values of
     the state variables is like knowing the values (dependent on time) of the
     coordinates obtained ‘projecting’ an object that we call a dynamical system
     on each of the n axes. The evolution of the system is given by the evolution
     of these variables in their entirety, in the sense that the law of dynamics (the
                                                                          The phase space    51

law of motion) that deﬁnes the evolution of the system also deﬁnes the
evolution over time of each of the n state variables. All that we need to know
are the coordinates of the starting point, i.e. the initial values of the state
variables. At times, however, it is more useful and easier to do the contrary,
i.e. describe the system by obtaining its law of evolution from the law of
evolution of each of the state variables considered individually. We should
also add that a dynamical system is deterministic if the law of dynamics is
such as to generate a single state consequent to a given state; on the other
hand, it is stochastic, or random, if, consequent to a given state, there are
more possible states from among which the dynamical system, in some way,
can choose according to a probability distribution.
   The phase space is a useful tool to represent the evolution of a dynamical
system. Let us clarify this point with some basic examples. Let us consider a
very simple case of dynamics, the simplest of all: a material point in uniform
rectilinear motion in a direction indicated by a sole spatial coordinate x
(Figure 8.1). In this case, (8.1) becomes simply: x_ ¼ constant.
   The state of this system is characterized by a single spatial magnitude:
x(t), the coordinate of the point as a function of time (hereinafter, for the
sake of simplicity, we will not write the explicit dependence of x on time).
Uniform rectilinear motion means that the increase of x starting from an
initial value x0 , i.e. the distance travelled, is directly proportional to the
time t elapsed from the moment in which the mobile point was in x0 . We
represent the dynamics of the point on a set of three Cartesian axes, in
which the magnitudes x (the position), t (time) and x_ (speed) are shown on




                              x
                                              Phase
                    Speed−time                space
                                                          Space−speed
                     diagram                                diagram
                             v0
                                                      D


                     B
                                  x0                      x
                                            A
                                                   Space−time
                                                    diagram:
                                                  law of motion
                                       C
                       t

Figure 8.1 Dynamics of uniform rectilinear motion represented in a three-dimensional space
x, x_ , t and its projections on three planes.
52   8 : Dynamical systems and the phase space

     the coordinate axes, as represented in Figure 8.1. In a case such as this, in
     which the motion is described by a sole coordinate, the plane xx_ is, pre-
     cisely, the phase space (with just two dimensions: the phase plane).
        It is then possible to consider the three diagrams that describe the uniform
     rectilinear motion: the space–time diagram (curve C in Figure 8.1), the
     speed–time diagram (curve B) and the space–speed diagram (curve D), as
     if they originated projecting a curve (curve A) on three planes xt, x_ t and xx_
     in the three-dimensional space xx_ t. It is immediately apparent that, in this
     case, this curve can only be a straight line, straight line A; a straight line, in
     actual fact, is the only curve that, projected on any plane, always and
     invariably gives a straight line.26
        The same way of representing dynamics, applied to a case of motion that
     accelerates steadily with respect to a single variable x, gives Figure 8.2.
     Again in this case, in which (8.1) becomes x_ ¼ kt, the trend of the variables
     described by some of the known formulae of kinematics is immediately
     apparent.27


                                       x
                                                            Phase
                                                            space
                               Speed−time                            Space−speed
                                diagram          A                     diagram
                                                        D

                           B


                                                                 x
                                                               Space−time
                                                                diagram:
                                                              law of motion

                            t                    C

     Figure 8.2 Dynamics of uniform accelerated motion represented in a three-dimensional
     space x, x_ , t and its projections on three planes.


       26
           More strictly speaking, we would like to remind readers that the equation that deﬁnes
     uniform rectilinear motion is x € ¼ 0; its integration is immediate and provides some of the
     laws of kinematics. In fact, a ﬁrst integration with respect to time gives x_ ¼ v0 , the straight
     line B in Figure 8.1. A further integration gives x ¼ v0 t þ x0 , curve C (law of motion). The
     speed, constant over time, is also constant in space, from which we obtain the horizontal
     straight line D in Figure 8.1 (space–speed diagram in the plane of phases). v0 and x0 ,
     respectively initial speed and initial coordinate, appear as constants of integration.
        27
           The law of motion, in this case, is x  € ¼ a, with a constant. By integrating once with
     respect to time and, for the sake of simplicity, assuming that the integration constants, i.e. the
     initial coordinate and the initial speed are nil, we have x_ ¼ at, curve B of Figure 8.2 (speed–
                                                                                   The phase space     53

   The usefulness of the phase space with respect to a space–time (the law of
motion) or speed–time diagram lies in the fact that in the phase space the
variables that appear are not represented as a function of time; time is only
indirectly present, as the independent variable with respect to which space
is derived.
   This enables us to obtain a representation of the system’s states in what
we could call an atemporal way, that is to say in a perspective in which time
does not play the primary role of the system’s ‘motor element’, but rather
the secondary role as a reference for the speed at which a spatial magnitude
varies. In other words, the system is represented only with respect to the
state variables (a bit like saying ‘with respect to itself’), without the intro-
duction of variables, such as time, that do not characterize the system itself,
and in this sense, are not strictly necessary.
   Therefore, the information shown in a phase space diagram is better,
because it contains as much information as that provided by two space–
time and speed–time diagrams, but it is expressed more succinctly in a single
diagram. Obviously, this only applies to autonomous differential equations,
in which time is not expressly present; in the case of non-autonomous
systems, on the contrary, time is one of the variables which deﬁne the
phase space.
   The trajectories traced by a system in the phase space are commonly
called orbits.
   To conclude this digression into the phase space, we can add an initial
deﬁnition of the concept of the stability of a system, a concept that we
already brieﬂy mentioned in our discussion of the pendulum, using the
phase space as a tool to represent the dynamics; we will be discussing the
concept of stability in further detail in Chapters 17–19. We will be looking
at the concept of a system’s stability again in Chapter 12, when we discuss
the evolution of a system of two interacting populations.
   If a system is in some way distanced from equilibrium, as a result of said
movement, it may demonstrate different dynamics, depending on the type
of law that governs it: (1) the system may evolve, remaining close to the
abandoned equilibrium conﬁguration, which, in this case is a stable equi-
librium; (2) the system may tend to return to the abandoned equilibrium,
which, in this case is a asymptotically stable equilibrium; (3) the system may
distance itself further still from the equilibrium, which in this case is known
as unstable equilibrium.

time diagram); by integrating a second time, we have x ¼ at2 =2, curve C (law of motion). By
                                                      pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ the expression of speed with respect
eliminating time from the last two equations, we obtain
to space, i.e. the trajectory in the phase space: x_ ¼ 2ax, i.e. curve D (space–speed diagram).
54   8 : Dynamical systems and the phase space


                   Stable equilibrium                          Asymptotically stable equilibrium



                  x      Ω                                     x     Ω




                                        Unstable equilibrium



                                        x        Ω



           Figure 8.3 Depiction of stable, asymptotically stable and unstable equilibrium.


       More precisely, we can indicate the set of the values of the coordinates of
     a point of equilibrium as x : if the system’s orbit remains indeﬁnitely con-
     ﬁned to a neighbourhood V of x       (Figure 8.3), then x is a point of stable
     equilibrium (this is the case, for example, of the non-damped oscillations of
     a pendulum around the rest position). If on the other hand, as time tends
     towards inﬁnity, the successive states of the system always tend increasingly
     towards x         is an asymptotically stable point of equilibrium (this is the
              , then x
     case, for example, of the dampened oscillations of a pendulum around a
     position of equilibrium). Lastly, if no neighbourhood of x   can be found that
     satisﬁes what has been deﬁned, then x    is an unstable point of equilibrium of
     the system (this is the case, for example of a pendulum placed vertically,
     with the mass above the centre of rotation, as in case C in Figure 7.1, in
     which q ¼ p).



     Oscillatory dynamics represented in the phase space
     Let us now return to the dynamics of the pendulum according to the linear
     model (Model 1: small oscillations without friction) that we described in
     Chapter 4 (hereinafter we will refer to the linear model by its proper name
     in mathematical physics: ‘harmonic oscillator’). The considerations that we
     will make are quite technical: on one hand they can be considered as an
     example of the use of the concepts that we have introduced so far (the phase
     space, stable/unstable equilibrium, etc.); on the other, they actually enable
     us to introduce other concepts (attractor, unstable trajectories, etc.) that we
     will also ﬁnd in cases of less basic dynamics.
                                             Oscillatory dynamics represented in the phase space   55

 As we know, the solution of the equation of motion (5.2) is the law of
motion (5.3), in which v2 ¼ g=l. They are both shown below:

                                    mlq€(t) ¼ mgq(t)

                                     q(t) ¼ q0 cos vt

  Equation (5.2) is a second order equation that can be either fully (i.e.
twice) integrated with respect to time or just once. By integrating once only,
with some intermediate steps, we thus obtain a ﬁrst order differential
equation, a so-called ﬁrst integral of motion:28

                            1 2 _2 1
                              ml q þ mglq2 ¼ constant                                    (8:2)
                            2       2

The ﬁrst integral (8.2) expresses the well-known fact that during the oscil-
lation of a system, there is one magnitude that remains constant over time,
and is therefore called a ‘constant of motion’: we will indicate it with E, and
we will call it the system’s total energy. In the case in which the harmonic
oscillator is in actual fact the linear pendulum we discussed earlier, we can
demonstrate that the two terms that are summed to the ﬁrst member of (8.2)
are, respectively, the kinetic energy and the potential energy of the pendu-
lum, and the total energy is simply the mechanical energy. A system in
which mechanical energy is a constant of motion is called conservative.29


  28
      More precisely, given a differential equation of order n $ 2, all relationships between
the independent variable, the unknown function and its ﬁrst n  1 derivatives are called ﬁrst
integrals. The study of the ﬁrst integrals of the equations of motion enables us to identify
constants of motion that can be as fundamental to the description of the phenomena, as the
complete solution of equations of motion. It is precisely from the examination of ﬁrst
integrals that in the eighteenth century, the formulation of important general principles (or
rather theorems) for the conservation of mechanical systems was achieved, such as the
theorem of the conservation of mechanical energy, of linear momentum and of angular
momentum, a theorem that played a fundamental role in the birth and the development of
deterministic concepts in the science of the era (see Chapter 3).
  29
      The fact that a constant of motion, mechanical energy, exists is the well-known theorem
of the conservation of mechanical energy of a material point, one of the greatest conquests of
mathematical physics and, in general, of scientiﬁc thought of the eighteenth century. This
theorem represents a speciﬁc case of the general principle of energy conservation (if non-
conservative forces are acting), fundamental to all branches of physics. We observe that we
have discovered that in oscillations, a constant of motion exists, without fully integrating the
equation of motion (5.2), therefore without calculating the real law of motion (i.e. the law
that links space to time).
56   8 : Dynamical systems and the phase space

         In the phase space deﬁned by the variables q and q_ (in this case, therefore,
     it is a phase plane), the curves represented by (8.2), as E varies, constitute a
     set of ellipses, the centre of all of which is at the origin p      the coordinate
                                                                    ofﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ   pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
     axes and the lengths of whose semiaxes are, respectively, 2E and 2E=v.
     Therefore, the dimensions of the orbit in the phase space depend on energy
     E. In Figure 8.4 we show several different values of E.
         Each of the ellipses traced is the set of the points in the phase space that
     deﬁne states of equal total energy. The arrows indicate the direction in
     which the orbits are travelled with the passing of time.
         As the system travels along one of the indicated orbits, the energy of the
     pendulum is transformed from kinetic to potential, then from potential to
     kinetic, then from kinetic to potential again and so on; the two forms of
     energy alternate periodically, maintaining their sum constant. As in the
     approximation considered, in which friction is not introduced, there is no
     dispersion of mechanical energy, because the latter is a constant of motion,
     the possible orbits are all isoenergetic and correspond to different quantities
     of total energy. Different orbits do not intersect each other, because a point
     of intersection, belonging to two different orbits, would result in two
     different values of the total energy (which is constant) for the same system.
         Let us leave the harmonic oscillator and return to the linear pendulum
     subject to friction described in equation (5.4) (Model 2). With consider-
     ations similar to those described above, we discover, in this case, that the
     total mechanical energy (only the mechanical energy!) E is not maintained,
     but dissipates over time.30 In this case the system is called dissipative; the


                                                      J




                                                                              J




     Figure 8.4 Representation of the motion of a harmonic oscillator in the phase space for
     different values of E.

       30
             It must be absolutely clear to the reader that, when we speak of dissipated energy, we are
     only referring to mechanical energy (potential energy þ kinetic energy), not to total energy
     (mechanical energy þ thermal energy þ energy of the electromagnetic ﬁeld þ mass energy
     þ . . . ). According to current scientiﬁc vision and knowledge, the total energy of a closed
     system is always conserved in any process.
                                           Oscillatory dynamics represented in the phase space   57


                                   J        At the origin of the axes there is a
                                            point of asymptotically stable
                                            equilibrium (a sink): an attractor


                                              J




Figure 8.5 Representation of the motion of an oscillating system in the phase space that
undergoes a damped oscillation in the presence of friction.


orbit in the phase space qq_ is now made up of a spiral with an asymptot-
ically stable point of equilibrium at the origin of the axes (sometimes this
point is called a ‘sink’), i.e. at the angle q ¼ 0 and with the pendulum still:
q_ ¼ 0 (Figure 8.5).
   We have therefore met a ﬁrst, very basic example of a dissipative system,
whose orbit in the phase space is an open curve. We will repeatedly come
across dissipative systems characterized by non-periodic orbits in the sec-
ond part.
   Let us now consider the motion of the pendulum that makes oscillations of
large amplitude in the simpler form described by (7.1), i.e. ignoring friction
(undamped oscillations: Model 3). Equation (7.1) can be rewritten as follows:

                                 mq€ þ mv2 sin q ¼ 0                                   (8:3)

  By integrating (8.3) once with respect to time, as we did with (5.2), we
discover the existence of a magnitude that is maintained constant over time.
Here again, as for (8.2), we are dealing with total mechanical energy E:

                           1 2 _2
                             ml q þ mgl(1  cos q) ¼ E                                 (8:4)
                           2

  Just as in (8.2), (8.4) which represents the general case for any angles q,
the ﬁrst addend to the ﬁrst member is the pendulum’s kinetic energy, while
the second addend is the potential energy.
  Oscillations of small amplitudes mean small energies and, as we have
said, in this case (8.2) gives elliptic orbits. For oscillations of amplitudes
that cannot be considered ‘small’, i.e. if linear approximation is not accept-
able, the dynamics of the pendulum is no longer that provided by the model
of the harmonic oscillator (5.2) and the orbits in the phase space are curves
other than ellipses (8.2). We develop the term cos q in Taylor series around
q ¼ 0:
58   8 : Dynamical systems and the phase space


                                                  q2 q4 q6
                                 cos q ¼ 1         þ     þ ...
                                                  2! 4! 6!

       If we ignore, for small q, the terms above the second order, the equation
     (8.4) leads back to equation (8.2) and therefore we return to linear approxi-
     mation. If, on the other hand, as the amplitude of oscillation q increases, we
     progressively consider the subsequent terms of the series development of
     cos q, the curves that (8.4) gives in the phase space deﬁned by variables q
     and q_ remain closed, but we get increasingly further away from the ellipse
     shape (8.2), with an increasingly marked difference as energy E grows. We
     can demonstrate that, in correspondence to a critical value of E, the orbits
     become closed curves formed by sinusoidal arcs in the upper half-plane and
     by sinusoidal arcs in the lower half-plane. For higher energy values, the
     orbits are not even closed curves: the pendulum no longer oscillates around
     a point of stable equilibrium, but rotates periodically.31

       31
          Let us add some technical considerations that are not indispensable to the discussion
     presented in the text. Remembering that v2 ¼ g=l, we have from (8.4):

                                             2E
                                       q_ 2 ¼ 2  2v2 þ 2v2 cos q                                 (8:5)
                                             ml

     which, for small values of q, is similar to the form of the harmonic oscillator:

                                                   2E
                                             q_ 2 ﬃ 2  v2 q2                                     (8:50 )
                                                   ml

     which is simply (8.2) rewritten expressing q_ 2 .
       As the mechanical energy E (positive) varies, (8.5) represents a set of orbits in the phase
     space deﬁned by the variables q and q_ (Figure 8.6):

     1. For 0 < E < 2ml2 v2, we have the closed orbits cited in the text: (i) in the limit case of small
        values of the angle of oscillation q (the case of the harmonic oscillator), they become the
        ellipses given by (8.5’); (ii) in the general case of large values of q, they are the closed
        curves (deformed ellipses) given by (8.5).
     2. For E ¼ 2ml2 v2, the critical value of the energy cited in the text above, we have the case of
        closed orbits composed of arcs belonging to the two cosine curves that intersect each other
        on the axis of the abscissas of Figure 8.6. This is the limit case that separates the previous
        case from the following case: it corresponds to the motion of a pendulum whose energy is
        ‘exactly’ equal to that which would allow it to reach the vertical position above the centre
        of oscillation (point C in Figure 1.3) with nil speed and in an inﬁnite time (the total energy
        E is ‘exactly’ equal to the potential energy of the pendulum in equilibrium above the centre
        of rotation: U(q) ¼ 2mgl).
     3. For E > 2ml2 v2, (8.5) represents a set of cosine curves, symmetrical in pairs with respect
        to the axis of the abscissas, shifted higher (or lower) with respect to those of the previous
        case, the higher the value of E, and with amplitudes that decrease with the entity of the
                                           Oscillatory dynamics represented in the phase space     59

                                             J




                                                                                 J




          Figure 8.6 Orbits in the phase space of an undamped pendulum.



shifting. These are open orbits shown at the top (and bottom) of Figure 8.6: the pendulum
has an energy E that is so great that it does not oscillate, but rotates periodically at a speed
q_ that is not constant (the orbits are oscillating functions), but, on average, is greater the
higher E is.
               Extension of the concepts
   9           and models used in
               physics to economics



Jevons, Pareto and Fisher: from mathematical physics
to mathematical economics
Models such as the oscillators, in particular the harmonic oscillator illus-
trated in chapter 8, constitute a set of mathematical models of physical
systems that have been studied for some time and that represent some of the
ﬁrst and most important accomplishments of classical-era mathematical
physics. In principle, models of this kind can be used to describe any
oscillating system, with a few simple adaptations that don’t affect their
substance. In particular, the linear model of the harmonic oscillator is
particularly suited to describing all cases of oscillating systems for which
linear approximation is considered acceptable: these range from systems in
physics, e.g. when we describe the movement of electrons in an oscillating
electric circuit, or of the electrical or magnetic ﬁelds of an electromagnetic
wave, to systems in other disciplines in which we believe that we can
observe periodic oscillations over time, such as an economic system, a
population, etc.
   Taking a concept or a model that has enjoyed success in physics and
applying it to social sciences was in actual fact one of the routes followed by
physicalism, as we mentioned in Chapter 1. The general idea is that the
nature of the real world (i.e. the universe and everything in it) conforms to
the condition of being physical; when we observe oscillations of a certain
empirically measured magnitude that remain constant over time, we can
deﬁne other constants of motion (the ﬁrst integrals), such as for example the
energy in physical systems, giving them different meanings according to
their context.
   Between the last decades of the nineteenth century and the ﬁrst decades of
the twentieth century, considerations and concepts like those that we have
mentioned so far, typical of a particular sector of mathematical physics
                                          From mathematical physics to mathematical economics      61

called rational mechanics, have been transferred from physics to economics,
traditionally the most quantitative of the social sciences, through real
homologies. We have long been trying to build economic models that
apply mathematical laws such as those we have illustrated so far, attempt-
ing to create a real mathematical economics on the model of rational
mechanics.
   The forefathers of marginalist neoclassic economics, the authors of this
economic concept, attempted to literally copy the models used in physics,
term by term, symbol by symbol, in a methodical and organic way, expli-
citly declaring their intentions of transferring the concepts and the methods
used in physics to economics (Cohen, 1993). Economists such as William
Stanley Jevons, Léon Walras, Vilfredo Pareto and Irving Fisher stated that
their objective was to transform economics into a ‘real’ science, choosing
physics as a reference.
   There were various reasons for this: on one hand, physics was a science
that they were all well acquainted with (Jevons graduated in chemistry at
University College London, where, later, he became a professor of political
economics, having been a student of the mathematician George Boole;
Pareto graduated in civil engineering from Turin Polytechnic; Fisher had
been a student, at Yale University, of Josiah Williard Gibbs, an eminent
ﬁgure in mathematical physics and one of the fathers of theoretical thermo-
dynamics); on the other hand, because physics, more than any of the other
sciences, was very highly considered and enjoyed a general appreciation
thanks to the signiﬁcant successes it had achieved. However, above and
beyond all of this was the important fact that physics was characterized,
more than any other scientiﬁc discipline, by its extensive use of mathemat-
ics. Above all, this last aspect constituted the primary element, according to
these economists, but not just them, to give a discipline such as economics,
whose mathematical foundations were rather vague at the time, a more
scientiﬁc character.32
   Concepts were transferred from physics to economics in a number of
different ways. Jevons, for example, sustained that in economics, the notion

  32
       The economists cited in the text all belong to the marginalist school that reached its
height of development during the last 30 years of the nineteenth century and of which the
same Jevons, in Great Britain, and Walras, in France, were among the founders. For margin-
alists, the use of mathematics became common practice, although there were of course
exceptions, such as, for examples, the marginalist economists from the Austrian school,
ﬁrstly Carl Menger, who, unlike the marginalists of the French or British schools, considered
the number that expresses the marginal value of a good not as a cardinal measure of the
‘psychological pleasure’ attributed to the good, but only as an indication of an ordinal nature,
that could only be used to make comparisons, and not for quantitative calculations.
62   9 : Extension of the concepts and models used in physics to economics

     of value played the same role as that of energy in mechanics, and main-
     tained that goods, in economics, can be attributed the same dimension that
     mass has in physics, and furthermore, that utility corresponds to Newton’s
     gravitational force.
        Pareto was convinced that there were close and surprising similarities
     between the equilibrium of a economic system and the equilibrium of a
     mechanical system. In his famous Cours d’économie politique (1896), he
     even went as far as drawing up a table to assist readers that had no know-
     ledge of rational mechanics, in which he compared mechanical and eco-
     nomic phenomena, establishing strict parallels between the two disciplines.
        Fisher also published a table in which he compared rational mechanics
     and economics, although he pushed the homology much further than
     Pareto. According to Fisher, for instance, the magnitudes used in economics,
     just as those used in physics, could be attributed scalar or vectorial proper-
     ties. Fisher, for example, suggested the following analogies between phys-
     ical magnitudes and economic magnitudes: particle–individual, space–basic
     products, force–marginal utility (both vectorial quantities), energy–utility
     (scalar quantities), work–disutility (scalar quantities; ‘work’ obviously is
     given the meaning it has in physics, i.e. the scalar product of a force applied
     to a body times the displacement made by the same). In any event, it should
     be noted that the analogies suggested by Fisher were criticized by other
     authors who were working in the same ﬁeld. Their reasons were varied; for
     example, the fact that Fisher did not take due account of the principle of
     energy conservation that, applied to a closed economic system, would imply
     that the sum of total expenditure and of total utility has to be constant
     (Cohen, 1993).



     Schumpeter and Samuelson: the economic cycle
     The idea of applying mathematical techniques, that originated from clas-
     sical physics, to economics, was developed and examined in further detail in
     the years that followed those of the ﬁrst mathematical economists, even
     though under very different perspectives and without seeking or imposing
     strict parallels between physical and economic magnitudes, as Jevons,
     Pareto and Fisher had done in the past. In particular, these scholars con-
     centrated their efforts on the idea of using a model to describe and repro-
     duce the continually alternating occurrence of prosperity and depression
     that was observed in modern market economics, attempting to use models
     of various types of oscillations (linear, nonlinear, damped, forced, etc.) that
     had enjoyed so much success in physics.
                                                                             The economic cycle    63

   The use of mathematical models of oscillations in economics therefore
ﬁnds its most distant roots in the mathematical approach to the study of
physical phenomena that originated in the seventeenth century, but that
now abandons the assumption that there are strict homologies with physics.
In this context, we no longer speak of magnitudes that simply replace those
of physics, assuming the same role as the latter, but, for example, of a
macroeconomic magnitude, usually gross domestic product or income,
that oscillates over time according to a sinusoidal law, in analogy to the
action of the harmonic oscillator; the concept is taken from physics, but the
analogy with physics is now entirely formal.
   From the end of the 1930s onwards, this new perspective generated a
long series of mathematical models depicting the economic cycle, identiﬁed
as a cyclical succession of phases (for example, as Joseph Schumpeter, 1939,
suggested, the phases of prosperity, recession, depression and recovery),
hypothesizing that there was a more or less sinusoidal mathematical law
that could describe the regular patterns observed.
   One of the ﬁrst and fundamental models was the famous linear model
formulated by Paul Samuelson (1939, 1947; see also Allen, 1959). Samuel-
son’s model was made up of three equations: the consumption function, in
which current consumption depends on the income of the previous period;
the investment function, in which investment depends on the variation in
income of the previous period; and the condition of equilibrium between
production and demand in the goods market, to which a form of expend-
iture, called autonomous, is added, which is considered exogenous. The
model, in its original form, produces a non-homogeneous second order
linear equation, like the ones we presented in chapter 5 relative to the
oscillations of a pendulum.33 Samuelson’s linear model envisages four
possible dynamics: (1) divergence without oscillations, (2) divergence with
oscillations, (3) convergence without oscillations, and (4) convergence
with oscillations; two of these, (3) and (4), have exactly the same dynamics
that are possible for a non-forced pendulum, those represented in Figures
8.4 and 8.5.
  33
      In reality, the equation that Samuelson obtains is not a differential equation in continu-
ous time, but a ﬁnite difference equation in discrete time, such as:

                                   Yt þ aYt1 þ bYt2 ¼ A

where Y is the macroeconomic magnitude in question (for example income), that in the
equation is considered at three different and successive points in time (indicated by
t  2, t  1 and t), a and b are suitable parameters and A is autonomous expenditure. In
our context, however, we can confuse the continuous and discrete nature of time, without this
resulting in fundamental errors in the dynamics calculated.
64   9 : Extension of the concepts and models used in physics to economics

       Later, John Hicks (1950) made Samuelson’s model nonlinear. The re-
     nowned, fundamental model of Goodwin–Kalecki–Phillips (Goodwin,
     1951; Kalecki, 1954; Phillips, 1954, 1957) represented a further develop-
     ment of Samuelson’s model in a nonlinear form, introducing new hypoth-
     eses. We will not be discussing the contents of these models; readers should
     refer to the cited references and to the wealth of literature on mathematical
     economics (for example, Allen, 1959).



     Dow and Elliott: periodicity in ﬁnancial markets
     The models cited, from Samuelson’s to the one developed by Goodwin–
     Kalecki–Phillips, which represent some of the most important milestones in
     the history of economic thought, were formulated making extensive use of
     mathematics and with clear analogies to the cyclical oscillations of systems
     in physical mathematics.
        Alongside the cited models, other descriptions of certain speciﬁc eco-
     nomic systems in terms of oscillations were also developed, but without
     strict mathematical formulations. We are referring to models of the dynam-
     ics of the ﬁnancial markets, i.e. the trend over time of the values of share
     prices and market indices. They are not mathematical models in the real
     sense of the word, and even less so deterministic models; however we
     mention them as examples of attempts to model human behaviour. A
     basic assumption of these models is that the trends in share prices and
     indices can be largely ascribed to dynamics that are based on human
     psychology; not the psychology of the single individual that operates on
     the market (the investor), but that of the mass of investors. We could even
     go so far as saying that efﬁcient34 and competitive ﬁnancial markets,
     particularly share markets, are one of the contexts that best reﬂects mass
     psychology (Batten, 2000a).
        Studies of this nature, aimed at highlighting recurrences in the trends of
     share prices, have mainly been developed in America, especially from when,
     at the end of the nineteenth century, the goods and ﬁnancial markets have
     continued to increase in size. A pioneer of these theories was Charles Dow,
     who was the ﬁrst to believe that he had identiﬁed recurrences in the form of
     cycles. In 1900, he actually wrote in the Wall Street Journal: ‘The market is
     always considered as having three movements, all going at the same time.

        34
           A market is said to be efﬁcient when all information that is available instantaneously
     reaches all operators, is immediately processed and gives rise to a new value of the goods
     traded.
                                                      Periodicity in ﬁnancial markets   65

The ﬁrst is the narrow movement from day to day. The second is the short
swing, running from two weeks to a month or more; the third is the main
movement, covering at least four years in duration’ (cited in Batten, 2000a,
p. 213).
   Furthermore, Dow sustained that the stages of share price trends were
characterized by three successive waves. The ﬁrst is the rebound from the
excess of pessimism from the decline that preceded it, the second reﬂects the
real increase in earnings, while the third is simply caused by an overesti-
mation of values. Moreover, again according to Dow, there is a time at
which any upwards or downwards movement of the market is interrupted
and is immediately followed by a counter-movement that recovers a part
that can be between 2/5 and 3/5 of the previous movement, which is called
retracing.
   Around 30 years after Dow’s observations, during the period immedi-
ately following the Wall Street stock market crash of 1929, the idea that
the trend of the ﬁnancial markets presented recognizable patterns that
repeated themselves, almost as if they were real recurrent patterns, was
taken up by Ralph Nelson Elliott, who developed and made the theory
outlined by Dow more generalized and precise. According to Elliott, the
collective behaviour of investors gives rise to phases of growth and decline
of share prices and indices, which are manifested, in the graphs that
report the values of share prices over time, in the form of periods of
growth followed by periods of decline, which follow each other at more
or less constant rhythms although with different amplitudes: these are
known as Elliott waves.
   According to Elliott’s assumptions, in the graphs, characteristic phases of
different periodicity can be identiﬁed, that provide a basis to describe the
trends of the share prices in question, and more importantly, to formulate
(an attempt at) forecasting (Elliott, 1946; see Frost and Prechter, 1990). In
particular, Elliott’s complete cycle is made up of ﬁve waves that drive share
value upwards, followed by three waves that drive them back down and
that represent the so-called correction of the previous phases. One of the
most interesting aspects of this theory is that each of these waves can be
broken down into a reduced time-scale, into an analogous cycle of eight
waves, each of which can be further broken down in more or less the same
way and so on. In this way, Elliott identiﬁed a sort of invariance of scale,
which we would nowadays call a fractal structure, i.e. 40 years before
Benoı̂t Mandelbrot formally introduced the mathematical concept of a
fractal object and applied it to the ﬁnancial markets, using the concept of
invariance of scale in a more detailed and complete way than Elliott had
(Mandelbrot, 1997ab, 1999ab).
66   9 : Extension of the concepts and models used in physics to economics

        Elliott’s pattern can be applied to any market that is characterized by
     efﬁciency, liquidity and ﬂuidity in its price movements and by the competi-
     tiveness of the operators. It therefore ﬁnds its most natural application in
     the graphs of stock market indices, those of futures indices as well as the
     graphs of the most extensively traded shares.
        At the basis of the Elliott wave principle is the assumption that the
     ﬁnancial markets reﬂect a general principle of natural symmetry: symmetry
     that manifests itself, in this context, both in the succession of waves accord-
     ing to periodic patterns and in the invariance of the trends of share prices on
     different time-scales.35 Elliott’s deep-rooted conviction of the existence of
     this general principle of symmetry is the origin of the title he gave to his
     most famous book Nature’s Law. The Secret of the Universe (1946), in
     which he fully illustrated the wave theory that he had developed in a series
     of previous articles.
        We will now return, for the last time, to our discussion of the pendulum in
     a situation that is totally different to the ones examined up until now.

        35
           The fact that there are patterns in the trends of share prices and indices, even though not
     truly periodical, but at least that repeat over time, is one of the fundamental postulates of the
     so-called technical analysis of the ﬁnancial markets, of which Elliott waves, still today, are
     one of the most important elements.
                The chaotic pendulum
 10

The need for models of nonlinear oscillations
In this part we have discussed oscillations at some length. Whether we are
examining a pendulum or a mass connected to a spring, an electrical current
in a speciﬁc circuit or a wave broadcast by an antenna, economic cycles
(real or assumed) or the listing of a stock, or further still, in a more general
and abstract sense, the condition of dynamic equilibrium of a system that is
interacting with other systems, the mathematical model of oscillations
represents a basic schema that can be adapted, by making the appropriate
corrections, to ﬁt the case in question. A wide number of variants of the
model of motion of an oscillating system can be constructed. These depend
not so much on the nature of the speciﬁc system being studied, but rather on
the different external conditions in which the system ﬁnds itself, or, to put it
better, that we wish to be taken into account. The oscillations described by a
linear model, for example, can be applied to the dynamics of a pendulum as
well as to a mass attached to a spring, a current in an electric circuit, etc., as
long as the disturbances to the state of stable equilibrium are small. This is
precisely what the model does: it abstracts the common characteristics, in
this case the dynamics of the motion close to the condition of stable
equilibrium, ignoring the other characteristics that deﬁne the speciﬁc oscil-
lating system. If the dynamics envisaged by the linear model do not suc-
cessfully adapt to the description of the oscillations observed, this may be
due to the fact that the oscillating system is not close to its stable equilib-
rium, or even that the oscillating system is so disturbed that it cannot ﬁnd a
stable equilibrium. In this case a new model of nonlinear oscillations, one of
the many variants that can be conceived starting from the basic model of the
harmonic oscillator, must be used to provide an acceptable description of
the dynamics observed.
68   10 : The chaotic pendulum




     The case of a nonlinear forced pendulum with friction
     (Model 4)
     Of the numerous possible variants of the model of an oscillator, we will
     illustrate a further one, without entering into its mathematical details, given
     its singular nature and importance to our discussions on chaos in the second
     part of the book. We will be referring to the case of a forced pendulum, i.e. a
     pendulum subjected to the action of another force in addition to that of
     gravity, that is free to rotate a 3608 angle; we are speciﬁcally interested in
     the case in which the oscillation pivot, under the action of an external force,
     makes sinusoidal oscillations along a vertical axis. In this way the pendulum
     moves due to the force of gravity, friction and the force of a sinusoidal
     oscillation, acting on the pivot of the pendulum. The dynamics of the
     system can be expressed by the following equation (again, for the sake of
     simplicity we will not include the dependence of q on time):

                          mlq€ þ klq_ þ mg(1 þ Af2 cos ft)sinq ¼ 0                      (10:1)

     where A indicates the maximum amplitude of the vertical oscillation of the
     pivot, and f is the ratio between the oscillation frequency of the pivot and
     the oscillation frequency of the pendulum; compare (10.1) with (5.4) for the
     other symbols used.
        This is a nonlinear and non-autonomous system, in which the resulting
     acting force depends explicitly on time through the term Af2 cos ft. Equa-
     tion (10.1) differs from (7.2), applicable to the case of nonlinear unforced
     oscillations, due to the presence of the product Af2 cos ft in the term that
     gives the restoring force. A system described in this way was discussed by
     Rayleigh (1902) and has been studied in more depth in recent years (Leven
     et al., 1985).36 The pendulum thus described is illustrated in Figure 10.1.
        We will not enter into the technical details of the dynamics that this
     system may manifest, which are rather complex. We will limit ourselves
     to pointing out that this pendulum, in certain circumstances, represents an
     initial example of a type of dynamics that we will be discussing at length in
     the second part: chaotic dynamics. The peculiarity of this system, in fact, is
     that for certain values of parameters A and f, the dynamics become
     unstable and substantially unpredictable. The fact that the force applied

       36
          Alternatively, and without making signiﬁcant changes to equation (10.1), we could also
     consider the case of oscillations of the pivot along a horizontal axis. Obviously, the most
     general case is that in which the pivot moves according to any law.
                                              The case of a nonlinear forced pendulum with friction   69




                             The pivot
                  oscillates vertically
                     according to the
                   sinusoidal law by      A
                    amplitude A and
                     frequencyf times     A
                                                 J
                           that of the
                            pendulum
                                                                 Component of the
                                                                 force of gravity
                                                                 cancelled by the
                                                                 constraint reaction
                                                                 F = mg cos J

                                                           mg

                                                      Restoring force:
                                                      F = mg sin J

            Figure 10.1 The case of a nonlinear pendulum forced on the pivot.


to the pivot is variable and that it acts with different intensities and in a
different way at each phase of motion of the pendulum can cause different
effects, such as a brusque change in the oscillation amplitude, or a sudden
complete rotation, or similarly a sudden change in the direction in which
the pendulum is moving. In general, the dynamics of this system are there-
fore unpredictable, even though the forces in play are both known: the
tangential component of the force of gravity, that acts on the oscillating
mass, and the sinusoidal force of known amplitude and frequency, that acts
on the pivot.
   In addition to the above, it is interesting to note that it can be shown
(Beltrami, 1987) that for speciﬁc values of the amplitude and frequency of
the force applied to the pivot, A and f respectively, the pendulum can even
ﬁnd a position of stable equilibrium upside down, i.e. with the mass above
the oscillation pivot. Obviously, as we have seen in chapter 9, a position of
equilibrium with the oscillating mass above also exists for an unforced
pendulum, which, however, unlike the case that can take place in the forced
pendulum, is unstable equilibrium, that cannot be achieved in practice
merely by applying a force that moves the mass that is still in a position
of stable equilibrium.37
   37
       It can be demonstrated that, by putting the oscillating mass of a unforced pendulum,
still at the bottom, in motion, by applying a force (a blow), of a suitable intensity, the mass
reaches a position of unstable equilibrium, at the top, with a decreasing speed that becomes
70   10 : The chaotic pendulum

       We will end our discussion of models of oscillating systems here; further
     and more in-depth examination of these and other dynamical systems can
     be found in the wealth of literature dedicated to this topic; for example
     Jordan and P. Smith (1977); Arnold (1983, 1992); Beltrami (1987); Anosov
     and Arnold (1988); Perko (1991); Moon (1992); Bellomo and Preziosi
     (1995); Alligood, Sauer and Yorke (1996).


     nil when the mass stops, but in an inﬁnite amount of time. In practice, this means that an
     unforced pendulum cannot reach a state of unstable equilibrium.
               Linear models in social
 11            processes: the case of two
               interacting populations



Introduction
After having presented, in the paragraphs above, several versions of one of
the simplest and most important models in mathematical physics, the model
of the oscillator, which has served as a basis for developments and exten-
sions into other sectors, we will now look at another example of modelling
that has become a classic theme in social science: the case of a system of two
interacting populations.
   A number of different theories have been adopted in the approach to this
subject which have given rise to a numerous family of models. In general
these are models that are essentially of theoretical interest: they do not
represent anything more than an initial attempt to model extremely com-
plex phenomena such as social ones (in this context, naturally, the term
social is intended in a broad sense, referring to any group of individuals,
identiﬁable according to certain parameters, that interact with another
group of individuals).
   The simplest hypothesis on which a model can be formed is that in which
the two populations interact with each other in a manner that can be
expressed in a purely linear form; this hypothesis, however, is unrealistic,
as we have already pointed out several times for other types of linear
models. The linear model of two populations interacting with each other
that we will illustrate in this part of the book, constitutes a very schematic
example of how an extremely simpliﬁed mathematical model can be con-
structed to describe phenomenologies that belong to sciences that, at least in
the past, have been little mathematized, and of how mathematical tech-
niques developed in certain contexts (differential equations in mathematical
physics) can be usefully transferred to other environments.
   In the picture that we will be illustrating, we will not enter into the
mathematical details; for a more in-depth exploration of the technical
72   11 : Linear models in social processes

     aspects, we recommend the reader consult speciﬁc literature on the topic of
     differential equations and dynamics systems, such as for example Zeldovich
     and Myškis (1976); Elsgolts (1977); Jordan and Smith (1977); Bender and
     Orszag (1978); Arnold (1983, 1992); Beltrami (1987); Anosov and Arnold
     (1988); Perko (1991); Moon (1992); Epstein (1997); Bellomo and Preziosi
     (1995); Hannon and Ruth (1997ab); Riganti (2000).



     The linear model of two interacting populations
     Let us consider two populations P1 and P2 evolving over time; the number
     of members of P1 and P2 are respectively n1 (t) and n2 (t). The two popula-
     tions interact with each other in a linear manner, that is to say in such a way
     that the instantaneous speeds of change of n1 (t) and n2 (t), i.e. their ﬁrst
     derivatives with respect to time, n_ 1 (t) and n_ 2 (t), are directly proportional to
     a linear combination of the same values of n1 (t) and n2 (t). For the sake of
     clarity, imagine the case of two populations that collaborate for their
     reciprocal development in the presence of unlimited natural resources. We
     can therefore deduce that the higher the number of individuals in each
     population the faster the growth of said population.
        Let us now assume that the speed of growth of population P1 , indicated
     by n_ 1 (t), is proportional to the number of individuals n1 of the same
     population, through coefﬁcient k11 , and also to the number of individuals
     n2 of the other population, through coefﬁcient k12 . In other words, we
     assume that the speed of growth of P1 is given by a linear combination of
     the numbers of individuals of P1 and P2 . The same is valid for P2. In
     formulae, this translates into the following system of ﬁrst order homoge-
     neous linear differential equations with constant coefﬁcients:
                                  
                                      n_ 1 (t) ¼ k11 n1 (t) þ k12 n2 (t)
                                                                                   (11:1)
                                      n_ 2 (t) ¼ k21 n1 (t) þ k22 n2 (t)

       The (real) values of the coefﬁcients kij of the linear combination in the
     second member determine the contribution that each of the two populations,
     individually, makes to the speed of growth of each population. The values of
     coefﬁcients kij , therefore, express the reciprocal relationship between the
     growth (or decline) of the two populations.
       Depending on the sign of each of the coefﬁcients kij , we have a construct-
     ive action if kij > 0, or destructive action if kij < 0. More speciﬁcally, k12 , in
     the ﬁrst of the equations (11.1), and k21 , in the second of the equations
     (11.1), relate the speed of growth of a population to the number of indi-
                                       Some qualitative aspects of linear model dynamics   73

viduals in the other. For example, a positive value of k12 indicates the
positive contribution by P2 to the speed of growth of P1 , in the sense that
the higher the number of individuals in P2 , the faster population P1 grows.
Coefﬁcients k12 and k21 , taken separately, therefore represent the effect of
the cooperation (if both are positive) or of the competition (if both are
negative), on P1 by P2 and on P2 by P1 respectively, or of the parasitism of a
population on another (if k12 and k21 have opposite signs).
    The coefﬁcient k11 in the ﬁrst of the equations (11.1) and the coefﬁcient
k22 in the second of the equations (11.1) indicate the effect of the number of
individuals on the speed of growth of the population to which they belong.
Therefore, if k11 > 0, population P1 sustains itself and grows exponentially
(à la Malthus), for example following an increasing amount of reproductive
activity of the number of individuals n1 of population P1 ; if on the other
hand k11 < 0, the speed of growth of P1 decreases in proportion to the
growth of the number of individuals n1 in population P1 , for example due to
the effect of internal competition within population P1 , caused by a lack of
food resources (overpopulation crises).



Some qualitative aspects of linear model dynamics
Without resorting to the actual integration of (11.1) (so-called quadrature),
we can often form a qualitative picture of the dynamics of a system by
examining the state of equilibrium of the dynamics. The understanding
of the behaviour of the system in relation to states of this nature, once
identiﬁed, can actually enable us to predict the general behaviour of
the system in any other condition: in actual fact the system evolves by
following trajectories that distance themselves from the (stationary) states
of unstable equilibrium and come closer to the (stationary) states of stable
equilibrium. It is as if we were studying the dynamics of a ball that is rolling
on ground that has rises and depressions; more than the slopes between
them, where the dynamics are obvious and easy to describe, we would be
interested, in order to have a clear picture of the general dynamics, in
identifying the peaks of the rises, as points of unstable equilibrium (repel-
lers) and the bottoms of the depressions, as points of stable equilibrium
(attractors).
   Using the metaphor of the pendulum again, a subject that has been
discussed at some length in the previous paragraphs, a point of stable
equilibrium is that occupied by the pendulum in a vertical position under
the pivot, while at a point of unstable equilibrium the pendulum occupies a
vertical position above the pivot.
74   11 : Linear models in social processes

       The states of equilibrium, whether stable or unstable, are therefore the
     fundamental references of the system’s dynamics. This justiﬁes the interest
     taken in their identiﬁcation and in the study of the system’s dynamics in the
     neighbourhood of the equilibrium points.
       Establishing the states of equilibrium of the system of equations (11.1) is
     not difﬁcult. Based on the deﬁnition of derivative, they are those in which
     the ﬁrst derivatives n_ 1 and n_ 2 are both equal to zero (for the sake of
     simplicity, from now on we will not indicate the dependence of n1 and n2
     on time):
                                        
                                              0 ¼ k11 n1 þ k12 n2
                                                                                    (11:10 )
                                              0 ¼ k21 n1 þ k22 n2

        Excluding the trivial case in which all the kij are null, the only solution of
     the system is given by n1 ¼ n2 ¼ 0, which thus identiﬁes the only point of
     equilibrium of the linear model (11.1); this is the situation in which the
     populations are ‘empty’, i.e. they contain no individuals. The question that
     we now ask ourselves is: how do the dynamics of the two populations
     behave with respect to the point of coordinates n1 ¼ n2 ¼ 0? Do the evo-
     lutions of P1 and P2 , tend towards extinction (point of stable equilibrium,
     attractor point) or towards unlimited growth (point of unstable equilib-
     rium, repeller point)? We observe that, as n1 ¼ n2 ¼ 0, the only state of
     equilibrium of the linear model, we cannot have the extinction of only one
     of the populations: in fact if we assume that n1 ¼ 0 and n_ 1 ¼ 0, we see that
     equation (11.1) gives n2 ¼ 0 and n_ 2 ¼ 0.
        Before discussing the solution of system (11.1), we need to make another
     observation: we are attempting to ﬁnd a link between the numbers n1 and
     n2 of the individuals of P1 and P2 , starting from (11.1), by eliminating time
     from it; the function that we obtain will be the orbit of the system of the two
     populations in the phase space. Eliminating time from the two derivatives in
     equations (11.1), we obtain, after several steps:

                                         dn2 k21 n1 þ k22 n2
                                            ¼                                       (11:2)
                                         dn1 k11 n1 þ k12 n2

       Equation (11.2) illustrates, point by point, the position of the straight line
     tangent to the curve, and therefore the direction of the system’s orbit.38
     Equation (11.2), in other words, shows what the instantaneous variation of

       38
          To be thorough, together with (11.2) we should also consider the inverse, i.e. the
     derivative of n1 with respect to n2 :
                                                Some qualitative aspects of linear model dynamics    75

the number of individuals of P2 is with respect to that of the number of
individuals of P1 , whereas in (11.1) the instantaneous variations of the
number of individuals of P1 and P2 with respect to time, were considered
separately.
   Equation (11.2) can be calculated only if n1 6¼ 0 and n2 6¼ 0. The point of
coordinates n1 ¼ 0 and n2 ¼ 0, in which the derivative (11.2) does not
exist, is called the singular point. But n1 ¼ n2 ¼ 0 are also the only values
that make both the derivatives of (11.1) equal to zero, which leads us to
identify the states of equilibrium of model (11.1) with its singular points
(this happens for any system, not just linear ones), and, in practice, to turn
our attention to the study of solutions of the system of equations (11.1) in
the neighbourhood of the only singular point.39 We can claim, using a
paragon that is slightly forced, but serves to clarify the situation, that the
singular points of an equation are a bit like the points of support that hold a
suspended chain: they determine the general form of the chain (the orbit in
the phase space); what we are particularly interested in is studying the
location of the supporting points, because they determine the form that
the chain takes when suspended between one point and another.
   In the discussion that follows in this chapter, we will turn our attention
towards the study of the solutions of the system of equations (11.1) in a
neighbourhood of the only singular point. We would like to state now that
variables n1 and n2 should be understood in a general sense, not limiting
ourselves to attributing only the meaning of the number of individuals of a
populations in its strictest sense to them, but assuming that they can also
have negative values.


                                      dn1 k11 n1 þ k12 n2
                                         ¼                                                (11:20 )
                                      dn2 k21 n1 þ k22 n2

The existence of (11.2) alone, in fact, is not sufﬁcient, for example, to describe closed orbits,
in which there are at least two points in which the curve has a vertical tangent. The existence
of (11.2’), together with (11.2), guarantees that all points of the curve can be described using a
formula that links n1 to n2 , and that the curve is continuous and has a unique tangent at any
point.
  39
      To be precise, we note that at the singular points of a differential equation, the
conditions set by the well-know theorem of the existence and uniqueness of the solutions of
a differential equation are not satisﬁed, conditions that, furthermore, are sufﬁcient but not
necessary. Therefore, it could occur, as we will see in the discussion that follows in this
chapter, that more than one (from two to inﬁnity) trajectory of the system’s dynamics passes
through the singular points. This means, for example, that the system evolves towards the
same ﬁnal state of stable equilibrium, starting from any point on the phase plane, following
different orbits, as happens with a damped pendulum that tends to stop, regardless of the
initial oscillation amplitude.
76   11 : Linear models in social processes




     The solutions of the linear model
     A discussion, even if not complete nor rigorous, of the solutions of system
     (11.1) is useful because it enables us to highlight general characteristics and
     elements that can help us better understand certain aspects of the dynamics
     generated by more elaborate models. Some aspects of our discussion can be
     generalized, without making too many changes, to linear models with more
     than two interacting populations, and also, at least in part, and more or less
     along the same lines, to nonlinear models (which is actually much more
     interesting).
        The theory of differential equations shows that the solutions of the
     system of linear equations (11.1) are made up of linear combinations of
     exponentials such as:
                                      
                                          n1 ¼ a1 eb1 t þ a2 eb2 t
                                                                             (11:3)
                                          n2 ¼ a3 eb1 t þ a4 eb2 t

        In order to understand the evolutive dynamics of the two populations, the
     values of b1 and b2 are particularly important, because they determine the
     nature of the singular point: speciﬁcally its stability or instability charac-
     teristics. In fact, depending on whether the exponentials are real and
     increasing or real and decreasing or complex, we have, as we will see, a
     situation in which P1 and P2 distance themselves from a condition of
     equilibrium (instability) or tend towards a state of asymptotic equilibrium
     (stability) or make periodic oscillations.
        The values of the coefﬁcients a of (11.3) depend on the two integration
     constants and are less important than the values of b1 and b2 . For now we
     will limit ourselves to observing that it can be demonstrated how, in reality,
     to deﬁne the dynamics of a system in the neighbourhood of the singular
     point we do not need to establish four independent coefﬁcients a, because it
     is sufﬁcient to determine the ratios a1 =a3 and a2 =a4 , once b1 and b2 have
     been established, and therefore the nature of the singular point has been
     established.
        The theory of differential equations shows that coefﬁcients b1 and b2 can
     be found by solving a simple second degree algebraic equation, called the
     characteristic equation of (11.1), that can be written using the coefﬁcients
     of the same (11.1):

                           b2  (k11 þ k22 )b þ (k11 k22  k12 k21 ) ¼ 0     (11:4)
                                                                   The solutions of the linear model   77

  Now we need to examine the different cases that the signs of the co-
efﬁcients kij of (11.1) give rise to. Depending on the signs of the kij , b1
and b2 can be real or otherwise. If they are real we can identify the
cases in which b1 and b2 are negative (Case 1A), positive (Case 1B)
or one positive and one negative (Case 1C). If b1 and b2 are not real,
two possible cases can be identiﬁed: either b1 and b2 are imaginary conju-
gates (Re b1 ¼ Re b2 ¼ 0, Im b1 ¼ Im b2 ) (Case 2A), or b1 has a real
part common to b2 , i.e. b1 and b2 are complex conjugates
(Re b1 ¼ Re b2 6¼ 0, Im b1 ¼ Im b2 ) (Case 2B).
  Firstly, however, we would like to state three properties of the second
degree equations to which we will be referring in the discussion that
follows; we will refer to these properties indicating them as Point 1, Point
2 and Point 3 respectively:40

Point 1. The coefﬁcient of (11.4), indicated by (k11 þ k22 ), is equal to the
sum of the roots b1 and b2 the sign of whose real component has been
changed (obviously this does not mean that the roots of the equation are
necessarily k11 and k22 ).

Point 2. The term (k11 k22  k12 k21 ) is the product of the roots b1 and b2 .

Point 3. The characteristic equation (11.4) has real roots b1 and b2 only if
the discriminant of the coefﬁcients, that is indicated by D, is positive or nil,
i.e. if it is:

                        D ¼ (k11 þ k22 )2  4(k11 k22  k12 k21 )
                                                                                           (11:5)
                           ¼ (k11  k22 )2 þ 4k12 k21 $ 0

Real roots of the characteristic equation: both populations grow or both
extinguish themselves

Case 1A        Real negative roots: b1 < 0, b2 < 0.

  40
       In basic algebra it can be demonstrated that in the second order equation (in which a 6¼ 0):

                                         ax2 þ bx þ c ¼ 0

there are the following relations between coefﬁcients a, b, c (real or complex) and roots x1
and x2 (real or complex):

                       (  x1 ) þ (  x2 ) ¼ b=a and (  x1 )  (  x2 ) ¼ c=a
78   11 : Linear models in social processes

     The characteristic equation (11.4) has real and negative roots (for Point 1)
     if: (1) k11 and k22 are both negative or (2) only one is, but, in absolute value,
     it is higher than the other; at the same time, in both cases the following must
     be true: k11 k22  k12 k21 > 0 (for Point 2).
         Let us interpret these conditions.
         In case (1), k11 and k22 both negative means that there is internal
     competition within each of the two populations for the exploitation
     of the (limited) resources: as we can see from (11.1), in fact, an increase
     in population P1 impacts the speed of growth of both P1 and P2
     which decreases, because the derivatives n_ 1 and n_ 2 , in this case, are both
     negative.
         In case (2), on the other hand, we have real negative roots if there is
     a level of competition within only one population that is so high that
     it compensates for any (small) self-sustainment capacity of the other
     population. Let us suppose, for the sake of clarity, that there is internal
     competition within P1 , and therefore that k11 < 0, while P2 , on the
     other hand is self-sustaining: k22 > 0. As long as k11 k22  k12 k21 > 0
     (Point 2), the term k12 k21 must now be positive, in order to com-
     pensate for the product k11 k22 which is negative: k12 and k21 therefore
     must have opposite signs. This means that one of the two populations
     beneﬁts from the growth of the other, but at the same time, damages its
     growth.
         In this case (2) we not only have k11 and k22 that indicate internal
     competition within a population and self-sustainment of the other, but
     also the interaction between P1 and P2 and that between P2 and P1 ,
     considered globally in the product k12 k21 , represents a relationship that
     we can call parasitic, for example of P1 with respect to P2 . In other words,
     we ﬁnd ourselves in a situation in which the dominant characteristic of the
     system is the internal competition, which, even if present in only one
     population, is large enough to inevitably lead both populations towards
     extinction. On the other hand, as we have already observed, in a linear
     system, either both populations grow or both populations extinguish them-
     selves; there is no possibility that just one population survives over the other
     which completely extinguishes itself.
         An example will clarify which type of system can give real negative roots.
     If we give the following values to the coefﬁcients of (11.1):

        k11 ¼ 10 (high internal competition in P1 )
        k12 ¼ þ3 (moderate gain by P1 due to cooperation with P2 )
        k21 ¼ þ2 (moderate gain by P2 due to cooperation with P1 )
        k22 ¼ 5 (high internal competition in P2 )
                                                      The solutions of the linear model   79

system (11.1) thus becomes:
                            
                                n_ 1 ¼ 10n1 þ 3n2
                                n_ 2 ¼ 2n1  5n2

for which the characteristic equation (11.4) is:

                                b2 þ 15b þ 44 ¼ 0

  A simple calculation shows that, in this example, the characteristic
equation has the following roots:

                           b1 ¼ 4 and b2 ¼ 11

   The high values of the internal competition indicated by the values of k11
and k22 in this example are such that they globally exceed the beneﬁts of the
cooperation given by the positive coefﬁcients k12 and k21 , and therefore the
populations tend to extinguish themselves.
   The fact that the evolution of the system leads inevitably to the extinction
of both populations, regardless of their initial values, is reﬂected in the fact
that exponents b1 and b2 , in this Case 1A, are both negative and give rise to
solutions (11.3) that are linear combinations of exponentials that both
decrease over time. This is a condition of asymptotically stable equilibrium,
in which the origin of the axes acts as an attractor point, and is known as a
stable nodal point (Figure 11.1).
   In general, it can be demonstrated that the values of b1 and b2 determine
the speed of convergence of the orbits towards the singular point, while the
ratios a1 =a3 and a2 =a4 [equal to the two arbitrary constants of integration
of the system (11.1)] determine the direction the orbits take to reach the
stable nodal point, i.e. the inclination of the straight line in Figure 11.1
tangent to all the orbits at the singular point.

Case 1B Real negative roots: b1 > 0, b2 > 0.

The characteristic equation (11.4) has real and positive roots if the follow-
ing conditions are satisﬁed: k11 > 0, k22 > 0 (for Point 1) and, at the same
time, k11 k22  k12 k21 > 0 (for Point 2).
   Still with reference to (11.1), the conditions imposed by Point 1 tell us that
each population, individually, grows indeﬁnitely, as long as there are unlim-
ited resources. The condition imposed by Point 2 tells us that the self-sustain-
ment of both populations, considered globally in the product k11 k22 , is
80   11 : Linear models in social processes


                                                  n2



                                                                      n1




     Figure 11.1 Dynamics of n1 and n2 in Case 1A: extinction of the populations, asymptotically
     stable equilibrium; the singular point is called a stable nodal point.



     sufﬁcient to compensate for any effect generated by the interaction of each
     population with the other, the combined value of which is represented by the
     product k12 k21 , regardless of the speciﬁc type of interaction between the
     populations. The product k11 k22 is positive like in Case 1A, but, and this is
     the only difference between the two cases, k11 and k22 are now both positive.
       A numerical example will clarify the situation that occurs in this case. If,
     for example, we give the following values to the coefﬁcients:

        k11 ¼ þ10 (high level of self-sustainment of P1 )
        k12 ¼ þ3 (moderate gain by P1 due to cooperation with P2 )
        k21 ¼ þ2 (moderate gain by P2 due to cooperation with P1 )
        k22 ¼ þ5 (high level of self-sustainment of P2 ).

     system (11.1) thus becomes:
                                         
                                              n_ 1 ¼ 10n1 þ 3n2
                                              n_ 2 ¼ 2n1 þ 5n2

     for which the characteristic equation (11.4) is:

                                          b2  15b þ 44 ¼ 0

     which has the following roots:

                                       b1 ¼ þ4 and b2 ¼ þ11

       With all four coefﬁcients kij positive, it is evident that the evolution can
     only be growth, as no term acts as a restraint to growth. Observe, however,
                                                              The solutions of the linear model   81

that in this Case 1B, growth is given above all by the self-sustainment of the
two populations individually and not by their cooperation (the product of
the terms of the self-sustainment is greater than the product of the terms of
their interaction: 10  5 > 3  2). The case of growth driven mainly by
cooperation, that occurs only if k11 k22  k12 k21 < 0, is illustrated in Case
1C which follows.
   In a situation of this nature, in which all of the elements contribute to the
growth of the populations, (11.3) gives P1 and P2 , which, regardless of their
initial values, both tend to increase over time. This is a condition of unstable
equilibrium, in which the origin of the axes acts as a repeller point, and is
known as an unstable nodal point (Figure 11.2).
   Note how the dynamics in Case 1B envisage orbits of the same form as
those obtained in Case 1A, with the only difference that now the system is
not directed towards the singular point, but distances itself from the singu-
lar point. Here again, the ratios a1 =a3 and a2 =a4 determine the direction
the orbits take from the unstable nodal point.

Case 1C      Real roots of opposite signs: b1 < 0 < b2 .

The characteristic equation (11.4) has real roots of opposite signs only if the
product of the roots is negative, i.e. k11 k22  k12 k21 < 0 (for Point 2). This
occurs only if the product k12 k21 , which represents the combined effect of
the interaction between P1 and P2 , is positive and is greater than the product
k11 k22 , which represents the combined effect of the self-sustainment or of
the internal competition of both P1 and P2 .
   A situation of this type may arise if there is a very high level of cooper-
ation between the two populations, in which each of them beneﬁts consid-
erably from its interaction with the other (k12 > 0, k21 > 0), so much so



                                            n2




                                                                  n1




Figure 11.2 Dynamics of n1 and n2 in Case 1B: unlimited growth of the populations,
unstable equilibrium; the singular point is called an unstable nodal point.
82   11 : Linear models in social processes

     that the cooperation becomes the dominant element at the origin of the
     system’s dynamics. The beneﬁt brought by cooperation, in this case, is such
     that it exceeds the contribution to a population’s speed of growth generated
     by the number of individuals in the same, regardless of its type and regard-
     less of the fact that this contribution is positive (if k11 > 0 and k22 > 0, self-
     sustainment of the two populations), negative (if k11 < 0 and k22 < 0,
     internal competition within the two populations), or nil.41
        An example of a linear system that gives rise to a situation of this nature is
     obtained with the following values of the coefﬁcients:

        k11 ¼ þ5 (moderate level of self-sustainment of P1 )
        k12 ¼ þ9 (high gain by P1 due to cooperation with P2 )
        k21 ¼ þ6 (moderate gain by P2 due to cooperation with P1 )
        k22 ¼ þ2 (low level of self-sustainment of P2 ).

     The system thus becomes:
                                          
                                              n_ 1 ¼ 5n1 þ 9n2
                                              n_ 2 ¼ 6n1 þ 2n2

     for which the characteristic equation (11.4) is:

                                              b2  7b  44 ¼ 0

     which has the following roots:

                                       b1 ¼ 4 and b2 ¼ þ11

        In the above example, the roots are real, because the effect of the inter-
     action between the two populations P1 and P2 is positive (9  6 > 0), but
     the most important aspect is that the given effect of the interaction between
     P1 and P2 exceeds the effect of the self-sustainment of the two populations
     (9  6 > 5  2), i.e. the overall effect of the cooperation is greater than the
     overall effect of the self-sustainment. This latter aspect is what really
       41
           From an algebraic point of view, if we want to be thorough, the situation illustrated in
     the text is not the only one that can give two real values with opposite signs for b1 and b2 . For
     example, the same result could be achieved by changing the signs of all four k coefﬁcients with
     respect to those described in the text. We have limited ourselves to describing the situation
     indicated, because its interpretation is the most immediate in the terms that we have estab-
     lished, i.e. the application of the model to population dynamics, and we will ignore the other
     situations whose interpretation is less immediate, and whose signiﬁcance is almost exclusively
     mathematical.
                                                              The solutions of the linear model   83

distinguishes Case 1C with respect to Case 1B: both cases involve the
growth of the two populations, but in Case 1B this is the result of self-
sustainment, while in Case 1C, the cooperation between the two popula-
tions is what ‘drives’ the growth of both.
   In Case 1C, the solutions (11.3) of the linear model (11.1) are a linear
combination of one increasing exponential and one decreasing exponential.
The singular point at the origin of the axes is now an unstable point, but
is a different type from that of Case 1B; it is called a saddle point (Figure
11.3).
   It can be demonstrated that there is one direction, namely one straight
line, along which the saddle point acts as if it were an attractor, and another
straight line along which the instability, i.e. the ‘force’ with which the saddle
point repels the system, is greatest. The two straight lines [two singular
integrals of system (11.1)], are illustrated in Figure 11.3, and their equa-
tions are respectively:

                                  a1                    a2
                           n2 ¼      n1   and n2 ¼         n1
                                  a3                    a4

   The ﬁrst straight line indicates the only direction in which the linear
system evolves over time following an orbit that brings it towards the saddle
point, which is seen by the system (and only in this case) as a point of stable
equilibrium and not as a repeller point. In all other directions, the saddle
point is a point of unstable equilibrium. In particular, in the direction
indicated by the second straight line, the ‘force’ with which the saddle
point repels the orbit, and consequently the speed with which the system
travels along the same orbit, is greater with respect to all other directions
(see Figure 11.3). This second straight line is of particular interest to us
because it is an asymptote for the system’s orbits. In a certain sense, we can
say that this straight line ‘attracts’ all of the system’s orbits, which, after a

                                             n2




                                                         n1




Figure 11.3 Dynamics of n1 and n2 in Case 1C: unstable equilibrium; the singular point is
called a saddle point.
84   11 : Linear models in social processes

     sufﬁcient period of time, end up as being approximated by this same
     straight line. The ﬁrst straight line, on the other hand, the one that leads
     towards the saddle point, also an asymptote for the orbits, from a geomet-
     rical standpoint, acts in the opposite way to the second straight line in terms
     of dynamics: it repels the orbits that arrive in its direction, as shown in
     Figure 11.3. Both an unstable nodal point and a saddle point (with the
     exception of one direction), therefore, ‘repel’, so to speak, the orbits, but
     one saddle point differs from an unstable nodal point due to the fact that the
     effect of the repulsion that it exercises on them varies according to the
     direction, i.e. according to the orbit that follows the dynamics of the system.
        In summary, the values of the ratios a1 =a3 and a2 =a4 determine the two
     asymptotes, while the values of b1 and b2 (one positive, the other negative)
     determine the speciﬁc curve that these two asymptotes have.42
        Lastly, it can be shown that the straight line that drives the orbits away
     from the saddle point is more inclined towards axis n1 or axis n2 , the higher
     the value of the self-sustainment, respectively, of P1 or P2 (i.e. the larger k11
     is with respect to k22 , or respectively, the larger k22 is with respect to k11 ).
     This restates the fact that the population that has the highest level of self-
     sustainment determines the general dynamics of the system, drawing, so to
     speak, the growth of the other population into its dynamics, which, over
     time, ends up growing at a speed that is directly proportional to that of the
     ‘stronger’ population in terms of self-sustainment. In a certain sense, there-
     fore, it is as if the growth of the population of the two that has the higher
     self-sustainment coefﬁcient ‘draws’ the growth of the other.
        We will now examine Cases 2A and 2B whose characteristic equation
     (11.4) has roots b1 and b2 , which are not real.



     Complex conjugate roots of the characteristic equation:
     the values of the two populations ﬂuctuate
     Case 2A Imaginary conjugate roots b1 and b2 : Reb1 ¼ Reb2 ¼ 0.

     The characteristic equation (11.4) has imaginary conjugate roots if two
     conditions are satisﬁed simultaneously. The ﬁrst condition is that the dis-

       42
            The understanding in mathematical terms of this unique case of stability is simple: if we
     assume that a2 ¼ a4 ¼ 0, in (11.3) only two negative exponentials remain (remember that b1
     is the negative root and b2 is the positive one). In the same way, by assuming a1 ¼ a3 ¼ 0, we
     have the condition of maximum instability of the singular point, because only the positive
     exponentials remain. The two straight lines are asymptotes common to all of the orbits
     characterized by the same values for ratios a1 =a3 and a2 =a4 .
                                          Complex conjugate roots of the characteristic equation   85

criminant D of the characteristic equation (11.4) is negative; in this case,
instead of (11.5) of Point 3, we have:

                           D ¼ (k11  k22 )2 þ 4k12 k21 < 0                             (11:6)

   Equation (11.6) dictates that 4k12 k21 is negative and that (k11  k22 )2 ,
which is positive because it is a square, is not large enough to give a positive
result if summed to 4k12 k21 . This implies that k12 and k21 must have
opposite signs, and thus that the interaction between P1 and P2 is advanta-
geous to only one of the populations and not to the other.
   The second condition that must be satisﬁed is that the sum of the roots b1
and b2 is nil, which, for Point 1, can occur in two cases: (1) k11 ¼ k22 ¼ 0,
i.e. the two populations are not characterized by self-sustainment nor by
internal competition; or (2) k11 ¼ k22 , i.e. the intensity, so to speak, of the
effect of the self-sustainment of a population is equal and opposite to that of
the effect of the internal competition of the other population.
   To clarify, let us suppose, for example, that P2 is the population that
beneﬁts from its interaction with P1 (k21 > 0), while, on the contrary, P1 is
the population that is damaged by its interaction with P2 (k12 < 0), to the
extent that product k12 k21 is negative, and that P2 is the population char-
acterized by internal competition (k22 < 0), while P1 is self-sustaining
(k11 > 0).43 The situation that the values of the coefﬁcients generate is
that typical of a relationship that, in biology, is deﬁned as predation of
population P2 over P1, or also as parasitism of P2 towards P1 .
   It is clear that in a prey–predator relationship, the extinction of the prey
population P1 due to an excess of predation, would also lead to the extinc-
tion of the predator population P2 , as the growth of the number of pred-
ators depends, to a large extent, on coefﬁcient k21 , namely on the number of
available prey. The prey, for their part, would tend to multiply in an
unlimited manner, in the absence of internal competition, if the predators
did not intervene and reduce their numbers. A dynamic is thus established,
according to which the number of prey decreases due to the action of the
predators (k12 < 0), but when such reduction becomes excessive, even the
predators suffer due to the limited amount of food resources, which creates
internal competition within the population and hinders its growth
(k22 < 0). A restricted number of predators, however, would leave the
prey free to multiply, as the latter do not have any internal competition

  43
     Our observations in note 41 on p. 82 are also valid in this case; as well as the situation
that we have described here, whose interpretation is the most immediate, there are other
conﬁgurations of the coefﬁcients k that can give imaginary conjugate roots b1 and b2 but
which are of less interest in this context.
86   11 : Linear models in social processes

     (k11 > 0); the growth of the prey stimulates, in turn, the growth of the
     predators (k21 > 0), which once again restrain the unlimited growth of
     the prey, and so forth.
       Using Euler’s formula:

                          eRe b þ iIm b ¼ eRe b ( cos (Im b) þ i sin (Im b))

     we see, after several steps, that in Case 2A in question, which has pure
     imaginary roots (Re b ¼ 0), (11.3) becomes:
                            
                                n1 ¼ a1 cos (Im bt) þ a2 sin (Im bt)
                                                                                       (11:7)
                                n2 ¼ a3 cos (Im bt) þ a4 sin (Im bt)

     where b ¼ jb1 j ¼ jb2 j.
       The equations (11.7) describe the dynamics of a system in which the two
     populations ﬂuctuate periodically between a maximum and a minimum
     value, each of which according to a sinusoidal law (Figure 11.4). It can be
     demonstrated that both the phase difference between the two sinusoids and
     their amplitudes depend on the (real) values of the coefﬁcients a of the
     equations (11.7).
       Once time has been eliminated, the equations (11.7) generate, on the
     phase plane, ellipses whose centre is the singular point. The values of the
     four coefﬁcients a determine both the amplitude of the axes of the ellipses,
     and their inclination with respect to the coordinate axes. Figure 11.5 shows
     the dynamics corresponding to that of Figure 11.4. In this speciﬁc case, the
     coefﬁcients a that are not 0 directly give the length of the semiaxes of the




                                              n1, n2

                                                       n1
                                                 n2
                                                                               t




                  Figure 11.4 Trend of n1 and n2 as a function of time t in Case 2A.
                                            Complex conjugate roots of the characteristic equation    87


                                                     n2



                                                                 n1




   Figure 11.5 Dynamics of n1 and n2 in Case 2A; the singular point is called a centre.


ellipses. The projections on the two axes of the successive states in Figure
11.5 give the trend over time of the values n1 and n2 shown in Figure 11.4.
   The evolution of the system over time, represented by the motion of a
point that travels along an elliptic orbit like that shown in Figure 11.5, is
similar to the one we illustrated previously in our discussion on oscillating
systems in Chapter 10.
   We are therefore dealing with stable orbits around a singular point that,
as we know, is situated at the origin of the axes in the phase plane and that
now is not characterized as an attractor nor a repeller; an indifferent point
of equilibrium which is called a centre.44
   The system of the two populations, therefore, does not evolve in any
manner towards an asymptotically stable ﬁnal state, but demonstrates a
periodically repetitive situation in which the number of prey and the number
of predators continually ﬂuctuates, with the recurrence of the same values.
The predation relationship means, in the linear hypothesis, that the prey–
predator system makes neither damped nor ampliﬁed oscillations, demon-
strating close similarities to that of a non-damped linear pendulum,45 de-
scribed in the model of the harmonic oscillator (Chapter 8).

   44
      Remember that we are still describing an abstract model, in which the magnitudes n1
and n2 have been interpreted as the values that two (abstract) populations could have, and
which also include negative values. In a real case, the state variables n1 and n2 should be
reinterpreted in light of the speciﬁc situation to which they refer. Obviously, a population, in
the strictest sense, cannot have negative values: attributing the numerical signiﬁcance of
members of a population to n1 and n2 in a strict sense, would imply, from a mathematical
point of view, at least a shift of the axes in Figures 11.1–11.7, so that the singular point is not
the state in which both populations are zero, but another pair of positive values. For example,
identifying a centre in the pair of coordinates N1 ¼ 50, N2 ¼ 100 (i.e. if P1 and P2 oscillate
around these two respective values) would lead us back to the dynamics described in Case 2A
above, assuming n1 ¼ N1  50 and n2 ¼ N2  100.
   45
      To establish the correspondence between the prey–predator system and the pendulum, it
is sufﬁcient to replace n1 with the angle and n2 with the speed of the pendulum.
88   11 : Linear models in social processes

       Consider, for instance, the linear model of a set of two interacting
     populations, which have the following coefﬁcients:

        k11 ¼ þ1 (moderate level of self-sustainment of P1 )
        k12 ¼ 2 (high damage of P1 caused by its interaction with P2 )
        k21 ¼ þ3 (high gain by P2 due to its interaction with P1 )
        k22 ¼ 1 (moderate level of internal competition within P2 with the
                  opposite value to that of the self-sustainment of P1 ).

     The system thus becomes:
                                              
                                                  n_ 1 ¼ n1  2n2
                                                  n_ 2 ¼ 3n1  n2

     for which the characteristic equation (11.4) is:

                                                   b2 þ 5 ¼ 0

     which has the following roots:
                                                  pﬃﬃﬃ          pﬃﬃﬃ
                                      b1 ¼         5i and b2 ¼  5i

        We can see from the above that the system’s coefﬁcients satisfy the
     conditions of Case 2A: k11 ¼ k22 , and furthermore, k12 k21 < 0.
        Let us interpret the dynamics of the example. Population P1 grows, due
     to the effect of self-sustainment, at a speed proportional to the number of
     individuals n1 (k11 ¼ 1), which indicates ease of reproduction in the absence
     of competition for food resources. The speed of growth of P1 , however,
     decreases as the number of individuals n2 of P2 increases (as k12 ¼ 2),
     which can be seen as the effect of the predation of P2 to the detriment of P1 .
     On the other hand, the number of individuals in P2 grows at a speed
     proportional to the number of individuals in P1 (k21 ¼ 3), and this reintro-
     duces the predation relationship of P2 over P1, but decreases as the number
     of individuals n2 increases (k22 ¼ 1), which indicates competition for
     (limited) resources within P2 .
        We can observe that if coefﬁcients k11 and k22 didn’t have opposite values
     as in the above example, the situation could change. If, for example, the
     self-sustainment of P1 (the prey) was greater than the internal competition
     within P2 (the predators), i.e. if jk11 j > jk22 j, and if the difference
     jk11 j  jk22 j > 0 was such as to compensate for the effect of the interaction
                                    Complex conjugate roots of the characteristic equation   89

between the two populations, then condition (11.6) would no longer be
satisﬁed and we would return instead to (11.5):

                       D ¼ (k11  k22 )2 þ 4k12 k21 $ 0

which would result in (11.4) having real roots b1 and b2 , and therefore
we would return to one of the Case 1 situations. Furthermore, if the
difference between the self-sustainment of the prey and the internal com-
petition of the predators was not zero, but was not sufﬁcient to satisfy
(11.5), then the resulting situation would be that described in Case 2B
below.

Case 2B Complex conjugate roots: b1,2 ¼ Re b  Im b.

In this case, the roots b1 and b2 of the characteristic equation (11.4) have
the same real component Re b 6¼ 0, and an imaginary component
Im b 6¼ 0, which appears with opposite signs in the two roots.
   We obtain a situation of this type if (11.6) is satisﬁed, which guarantees
the non-reality of b1 and b2 (Point 3) and if, at the same time, we have
k11 þ k22 6¼ 0 (Point 1: the sum of the roots b1 and b2 must not be zero). We
will interpret this situation as we did for Case 2A. The ﬁrst condition
imposes that (k11  k22 )2 is small, so as not to exceed in absolute value
4k12 k21 , which must be negative so as to yield D < 0, as in Case 2A. The
second condition means, on the other hand, that the self-sustainment of a
population, say P1, has a different intensity to that of any internal compe-
tition within the other population P2 .
   In Case 2B, the solutions of the system (11.1), with respect to (11.7), have
an extra real exponential component, that is increasing or decreasing over
time depending on the values of the real components of roots b1 and b2 .
They thus become:
              
                  n1 ¼ eRe bt (a1 cos (Im bt) þ a2 sin (Im bt))
                                                                                  (11:8)
                  n2 ¼ eRe bt (a3 cos (Im bt) þ a4 sin (Im bt))

  Equation (11.8) represents an evolutive dynamics in which n1 and n2
ﬂuctuate as in Case 2A, but in which their maximum amplitudes are
no longer constant, and actually decrease exponentially if Re b < 0, or
increase exponentially if Re b > 0. In the ﬁrst case, the orbits trace
spirals that go towards a point of stable equilibrium, called a stable focal
point (Figure 11.6); in the second, they trace spirals that distance themselves
90   11 : Linear models in social processes



                                                      n2


                                                                         n1




     Figure 11.6 Dynamics of n1 and n2 in Case 2B, with Re b < 0: stable equilibrium; the
     singular point is called a stable focal point.

     from a point of unstable equilibrium, called an unstable focal point (Figure
     11.7).46
        Let us consider two examples of this dynamic.
        The ﬁrst example is represented by the system in Case 2A, which we modify
     by making k11 ¼ 1=3, and leaving the other coefﬁcients unchanged; we
     establish, therefore, that the self-sustainment of the prey is less than the inter-
     nal competition between predators. We thus obtain the following system:
                                         (
                                                     1
                                              n_ 1 ¼ n1  2n2
                                                     3
                                              n_ 2 ¼ 3n1  n2

     whose characteristic equation is:

                                                  2    17
                                              b2 þ b þ    ¼0
                                                  3     3

                                                      n2



                                                                         n1




     Figure 11.7 Dynamics of n1 and n2 in Case 2B, with Re b > 0: unstable equilibrium; the
     singular point is called an unstable focal point.

       46
           Both the focal point and the nodal point can be stable or unstable. From a geometric
     point of view, the difference between a stable/unstable focal point (Figures 11.6 and 11.7) and
     a stable/unstable nodal point (Figures 11.1 and 11.2) lies in the fact that at the nodal point
     there is a straight line tangent to the orbits passing through it, that can clearly be deﬁned and
     calculated; in the focal point, on the contrary, there is no tangent to the orbits at all.
                                       Complex conjugate roots of the characteristic equation   91

which has the following roots:
                                         pﬃﬃﬃ
                                      1 5 2
                                   b¼       i
                                      3  3

  The second example is still made up of the system of Case 2A, modiﬁed by
supposing k22 ¼ 1=3, leaving the same coefﬁcients as the example in Case 2A;
we thus establish that the self-sustainment of the prey is greater than the
internal competition between predators. The system therefore becomes:
                               (
                                   n_ 1 ¼ n1  2n2
                                   n_ 2 ¼ 3n1  1 n2
                                                3

whose characteristic equation is:

                                     2    17
                                 b2  b þ    ¼0
                                     3     3

which has the following roots:
                                         pﬃﬃﬃ
                                      1 5 2
                                   b¼þ       i
                                      3  3

  In the ﬁrst example, solutions (11.8) indicate a tendency towards the
extinction of the two populations, which ﬂuctuate with amplitudes that
decrease exponentially over time (Figure 11.8). This is due to the lack of

                                           n1




                                                                      t




Figure 11.8 Dynamics of one of the two populations with respect to time t, in the ﬁrst
example, with a3 ¼ a4 ¼ 1. The ﬁgure also shows the decreasing exponential exp(Re bt),
with b ¼ 1=3.
92   11 : Linear models in social processes


                                                    n1




                                                                           t




     Figure 11.9 Dynamics of one of the two populations with respect to time t, in the second
     example, with a1 ¼ a2 ¼ 1. The ﬁgure also shows the increasing exponential exp(Re bt),
     with b ¼ 1=3.


     self-sustainment of the prey which, added to the predation relationship,
     does not permit either the prey or the predators to grow, or even to ﬂuctuate
     around an average value. In the second example, on the other hand, the prey
     is characterized by self-sustainment that is sufﬁcient to cause a progressive
     ampliﬁcation of the ﬂuctuations in the number of individuals of the two
     populations (Figure 11.9).
        We will end our description of the linear model here. We will now be
     looking at (chapter 12) a well-known nonlinear prey–predator model and at
     some developments that have resulted from this.
                  Nonlinear models in social
 12               processes: the model of
                  Volterra–Lotka and some
                  of its variants in ecology



Introduction
Around the mid-1920s, the American biologist Alfred Lotka (1925) and the
Italian mathematician Vito Volterra (1926) independently proposed a non-
linear model of the dynamics of a prey species interacting with a predator
species, which although still rather abstract, like the linear model (11.1)
described in 11, was more realistic than the latter. The model, which is very
well known and which has been extensively applied in a variety of areas, is
known by the name of the Volterra–Lotka model.47

   47
      Alfred Lotka had been working on self-catalytic processes since the ﬁrst decade of the
twentieth century, proposing in 1920 a well-known model of three chemical reactions
(Epstein, 1989), whose equations were used as a basis for the Volterra–Lotka model in
question. Vito Volterra, one of the most remarkable ﬁgures in mathematics and science in
Italy in the early decades of the twentieth century, was inspired by the observation that,
during the course of the First World War and in the years immediately following, the
frequency with which cartilaginous (or selachian) ﬁsh, usually predators, such as small sharks
or rays, were caught in the ports of Fiume, Trieste, and Venice, went from fairly stable values
of around 10 and 12 per cent, to higher values, reaching, depending on the port and the year,
values of around 20 per cent and, on occasion close to 30. The biologist Umberto D’Ancona,
Volterra’s son-in-law, who had been working for several years on ﬁshing statistics in the
Adriatic, came up with the hypothesis of a relation between the reduction in ﬁshing caused by
the raging war, and the consequent restoration of a natural equilibrium between prey and
predators, which had been altered previously by intense ﬁshing activity. D’Ancona asked his
father-in-law if his hypothesis could be conﬁrmed in mathematical terms. Volterra formulated
the model in question [equations (12.1) on page 94], with which he identiﬁed the existence
of a dynamic equilibrium corresponding to the situation observed during and after the war.
He then demonstrated that the insertion in the model of a reduction in the number of
cartilaginous ﬁsh and of the number of other ﬁsh at the same rates (the effect of ﬁshing
activity carried out indiscriminately for cartilaginous ﬁsh and other ﬁsh, which favoured
neither the prey nor the predators, as occurred before the war), effectively shifted the natural
94   12 : The Volterra–Lotka model in ecology

        Setting aside the linear model discussed in the previous pages, although
     signiﬁcant above all on a theoretical level, the Volterra–Lotka model was
     one of the ﬁrst models formulated with the speciﬁc aim of describing the
     actual interaction between an animal prey species and an animal predator
     species in mathematical terms. Not only does it have a historical value, even
     today it is the fundamental starting point for countless series of other more
     reﬁned prey–predator models which feature a wealth of elements, used to
     describe the dynamics of reciprocally interacting populations in continuous
     time. The general fundamental principles of the model are still considered
     valid today and many theoretical biologists use them as a reference for
     modelling in a ﬁeld known as mathematical biology (Jost, Arino and Arditi,
     1999). In addition to mathematical biology, the Volterra–Lotka model has
     been successfully applied, as we will see in chapter 13, to the areas of urban
     and regional science (Pumain, Sanders and Saint-Julien, 1989; Pumain,
     1997).



     The basic model
     The original form of the Volterra–Lotka model, which we will call the basic
     model, describes the evolution of two populations of different species, P1
     and P2 , that interact in a closed ecosystem. Population P1 belongs to an
     animal prey species that has n1 individuals, who have an unlimited food
     supply and therefore are not in any nature of internal competition. Popu-
     lation P2 belongs to an animal predator species that has n2 individuals, who
     feed only on the prey represented by population P1 . Prey P1 are present in
     limited quantities and, therefore, the carnivores are in competition between
     themselves for the food. One could imagine, for example, the prey to be
     herbivores that have an unlimited quantity of grass, while the predators
     could be a species of carnivore that feed on the above-mentioned herbi-
     vores.
        The equations of the basic model (Beltrami, 1987; Arnold, 1992; Çam-
     bel, 1993; Israel, 1996; Epstein, 1997) are:
                                    
                                        n_ 1 ¼ k11 n1  k12 n1 n2
                                                                                    (12:1)
                                        n_ 2 ¼ k21 n1 n2  k22 n2




     (dynamic) equilibrium between prey ﬁsh and predator ﬁsh, reproducing the data observed.
     Volterra’s model, thus formulated, conﬁrmed D’Ancona’s hypothesis (Israel, 1986, 1996).
                                                                  The basic model   95

in which the coefﬁcients kij , that are all positive, have the following mean-
ings:

k11 growth rate of the prey
k12 mortality rate of the prey due to predation
k21 reproduction rate of the predators (how many predators are born for
    each prey consumed)
k22 mortality rate of the predators

   A fundamental characteristic of the model is that the two populations
interact in a nonlinear way, due to the presence in the two equations of the
products of the two variables n1 and n2 . The nonlinear term n1 n2 represents
the frequency with which a prey and a predator encounter one another
which, according to the law of compound probability, is assumed to be
proportional to the product of the total number of prey multiplied by the
total number of predators, through coefﬁcients k12 and k21 .
   In the absence of encounters between prey and predator, i.e. when
k12 ¼ k21 ¼ 0, each species would develop according to a Malthusian
schema: the prey, which possess unlimited quantities of food, would grow
exponentially (k11 is positive) due to a lack of encounters with predators,
while the number of predators would decrease exponentially (k22 is nega-
tive) due to a lack of food, because they never meet the prey. The presence of
a positive coefﬁcient k11 in the equation which gives the speed of growth n_ 1
of the number of prey n1, the ﬁrst of the equations (12.1), indicates that said
speed of growth is proportional to the number of existing prey.
   In the ﬁrst of the equations (12.1), there is a term with a negative
coefﬁcient k12 ; this means that the speed of growth, in reality, decreases
proportionally to the frequency of encounters, represented by the product
n1 n2 . On one hand, in fact, the more numerous the prey, the higher the
probability each prey has of surviving and reproducing; on the other, the
more numerous the prey, the higher the probability of encounters with
predators. In the ﬁrst equation, therefore, there are two types of feedback,
one positive, proportional to k11 , and one negative, proportional to k12 .
   The second of the equations (12.1) gives the speed of growth of the
number n2 of predators. It also contains a positive term, k21 , and a negative
term, k22 , but the positions with respect to the ﬁrst equation are ex-
changed. This means that the speed of growth of the predators is directly
proportional to the ease with which the predators procure their food, which
depends on the frequency of their encounters with the prey, here also
represented by n1 n2. However, this time, unlike the case of the prey, as
k21 > 0, the speed of growth of the predators n2 increases as the number
96   12 : The Volterra–Lotka model in ecology

     of prey n1 increases, and thus as the product n1 n2 increases, but decreases
     due to the effect of competition between predators, proportionally to their
     number (k22 negative), due to the limited food supply represented by the
     prey. Therefore, also in this second equation there are two types of feedback:
     a positive one, proportional to k21 , and a negative one, proportional to k22 .
        Basically, we have a mechanism according to which an increase in the
     number of prey provokes, through an increase in the frequency of encoun-
     ters with predators, an increase in the number of the latter. The increase in
     the number of predators, however, leads to a decrease in the number of prey,
     which negatively inﬂuences the growth of the number of predators. At a
     certain point, the number of predators stops increasing and starts to de-
     crease due to the lack of food, which leads to a reduction in encounters
     between predators and prey, with a consequent increase of the latter, which
     again causes a growth in the number of predators, and so on. Note how
     these aspects of dynamics recall, at least partly, those of the linear model, in
     the case of imaginary conjugate roots, discussed as Case 2A in chapter 11.
        The numerical integration of the model is not complicated and leads to
     interesting results, at least in theoretical terms. The model gives rise to
     cycles in the phase plane n1 n2 , i.e. to an oscillatory dynamics of the number
     of the individuals of the two populations, like those shown in Figures 12.1
     and 12.2 (the two ﬁgures illustrate dynamics similar to those shown in
     Figures 11.4 and 11.5 regarding Case 2A of the linear model, described in
     chapter 11).
        The model is interesting at a conceptual level, but there are a number of
     problems regarding its real effectiveness as a way to describe interactions


                        16
                        14
                        12
                        10
            Predators




                         8
                         6
                         4
                         2
                         0
                             0   20             40          60        80              100
                                                     Prey

     Figure 12.1 Numerical integration of the dynamics of the Volterra–Lotka model.
     The values of the parameters of the model assumed for the integration are:
     k11 ¼ 0:1 k12 ¼ 0:01 k21 ¼ 0:001 k22 ¼ 0:05:
                                                                           The basic model   97

  100            Prey
   90
   80
   70
   60
   50
   40
   30
   20       Predators
   10                                                                          Simulation
    0                                                                            cycles
        1   51     101   151    201    251   301    351    401    451    501

Figure 12.2 Numerical integration of the trend of prey and predator populations in the
Volterra–Lotka model. The values of the parameters are the same as those in Figure 12.1.


between species in a real environment. A fundamental characteristic of the
dynamics envisaged by the basic model is that there are no points of stable
equilibrium; the populations of the prey and the predators evolve according
to endless cycles, without ever tending towards a situation of stability. The
equilibrium is only dynamic; it can even be demonstrated that this occurs
for any set of values of the parameters.
   With regard to the cyclicity of the populations, although some cases of
cyclicity have actually been observed in nature, such as for example the popu-
lations of hares and lynx, the trends of which over time were recorded in
Canada between 1847 and 1903 by the Hudson’s Bay Company (Figure 12.3),




Figure 12.3 Trend of the populations of hares and lynx recorded by the Hudson’s Bay
Company.
Source: Israel (1996, p. 53 of the Italian edition of 1997).
98   12 : The Volterra–Lotka model in ecology

     this does not, in any event, appear to be the most common case. The
     basic assumptions of the model are evidently not realistic: for example, it
     does not consider any type of competition within the population of prey
     that is assumed to grow without any limits, if predators were not present;
     furthermore, it assumes that the predators are never satiated, as the quan-
     tity of food they feed from is directly proportional to the number of existing
     prey. It is no surprise, therefore, that it does not show any type of asymp-
     totic stability. Moreover, the basic model does not envisage the possibility of
     the extinction of the populations, which, on the other hand, is a frequent
     result in laboratory tests of simple prey–predator systems, which is some-
     thing that appeared right from the ﬁrst experiments carried out by the
     Russian biologist Georgyi Frantsevich Gause (1934, 1935). As the Vol-
     terra–Lotka model only envisages periodic dynamics, extinction was
     explained as the result of random ﬂuctuations of the populations which
     manifest themselves when the numbers of individuals is low, i.e. when the
     trajectory traced by the prey–predator system (see Figure 12.1) passes close
     to the origin of the axes.
        It is evident that the basic form of the Volterra–Lotka model, schematic as
     it is, is of great theoretical and historical value, but it does not appear to be
     sufﬁcient to model a predation relationship in a general and realistic way.
     On one hand, the model needs other theoretical elements to be added to it,
     that need to be deﬁned based on the speciﬁc context to which they refer; on
     the other, the assumption that the number of individuals in a populations is
     directly proportional to the speed with which it grows, in the case of the
     prey (coefﬁcient k11 ), or with which it decreases, in the case of the predators
     (coefﬁcient k22 ), is a very simple and schematic assumption, useful as a
     working hypothesis, but too rigid to be realistic. Appropriately deﬁned
     functions need to be introduced in some way, that make the model more
     detailed, ﬂexible and varied for the dynamics it envisages. This is exactly
     what we will be doing.
        Before illustrating later versions of the model, however, we need to
     introduce a new type of attractor that we will be encountering, to describe
     a type of dynamics that is not present in any of the systems illustrated thus
     far: the limit cycle.



     A non-punctiform attractor: the limit cycle
     Let us re-examine the dynamics of a forced pendulum, subject to friction.
     This time the pendulum is activated by a mechanism that keeps it in motion,
     the escapement, connected to a weight, that periodically supplies the energy
                                                              A non-punctiform attractor   99

that the pendulum loses due to friction, as occurs with a pendulum clock.
Therefore, if the pendulum is still, the escapement, under the thrust of the
weight, sets it in motion, making it oscillate at its characteristic frequency
and with a speciﬁc oscillation amplitude; if, on the other hand, the pendulum
is oscillating with too large an amplitude, perhaps because it has been set in
motion by a very large initial impulse, the friction damps the motion, until
an equilibrium is reached between the energy lost due to friction and the
energy supplied to the pendulum by the weight. The result is the establish-
ment of a stable oscillatory motion, a closed orbit in the phase space
travelled periodically, as occurs with a linear pendulum without friction.
   Now, however, there is a fundamental difference with respect to the
previous models. The linear pendulum that we saw (Models 1 and 2) can
ﬁnd an inﬁnite number of orbits, one for each value of the total energy that
characterizes the oscillation (see chapter 8): different initial states of energy
distinguish different periodic orbits. On the other hand this is not true for
the pendulum we have just described: it always ends up in one periodic orbit
only, in dynamic equilibrium between lost energy and absorbed energy. If
the system is not in that orbit, over time it tends to reach it, and once it has
reached it, it will travel along it periodically.
   The closed orbit ‘attracts’ the dynamics of the oscillating system towards
itself, so to speak, starting from whatever state it ﬁnds itself in. The closed
orbit is called the limit cycle; it is a real attractor, not unlike a point attractor
in a damped pendulum or in a linear system. At a point attractor, the system
is still in a state of stable equilibrium; in a limit cycle, on the contrary, the
system is in a state of dynamic equilibrium; it is not still, although, in any
event, the condition is one of stability.
   A limit cycle can have a large variety of forms, depending on the system
and the values of the parameters, but it is always a closed, stable curve. In
general in dissipative systems characterized by a single variable, for which,
therefore, the phase space has only two dimensions (the variable in question
and its ﬁrst derivative with respect to time), in addition to the point
attractor, the case of an attractor represented by a limit cycle could thus
arise: a closed, continuous curve, that can be described using ordinary
techniques of mathematical analysis, even though not always of elementary
expression (Figure 12.4).
   When the system has reached its limit cycle, it no longer preserves the
memory of the previous states, nor of the initial states from which the
evolution started. The situation, from this point of view, is similar to that
of a point attractor, like in the damped pendulum; in both cases, future
evolution is predictable, because it is always the same, regardless of the
initial state, but the memory of the past is lost.
100   12 : The Volterra–Lotka model in ecology

                                                       Limit cycle
                       y     The system dissipates energy




                                            The system absorbs energy




                                                                                x

                             Figure 12.4 The limit cycle in the phase space.


         The establishment of a limit cycle assumes that the system, on one hand,
      is losing energy but, on the other, it is receiving it from an external source, in
      a dynamic equilibrium between the dispersion and acquisition of energy.
      The system behaves like a dissipative system if the energy it is supplied with
      is less that the energy it loses (in this case the orbit reaches the limit cycle
      from the outside), or like a system that absorbs energy if the energy supplied
      is more than that lost due to friction (in this case the orbit reaches the limit
      cycle from the inside).
         Limit cycles are typical, in general, of certain forced oscillating systems,
      such as the case of the pendulum described; the establishment of a limit
      cycle in the dynamics of a system is a frequently encountered phenomenon,
      that can be observed every time a system oscillates in a condition of
      dynamic equilibrium between lost energy (for example, due to different
      types of friction) and the energy absorbed from a source.48 A typical case of


        48
           There are several very well-known mathematical models whose solutions, in certain
      conditions, are limit cycles. One of the ﬁrst was formulated following the study of a
      mechanical phenomenon: a particular type of nonlinear oscillating system, subject to an
      external force dependent on time. The equation is known as the Dufﬁng equation (1918)
      and can have different forms; one of the most common is as follows:

                                       € þ kx_ þ ax þ bx3 ¼ G cos vt
                                       x

      in which k, a, b are parameters that deﬁne the oscillator and G cos vt is an external force (if
      the oscillator is made up of a spring, then b is a parameter linked to the hardness of the
      spring). The solution of this model (also known as the double-well oscillator), for certain sets
      of parameter values, is a limit cycle.
                                                                                 Carrying capacity    101

a limit cycle can be found, for example, in the dynamics of a heart beat (Van
der Pol and Van der Mark, 1928), even though it has been observed recently
that the physiology (not the pathology) of the heart rate usually has more
chaotic features (Goldberg, Rigney and West, 1994).



Carrying capacity
As we have said, numerous variants of the basic Volterra–Lotka model have
been conceived, in which various corrective terms have been introduced.
We will cite a few of the simpler ones, although we make no claims to have
covered the subject thoroughly.
  To start with, let us consider the model in which, like in the basic model,
we have a population P1 of prey, which, however, now have a limited food
supply, and a population P2 , of predators, which feed on the population of
prey P1. Here again n1 and n2 indicate the number of individuals of the two
populations. The reciprocal interaction between prey and predators, like in
the basic Volterra–Lotka model, is demonstrated by the two terms contain-
ing the product n1 n2 . The equations are as follows (Beltrami, 1987):
                          (                     n1 
                              n_ 1 ¼ k11 n1 1         k12 n1 n2
                                                  A                                       (12:2)
                              n_ 2 ¼ k21 n1 n2  k22 n2


  A second, equally famous model, is presented by the equation of Van der Pol (1927), who
describes the periodic motion of the electrical charges in an oscillating electrical circuit,
according to assumptions that are very similar to those described in the text regarding the
pendulum clock: there is a resistance that makes the electrical charges lose energy (which
corresponds to the friction) and an ampliﬁer that supplies them with energy (which corres-
ponds to the weight–escapement mechanism of the pendulum clock). Balthazar Van der Pol
established that the dynamics of the electrical charges are described by a nonlinear second
order equation:

                                    € þ m(q2  1)q_ þ q ¼ 0
                                    q

where the unknown function q(t) is the number of electrical charges, q_ (t) is the intensity of the
electrical current and m is a parameter that depends on the characteristics of the circuit.
   The system’s nonlinearity lies in the term q2  1: when q < 1, the system tends to reach
the limit cycle from the outside (it dissipates energy); when q > 1, the system tends to
reach the limit cycle form the inside (it absorbs energy), more or less like what happens
with the pendulum clock when the oscillation amplitude is, respectively, smaller or larger
than that corresponding to the stable oscillation. In the limit m ! 0, the Van der Pol equation
becomes the same as that of the harmonic oscillator [equation (5.2)] that, therefore, consti-
tutes the limit for negligible resistance or ampliﬁcations (Israel, 1996).
102   12 : The Volterra–Lotka model in ecology

      As in the basic model, the coefﬁcients kij are all positive.
         Equation (12.2) differs from (12.1) due to the presence of the term
      (1  n1 =A) in the equation that describes the dynamics of the prey. The
      interaction between prey and predators takes place in accordance with the
      same mechanism described for the basic model, but now, with regard to the
      dynamics of the prey, the presence of the term n1 =A in brackets that is
      multiplied by k11, has the effect of limiting the values of n1 slowing down
      the speed of growth, which becomes smaller the closer n1 gets to the value A.
         When n1 , initially smaller that A, grows over time, the value of the
      brackets (1  n1 =A) decreases, distancing itself from the unit, and n_ 1 de-
      creases with it. The brackets would become equal to zero, if n1 reached the
      value of A, totally cancelling, in this way, the contribution of n1 to growth,
      that originates from n1 itself. Term A therefore takes on the meaning of
      the maximum value of the number of individuals of P1 permitted by the
      available food and in a certain sense, plays the role of a limiting device of
      the speed of growth. In this context, it is interpreted as being due to the
      limited availability of food supplies and is called the carrying capacity of
      the environment. The presence of the factor (1  n1 =A), in addition to the
      constant k11 , therefore, changes the growth pattern that n1 would follow in
      the absence of predators, which now is no longer Malthusian, as in the
      linear model and in the basic Volterra–Lotka model, but is a new type,
      called logistic.49
         The carrying capacity has been used in another variant of the basic model
      that describes the dynamics of two separate populations, no longer prey and
      predators, that compete for the same limited resources. As a consequence of
      the limited availability of resources, the individuals are now in competition
      with one another within the same population, and with the individuals of
      the other population, according to the following model:
                               8              
                               >                   n 
                               < n_ 1 ¼ k11 n1 1  1  k12 n1 n2
                                                  A
                               >                   n2                                         (12:3)
                               : n_ 2 ¼ k21 n2 1        k22 n1 n2
                                                   B

      in which the coefﬁcients are all positive; A and B are the carrying capacities
      of the two populations (Beltrami, 1987).
        49
            The concept of carrying capacity and the law of logistic growth will reappear and will be
      discussed at length when in Chapters 20–22 we will be illustrating the Verhulst model and the
      logistic map. For now, let us just say, anticipating the basic elements, that the law of logistic
      growth (function of time, continuous and derivable on the entire real axis) describes the trend
      of a magnitude that grows over time at a speed that is initially low, then grows and reaches a
      maximum value and subsequently decreases tending to zero, as time tends towards inﬁnity.
                                                              Functional and numerical response    103



Functional response and numerical response
of the predator
The basic Volterra–Lotka model has been enhanced, besides the introduc-
tion of the carrying capacity, also by the addition of further terms that
consider, for instance, the possibility of the prey ﬂeeing from their usual
habitat, or by the addition of a second population of prey as an alternative
to the ﬁrst for the same population of predators, or again still with the
addition of various kinds of exogenous agents (climatic, biological, etc.) or
other.
   With the aim of demonstrating the fertility of the idea at the origin of the
Volterra–Lotka model, even without going into the technical details, we
would like to illustrate some important variants of the model that have been
developed, enhancing and making the basic model more ﬂexible with
elements suggested by observations.
   A ﬁrst variant which is widely used to describe the prey–predator inter-
action was proposed by Robert May (1973). May made various changes to
the basic model. Firstly, he assumed a logistic growth for the prey, as in
models (12.2) and (12.3). Secondly, he assumed that the predators could
satiate themselves, which led him to replace the product k12 n1 n2 , which in
the equation for the prey in the basic model gives the decrease of the prey
due to their interaction with the predators, with the term:

                                           bn1
                                                 n2
                                          a þ n1

where the positive constant b, expresses the per capita feeding rate of the
predators50 and a is an appropriate constant which is also positive.
  With regard to the predators, May assumed that the limited availability
of prey simply leads to a logistic growth for them as well, and that,
therefore, the number of predators does not depend on the probability of

  50
       This is justiﬁed by the fact that for large values of n1 we can approximate:

                                           bn1
                                                 b
                                          a þ n1

When there are large numbers of prey, therefore, the term which gives their decrease depends
only on n2 , the number of predators, through the constant of proportionality b, and no longer
on k12 n1 n2 , i.e. on the probability that the two populations will encounter each other. b can
thus be interpreted as the number of prey that each of the n2 predators consumes in an
inﬁnitesimal time interval, i.e. as the feeding rate of each predator.
104   12 : The Volterra–Lotka model in ecology

      their encounter with the prey, which in the basic model was represented by
      the term k21 n1 n2 , which now disappears. A peculiarity of May’s model is
      that the carrying capacity of the predators is not assumed to be constant,
      but proportional to the number n1 of prey by means of a factor B.
        The equations of May’s model are as follows:
                              8              
                              >
                              >                   n1    bn1
                              < n_ 1 ¼ k11 n1 1            n2
                                                 A  a þ n1
                                                                                                (12:4)
                              >
                              >                    n2
                              : n_ 2 ¼ k21 n2 1 
                                                  Bn1

      It can be demonstrated (Beltrami, 1987) that this model can have a limit
      cycle as its solution, unlike the basic Volterra–Lotka model which, as we
      said, only leads to cyclical, and not limit cycle solutions.
         Another variant of the basic model, one of the most well-known and most
      used in mathematical biology, is that of Crawford S. Holling (1959). Hol-
      ling, while studying several cases of predation by small mammals on pine
      sawﬂies, observed that the predation rate was not constant, but grew as the
      number of prey increased; therefore not only the number of predators grew
      as that of the prey grew, but each predator increased its own consumption
      rate following the growth in the number of prey. To describe this particular
      predation relationship, Holling introduced two new terms, called the func-
      tional response and the numerical response of the predator.
         The functional response of the predator is the capture rate of prey for
      each individual predator, a rate that is now no longer assumed to be
      constant, as in the models that we have examined up until now, but depends
      on the number of prey. Holling assumes that a predator divides its time into
      two parts: the time employed in searching for the prey, called the searching
      time, indicated by ts, and the time employed in digesting the prey, called the
      handling time, indicated by Th, which is equal to the handling time th
      required for a single prey, multiplied by the number of prey H that have
      been captured, i.e. Th ¼ th H. Holling obtained the following expression for
      the functional response of the predator, which in the model plays the role of
      the mortality rate of the prey per individual predator:51
        51
           The reasoning is as follows. Assuming that capture is a random process, the number of
      prey H captured by a single predator is given by the product of the searching time ts by the
      density of prey d per unit of area, multiplied by the surface area a of the territory in question:
      H ¼ adts . From this last formula, we obtain: ts ¼ H=ad, while, as we said in the text,
      Th ¼ th H. As the time t of the predator is t ¼ ts þ Th , we can write t ¼ H=ad þ th H, from
      which we can deduce H, the total number of prey captured by a predator in time t:

                                            H ¼ adt=(1 þ adth )
                                                               Functional and numerical response    105

                                                                     k12 n1
               Functional response of the predator ¼
                                                                  1 þ k12 th n1

   The functional response of the predator, multiplied by the number of
predators n2 , provides the total number of prey captured by all predators in
a unit of time.
   The numerical response of the predator is the predators’ growth rate. The
basic idea is that, for each prey captured, there is an increase in the number
of predators according to a constant of proportionality c, called the con-
version efﬁciency, which, basically, counts how many offspring each indi-
vidual predator has for each prey that it eats (for example, for every ten prey
consumed, a predator is born).
   The dynamics of the predators is the effect, thus, of the simple sum of two
components. The ﬁrst component is the growth in the number of predators
(the numerical response of the predator), which occurs according to a
constant of proportionality c (conversion efﬁciency):

                                                                    ck12 n1
               Numerical response of the predator ¼
                                                                  1 þ k12 th n1

  The second component is the decrease in the number of predators that
takes place according to a mortality rate which is assumed to be constant;
the number of predators that die, therefore, is proportional to the number
of predators and is expressed by the product k22 n2 , where k22 is positive.
  Holling’s model thus takes on the following form:
                     8              
                     >
                     >                     n1       k12 n1
                     < n_ 1 ¼ k11 n1 1                        n2
                                            A     1 þ k12 th n1                          (12:5)
                     >
                     >          ck12 n1
                     : n_ 2 ¼               n2  k22 n2
                              1 þ k12 th n1

Without entering into the technical details of the model, we will limit
ourselves to pointing out the wealth of the states of Holling’s models. In
fact, if it is numerically integrated choosing different values for the param-
Let us now assume that ad, the product of the density of the prey per unit surface multiplied
by the surface covered by the predator, is proportional to the total number of existing prey n1,
i.e. ad ¼ n1 k12 , and let us divide H by t: in this way we obtain the capture rate of a predator
shown in the text, namely the functional response of the predator.
   The model that Holling suggested for the functional response H remains very popular
among ecologists: it is often called the ‘disc equation’ because Holling used paper discs to
simulate the area examined by predators. Mathematically, this model is equivalent to the
model of enzyme kinetics developed in 1913 by Lenor Michaelis and Maude Menten.
106   12 : The Volterra–Lotka model in ecology

      eters, it can give rise to states of asymptotic equilibrium or to damped
      oscillations of the number of individuals or, further still, to limit cycles.
        A third variant of the basic model, which is also very popular, is the
      Holling–Tanner model (Tanner, 1975) which simply combines several elem-
      ents of May’s model (12.4) with others of Holling’s model (12.5). To be more
      precise, the equation of the prey is the same as the one that appears in Holling’s
      model, while the equation of the predators is that of May’s model (12.4):
                                        8              
                                        >
                                        >                   n1    k12 n1
                                        < n_ 1 ¼ k11 n1 1                   n2
                                                           A  1 þ k12 th n1
                                                                                                 (12:6)
                                        >
                                        >                    n2
                                        : n_ 2 ¼ k21 n2 1 
                                                            Bn1

        In Figure 12.5 we show an example of the dynamics envisaged by the
      Holling–Tanner model integrated numerically: the choice of the values of
      the parameters indicated in the ﬁgure gives rise to a state of asymptotic
      equilibrium (the arrow indicates the direction followed over time).
        In general, the variants developed from the basic Volterra–Lotka model
      (12.1) currently used in mathematical ecology, all adopt the following type
      of canonical schema:
                                             
                                                 n_ 1 ¼ n1 f (n1 )  n2 g(n1 ,n2 )
                                                                                                 (12:7)
                                                 n_ 2 ¼ n2 cg(n1 ,n2 )  kn2


                               25


                               20
                   Predators




                               15


                               10


                                5


                                0
                                    0            50         100          150         200   250
                                                                  Prey

      Figure 12.5 Dynamics of a Holling–Tanner prey-predator model (12.6). The values of the
      parameters are: k11 ¼ 0:2, A ¼ 500; k12 ¼ 0:1, th ¼ 0:5, k21 ¼ 0:1, B ¼ 0:2; initial values:
      prey ¼ 150, predators ¼ 6.
                                                     Functional and numerical response   107

where f (n1 ) is a function of the growth of the prey, g(n1 , n2 ) is a functional
response of the predators, c is the conversion efﬁciency and k is the mor-
tality rate of the predators.
   The stability properties of a model such as (12.7) have been examined by
Christian Jost, Ovide Arino and Roger Arditi (1999). Assuming certain
particular forms for f and g, they particularly studied the properties of the
critical point corresponding to the extinction of both populations, reaching
the conclusion that the dynamics of the two populations, according to their
model, can present a saddle point, or even an attractor, at the origin of the
axes, depending on the values of the parameters. In other words, the model
studied by Jost, Arino and Arditi reproduces Gause’s experimental obser-
vations, which we mentioned on p. 98, and therefore envisages that, unlike
that which occurs in the basic Volterra–Lotka model, which is not able to
result in extinction, in certain circumstances, the extinction of both popu-
lations arises after several ﬂuctuations in the number of individuals in both.
                   Nonlinear models in social
 13                processes: the Volterra–
                   Lotka model applied to
                   urban and regional
                   science



Introduction
As we mentioned at the beginning of Chapter 12, several variants of the
Volterra–Lotka model have been used to model urban and regional systems.
The dynamics obtained generally lead back to those obtained with the
ecological models illustrated in Chapter 12. Nevertheless, it is evident
that ecological models can only be applied through homologies, i.e. purely
formal equivalences conducted between the biological sphere and that of
urban and regional science;52 meanings relating to other scientiﬁc sectors
can under no circumstance be strictly attributed to the magnitudes typical of
urban and regional science. In urban and regional modelling, the relations
between prey and predators in ecology can be likened, for example, to the
dynamic interaction between demand (the predator) and supply (the prey) of
a good (also called stock), and we assume that it is possible to establish a

  52
      Regional science studies social, economic, political and behavioural phenomena with a
spatial dimension. In regional science, a region is, usually, a geographical area smaller than the
State in which it is found: it might be a city, a country or province, a group of countries or
provinces or even, sometimes, a State, according to the scale of the phenomenon studied.
Regions may even extend over governmental/political boundaries, as, for example, when the
issue under study relates to a labour market area or a watershed. In 1954 Walter Isard (emeritus
professor at Cornell University) founded the RSAI, Regional Science Association International
(see www.regionalscience.org), an interdisciplinary, international organization focusing on
understanding the growth and development of urban, regional, and international systems; by
that, regional science became formally recognized as an interdisciplinary ﬁeld of scientiﬁc
research which uses jointly the methods and the knowledge developed in different ﬁelds such as
economics, geography, sociology, demography, statistics, planning, design and others.
                                                   Joint population–income dynamics   109

relationship in the form of one of the variants of the Volterra–Lotka model
between said magnitudes.



Model of joint population–income dynamics
Transfers of formulations of this type to urban and regional analysis have
been carried out, for example, by Dimitrios Dendrinos (1980, 1984a-c,
1992) and by Dendrinos and Henry Mullally (1981, 1985). The basic idea
at the heart of the model that these scholars propose is that the macro
dynamics of spatial units (whether such are urban areas, regions, or coun-
tries) can be described by means of the dynamics of two key development
indicators: population and average per capita income. Instead of the prey
and the predator, in models of this nature, which generally refer to urban
areas, the variables used are the average income available in the urban area
in question, which constitutes supply (the prey), and the population of the
urban area ‘hunting’ the income, which constitutes demand (the predator).
The model, conceived in this way, expresses the joint population–income
dynamics that develops in a closed area, i.e. without external ﬂows, follow-
ing continual adjustments between the demand (population) and the supply
(income) in the various locations within the area in question (Dendrinos,
1992).
   The model simulates the evolution of a population in a given geographic
area, a population that is indicated by variable y, and the level of average
income indicated by x, according to the basic hypothesis that an average
income x available in an area, which is higher than in other areas, will
attract population, giving rise to immigration to said area; but a population
that grows in an area, because it is attracted by the average income avail-
able, provokes a reduction in said income, thus diminishing the attraction
of said area. A dynamic-evolutive mechanism can immediately be recog-
nized in this population–income relationship, similar to that of the prey–
predator system illustrated in chapter 12:
                            
                                x_ ¼ ax  bxy
                                                                           (13:1)
                                y_ ¼ cy þ dxy

in which constants a, b, c and d are all positive. In the equation that gives
the income dynamics, the ﬁrst of the equations (13.1), the term ax expresses
the positive effect that the income has on the growth of the income itself (to
use a popular expression ‘wealth generates wealth’). The term bxy, on the
other hand, expresses the negative effect that the increase in population has
110   13 : The Volterra–Lotka model in regional science

      on the growth of average income: this effect corresponds to that which
      occurs in the basic model (12.1) when the growth in the number of prey
      slows down or becomes negative due to the high number of predators.
         In the equation that gives the population dynamics, the second of the
      equations (13.1), the term cy expresses the negative effects that the above-
      mentioned congestion, reducing the attractiveness of the area, exercises on
      the speed of growth of the population. In the basic model, it corresponds to
      the fall in the number of predators caused by internal competition due to the
      limited amount of available prey. The term cy expresses a sort of spon-
      taneous decline in the population, contrasted by the term þdxy, which
      describes the growth of the population due to the immigration caused by
      the average available income. The term dxy basically expresses the attract-
      iveness of the labour market (Paelinck, 1992, 1996) and corresponds, in the
      basic model, to the growth of the predators cause by predation.
         Model (13.1), which is substantially identical to the basic model (12.1),
      shows the same dynamics as the latter: only periodic cycles, similar to those
      produced by the harmonic oscillator (chapter 8). The population–income
      dynamics can be made more rich and varied by adding a quadratic term to
      model (13.1), in addition to the already existing nonlinear terms. This
      enables us to take into account phenomena due to productivity and con-
      gestion in a less rigid way than simple direct proportionality. A model
      generalized in this way was successfully applied to the city of Rotterdam,
      for which it reproduced annual data regarding population and income
      between 1946 and 1978 (Bachgus, Van Nes and Van der Zaan, 1985).
         The ecological approach was adopted in the ﬁeld of urban and regional
      science not only to describe population dynamics, but also to analyse
      competition between actors or businesses in a limited area. Volterra–
      Lotka equations have thus been used, in various competition models for
      urban areas between two types of land use or between two different types of
      urban actors. On occasion, attention has been focused on the space–time
      diffusion of technological innovation (Sonis, 1983ab, 1984, 1995;
      Camagni, 1985), on the evolution of the labour market (Nijkamp and
      Reggiani, 1990), on the competition between operators for one or two
      locations in an urban environment (Dendrinos and Sonis, 1986), on the
      evolution of a population with respect to the cost of land, and to the cyclical
      behaviour of the relative growth of an urban centre and its hinterland
      (Orishimo, 1987).
         A number of variants of the Volterra–Lotka model have been used in
      applications of this nature. One often used in urban and regional science
      entails the introduction of carrying capacity; these are models that corres-
      pond to the ecological ones like (12.2) in which not only do both variables
                                                     Joint population–income dynamics   111

appear multiplied together, as in the basic model, but, and this is the
fundamental aspect, one of the two variables now appears in a quadratic
term as well (Nijkamp and Reggiani, 1992ab, 1998):
                           
                               x_ ¼ x(a  bx  cy)
                                                                             (13:2)
                               y_ ¼ y(  d þ ex)

  Coefﬁcients a, b and d are all positive and refer to the endogenous
dynamics of the variables, while coefﬁcients c and e, which are also positive,
reﬂect the interaction between the two variables. One can easily transform
(13.2) into the equivalent system (13.2’), identical in form to (12.2):
                        8                
                        <              bx
                          x_ ¼ ax 1          cxy
                                        a                              (13:20 )
                        :
                          y_ ¼ exy  dy

  Form (13.2’) enables a comparison to be made with (12.2) and, more
speciﬁcally, enables the carrying capacity of the prey population, indicated
by A in (12.2) to be expressed explicitly through the a/b relationship. By
comparing (13.2) with (13.2’), we note that a large carrying capacity, i.e. a
high availability of resources in the environment, translates into a small
value for b with respect to that of a, which signiﬁes, in (13.2), a lesser
importance of the second order term bx2 with respect to the linear term
ax. The scarcity of resources (low carrying capacity), on the other hand,
implies that the external environment exercises an action of higher intensity
on the system; this more intense environmental feedback translates into an
increased ‘nonlinearity’ of the model.
  By making the two derivatives equal to zero, we obtain two states of
equilibrium for model (13.2). One is trivial: x ¼ y ¼ 0, the other is a point
on the xy plane whose coordinates are x  and y as follows:
                                8
                                >      d
                                <x ¼
                                       e                                     (13:3)
                                >
                                : y ¼ a  b d
                                       c c e

  Figures 13.1 and 13.2 show an example of a type of dynamics envisaged
by (13.2): a case of the orbit of the two variables in the phase plane xy and
the corresponding dynamics of x and y as a function of time (represented by
simulation cycles) respectively.
  The curves shown in the ﬁgures were obtained by integrating system
(13.2) numerically, using the same numerical method and the same values
112   13 : The Volterra–Lotka model in regional science


                                           16


             y (predators or population)
                                           14
                                           12
                                           10
                                               8
                                               6
                                               4
                                               2
                                               0
                                                   0        10         20    30      40         50         60     70         80
                                                                              x (prey or income)

      Figure 13.1 Dynamics of two variables x and y according to variant (13.2) of the Volterra–
      Lotka model. The values of the parameters are: a ¼ 0:01, b ¼ 0:0005, c ¼ 0:01,
      d ¼ 0:05, e ¼ 0:001; initial values: x ¼ 50 y ¼ 15; ﬁnal equilibrium values: x ¼ 50 y ¼ 7:5.

      of the parameters that were used for Figure 12.1; stable equilibrium is
      obtained by making b ¼ 0:0005. The presence of the quadratic term bx2
      in the equation that describes the evolution of the prey (or of the income), as
      we can see by comparing Figures 13.1 and 13.2 with Figures 12.1 and 12.2,
      has the effect of the appearance of a state of asymptotic equilibrium for the
      dynamic evolution of the system. The dynamics described by this model are
      a convergent spiral type, with oscillations that dampen around an asymp-
      totic state of equilibrium.
         The value of parameter b, which is inversely proportional to the carrying
      capacity, is critical. It can be shown, in fact, that the equilibrium given by
      equations (13.3) is asymptotically stable for b > 0 (as that in Figure 13.1),
      as occurred in the linear model in Case 2B (chapter 10); equations (13.3)

                                   80
                                   70
                                   60                                                                                  x
                                   50
                                   40
                                   30
                                   20                                                                                  y
                                   10
                                           0
                                               1       51        101   151   201   251    301        351   401   451   501

      Figure 13.2 Trend of variables x and y as a function of time (the simulation cycles),
      according to variant (13.2) of the Volterra–Lotka model. The values of the parameters are the
      same as in Figure 13.1.
                                                     The population–income model   113

deﬁne, therefore, a stable focal point, like that shown in Figure 11.6. As b
decreases, the speed with which the dynamics tends towards asymptotic
equilibrium diminishes. It can be shown that, if the carrying capacity tends
towards inﬁnity (i.e. if b tends towards 0), the equilibrium becomes un-
stable: the orbit no longer converges at one point, but makes a stable cycle,
as occurred in the linear model in Case 2A (chapter 10) (a singular centre
type point, like that illustrated in Figure 11.5). For b ¼ 0, there is just
dynamic equilibrium: in fact, in this case, model (13.2) re-assumes the
form of the basic Volterra–Lotka model (12.1), which envisages only closed
orbits travelled cyclically and not points of equilibrium. If we also accept
negative values for b, then we can see that the equilibrium deﬁned by
equations (13.3) is unstable, and that the dynamics of the model follow
orbits that diverge from the point of equilibrium (13.3), which behaves,
therefore, like an unstable focal point, like that shown in Figure 11.7.



The population–income model applied to US cities
and to Madrid
The population–income model of ecological origin, founded on the prey–
available income and predator–population associations, was used to de-
scribe the dynamics of 90 metropolitan areas in the United States between
1890 and 1980, even though the scarcity of available historical data (the so-
called time series) does not enable us to ensure a good experimental basis to
the model, as Denise Pumain observed (1997). Figure 13.3 shows a simu-
lation of the evolutive dynamics described by Dendrinos (1992) for several
urban areas of the United States. The continuous lines indicate the orbits
simulated in the population–income phase plane, the dashed lines indicate
forecasts and the state of stable equilibrium. It can be noted how the
average available income in the Los Angeles area exceeds that of the New
York area, in accordance with the forecasts of the US Bureau of Census,
while, in contrast, the populations of the two areas tend to resemble one
another.
   The effectiveness of the ecological model applied to the ﬁeld of urban and
regional science becomes obvious when comparing the orbit simulated for
the urban area of New York (Figure 13.3) with the empirical data available
for 1930–80 (Figure 13.4), which describe the actual evolution of New
York with respect to the population coordinates on the x axis, and average
income on the y axis (population and income are expressed as percentages).
The part of the calculated curve corresponding to 1930–80 accurately
reproduces the empirical data for the same years.
114   13 : The Volterra–Lotka model in regional science

                       Average per capita income in the urban area
                             Average per capita income in the USA

                       1.8

                                                                     LosAngeles
                       1.7

                       1.6
        Income ratio




                       1.5

                       1.4                                           Philadelphia          New York

                                                        Detroit
                                   Houston San
                       1.3                Francisco


                       1.2             St         Pittsburgh
                                      Louis
                                                               Chicago                   Population in the urban area ⫻ 103
                       1.1
                                      Milwaukee                                               Population of the USA

                                  5               15               25               35           45           55          65

      Figure 13.3 Simulation, with a Volterra–Lotka model, of the population–income dynamics
      of several metropolitan areas of the United States, between 1890 and 1980; the continuous
      lines are the simulated evolution, the dashed lines indicate forecasts and ﬁnal equilibrium.
      Source: Dendrinos (1992, p. 120).

         The great socio-economic transformations that occurred in the United
      States, above all from the end of the Second World War, have given rise to
      phenomena of suburbanization, internal migration, the increase in the size of
      the family nucleus, and of the wealth and the average age of the population.
      Moreover, they are the origin of the economic growth of the southern states,
      and of the growing importance of the service sector with respect to that of
      industry, and in particular, of the signiﬁcant development of the electronics
      sector. These are none other than some of the many causes that have signiﬁ-
      cantly inﬂuenced the spatial-sectorial structure of the United States.
         The factors that characterize the US economy, in addition to the cited
      consequences, have also given rise to other economic and demographic
      changes. In particular, the impact of the socio-economic transformation of
      the two major metropolitan areas, New York and Los Angeles, has worked
      in opposite directions. Its effect has been a shift in the pole of attraction for
      the population from the New York area, and in general from north-eastern
      states, towards the younger and smaller area of Los Angeles, which was
      more economical and which had better opportunities of economic growth,
      in particular between the 1960s and the 1980s, as illustrated in Figures 13.3
      and 13.4 (Dendrinos, 1992).
                                                                 The population–income model   115


                   Average per capita income in the urban area
                     Average per capita income in the USA




                                           Population in the urban area ⫻ 103
                                                 Population of the USA



Figure 13.4 Population–income dynamics in the metropolitan area of New York between
1930 and 1980 (historic series).
Source: Dendrinos, (1992, p. 116).


  A model like that of (13.2) was also used to analyse the development of
the city of Madrid (Dendrinos, 1984a), obtaining the population–income
dynamics shown in Figure 13.5. Figures 13.6 and 13.7 show, respectively,
the average per capita income of Madrid, expressed as a percentage with
respect to the average per capita income in Spain, and the population of
Madrid, expressed as a percentage of the total population of Spain.
  According to Dendrinos, empirical data compared with the simulation
data of the model not only conﬁrm the validity of metropolitan dynamics,
but also allow us to conclude that the parameters responsible for the
dynamic evolution of Madrid have very similar values to those applicable
to a large number of metropolitan areas in the United States.
  Dendrinos (1984c) used the following ‘urban’ variant of the Volterra–
Lotka model for both the urban areas of the United States and for Madrid:
                             
                                 x_ ¼ ax(y  1  bx)
                                                                                    (13:4)
                                 y_ ¼ gy(x  x)

in which x is the value of the population, expressed as a percentage of total
population, and y is the average per capita income available in the urban
116   13 : The Volterra–Lotka model in regional science


                 Average per capita income in Madrid
                  Average per capita income in Spain
                                                  1955                 1960
              1,60                             1950

                                                                                          1970
              1,50
                                                                1960

              1,40                                                                                      1979
                                                                                      1969
                                                                                                         1980
              1,30

              1,20                                                               .
                                                                                 x=0
              1,10

              1,00
                                 2060
              0,90                                                     .
                                                                       y=0
                        1900
              0,80

              0,70                                                                   Population of Madrid
                                                                                     Population of Spain

                          0,05          0,06   0,07      0,08          0,09   0,10      0,11     0,12

      Figure 13.5 Population–income dynamics for the urban area of Madrid: comparison
      between simulated data, indicated by isolated points, and empirical data, indicated by points
      joined by the broken line; the intersection of the two lines is the state of equilibrium envisaged
      by the model.
      Source: Dendrinos (1984a, p. 242).




      area in question, expressed as a percentage of the average per capita income
      of the country. The parameter x identiﬁes the carrying capacity of the
      metropolitan area expressed in relative terms with regard to that of
      the country.
        The form of (13.4) is similar to that of (13.2): the ﬁrst equation contains a
      ﬁrst degree term in x, a second degree term in x and a second degree one
      with the product of the variables xy; the second equation contains a ﬁrst
      degree term in y and a second degree term with the product xy. Model
      (13.4), therefore, also entails a stable state of equilibrium at a point, like
      model (13.2).
        Parameters a and g are the relative speeds that regulate the changes in
      population and income respectively. The population dynamics in the ﬁrst
                                                                    The population–income model   117


               Average per capita income in Madrid
                Average per capita income in Spain

               1,6

              1,5

              1,4

              1,3

              1,2

              1,1

              1,0

              0,9

              0,8

              0,7
                                                                        Year

                     1900   1920   1940     1960   1980   2000   2020   2040   2060

Figure 13.6 Simulation of the average per capita income of the urban area of Madrid (the
dots on the curved line) and empirical data from historic series (the smaller dots).
Source: Dendrinos (1984a, p. 243).


            0,13     Population of Madrid
                      Population of Spain
            0,12

            0,11

            0,10

            0,09

            0,08

            0,07

            0,06

            0,05

            0,04
                                                                        Year

                     1900   1920   1940     1960   1980   2000   2020   2040   2060

Figure 13.7 Simulation of the evolution of the population of the urban area of Madrid (the
dots on the curved line) and empirical data from historic series (the smaller dots).
Source: Dendrinos (1984a, p. 244).
118   13 : The Volterra–Lotka model in regional science

      equation of (13.4) is the effect of two elements. The ﬁrst is the term
      ax(y  1), which favours growth, for the entire time that the relative
      average per capita income y for the urban area (variable) exceeds the
      average of the whole country (which equals one unit). The second is the
      nonlinear term abx2 , which represents the negative effect of agglomer-
      ation on population growth. Parameter b plays the role of friction factor: it
      is a term which, by opposing the effect of a, due to the negative sign with
      which it appears in the equation, acts by slowing down the movement of the
      population in question; the bigger the population, the more effect it has.
      The product abx2 constitutes a sort of force which, by opposing the
      action of ax(y  1), damps the system’s dynamics. It can be shown that
      for b > 0, the systems evolves towards a state of stable equilibrium, like the
      attractor point at the centre of the convergent spiral in Figure 13.1; for
      b < 0, on the other hand, the system evolves amplifying its own oscilla-
      tions, without tending towards a condition of stability.
         We underline the fact that in the income equation, the second of (13.4), a
      quadratic y term is missing that would express the (positive or negative)
      effects of agglomeration on income. These effects are assumed to be negli-
      gible; the carrying capacity of income is therefore assumed to be inﬁnite.



      The symmetrical competition model and the formation
      of niches
      In all of the variants of the basic Volterra–Lotka model that we have
      presented in the ecological sphere, with the sole exception of (12.3), we
      have been describing the interaction between two species, one of which, the
      predator, dominates the other, the prey. This is also true for the models that
      we have seen in regional and environmental spheres, in which the residents
      ‘hunt’ for the available income. The system, constructed in this way, pre-
      sents an asymmetry with respect to the two species.
         Another variant of the basic model can therefore be constructed, in which
      the roles of the two populations are symmetrical, in which, that is, the
      dynamics of the two populations are described by equations with the same
      form, like those of model (12.3) in an ecological sphere. In this case, it is a
      system that describes two populations of the same nature (or, in broader
      terms, that act according to the same mechanisms), that compete against
      one another for the limited resources available in the common environment.
      We therefore formulate a new variant of the basic model, introducing
      the carrying capacity for both populations. To this end, we add a second
      degree negative term to both system equations: bx2 and fy2 , for the ﬁrst
                                                         The symmetrical competition model   119

and second populations respectively (Nijkamp and Reggiani, 1992ab,
1998):
                      
                        x_ ¼ x(a  bx  cy)
                                                             (13:5)
                        y_ ¼ y(d  ex  fy)

Parameters a and d are natural growth rates; b and e represent the use of
the resources by the two populations, and are an index of the level of
competition for resources within the population; c and f represent the
sensitivity of the two populations to reciprocal competition and are an
index of the level of competition between them.
   A model such as (13.5) illustrates a dynamics, in certain aspects, similar
to that of (13.2) and (13.4) (Pumain, Sanders and Saint-Julien, 1989).53 It
can be demonstrated (Smith, 1974) that, if the inequalities d=e > a=b and
a=c > d=f are satisﬁed simultaneously, then (13.5) also results in the possi-
bility of two states of stable equilibrium, that can be calculated, as in (13.2),
by making the derivatives in (13.5) equal to zero. One solution is trivial:
x ¼ y ¼ 0; the other is the point of coordinates x   and y given by:
                                  8
                                  >
                                  >      af  cd
                                  <x ¼
                                         fb  ce
                                                                                  (13:6)
                                  >
                                  >      db  ea
                                  : y ¼
                                         fb  ce

  In Figures 13.8 and 13.9 we provide an example of numerical integration
of (13.5), similar to that shown in Figures 12.1–12.2 and 13.1–13.2. Note
the similarity of the orbits in Figures 13.1–13.2 and 13.8–13.9, but the
different coordinates of the points of equilibrium.
  In reality, system (13.5) can also give rise to other very different orbits
that differ again from those in the example illustrated in Figures 13.8 and
13.9, depending on the values of the parameters that characterize the
system in question. For example, equilibrium can be achieved in a number
of ways: the system can make repeated oscillations around the stability
value before reaching it, following a convergent spiral shaped orbit in the
phase space, or it can stabilize itself without oscillations, i.e. following an
orbit that, we could say, ‘aims’ directly towards the state of equilibrium.
  It can be seen that, if the two populations x and y are characterized by
different carrying capacities, then they reach a constant value over time and
  53
      Sonis and Dendrinos (1990), however, observe that the interpretation of the model
(13.5) in terms of the income–population dynamics presents some difﬁculties with regard to
internal consistency.
120   13 : The Volterra–Lotka model in regional science


               16
                          y
               14
               12
               10
                  8
                  6
                  4
                                                                                              x
                  2
                  0
                      0            10         20     30    40      50         60         70       80

      Figure 13.8 Dynamics of two variables x and y according to variant (13.5) of the Volterra–
      Lotka model. The values of the parameters are: a ¼ 0:1, b ¼ 0:0005, c ¼ 0:01, d ¼ 0:05,
      e ¼ 0:001, f ¼ 0:0005; initial values: x ¼ 50 y ¼ 15; ﬁnal values of equilibrium:
      x ¼ 53:66 y ¼ 7:32.



             80
             70
             60                                                                                    x
             50
             40
             30
             20
                                                                                                    y
             10
              0
                  1           51        101    151   201   251   301    351        401    451     501

      Figure 13.9 Trend of variables x and y as a function of time (simulation cycles), according to
      variant (13.5) of the Volterra–Lotka model. The values of the parameters, and the initial
      values are the same as those in Figure 13.8.

      coexist; but if the carrying capacities are identical, the most efﬁcient of the
      two will end up totally eliminating the other in accordance with Gause’s
      principle of competitive exclusion.54 The latter replicates one of the most
      important elements that characterize the economic theory of increasing
      returns, according to which the larger the market share of a company, the

        54
            In 1934 Gause published The Struggle for Existence, a fundamental work in ecological
      literature, where the principle of competitive exclusion is discussed. This principle, of par-
      ticular importance, is at the origin of the concept of ecological niche, according to which two
      different species that are not differentiated in their consumption of food resources cannot
      coexist indeﬁnitely: either they differentiate themselves in some aspect or one of the two will
      eventually disappear.
                                                 The symmetrical competition model   121

higher the probability that said quota will increase and eventually absorb
the market, eliminating competitors, and thus setting up a real monopoly
(Bertuglia and Staricco, 2000).
   Model (13.5) can be enhanced further, by replacing product xy with
xn ym (n, m 6¼ 1). The exponents n and m enable both the speed and the
intensity of the change with which each of the two variables responds to a
change in the other to be modiﬁed; this enables the interaction between x
and y to become more rich and varied (it could be said that n and m
introduce a form of partial elasticity to the interaction with respect to the
dimensions of the species). In general, models like (13.5) are called niche
models (Nijkamp and Reggiani, 1992b, 1998) and describe competitive
situations between different populations, as well as cooperation and para-
sitism, depending on the signs of the coefﬁcients c and e present in the terms
that express the interactions between the populations (naturally, we would
like to remind readers that ‘populations’ has a general meaning here, which
should be speciﬁed on each occasion).
   The concept of niche is particularly useful to describe the equilibrium
towards which a process of evolution tends when it occurs in an environ-
ment in which the limited resources are exploited by various operators
competing against one another, such as an undifferentiated set of prey for
different species of predator, or an undifferentiated market, or a new
market, for different goods manufacturers or service providers.
   As we have said, in model (13.5), we can have a situation of equilibrium,
in which the variables have the values indicated in (13.6). In this case we
have the contemporary survival of all actors, in the same way as, in ecology,
we have the contemporary survival of several species in a single environ-
ment. This happens if the species divide the limited available resources by
means of a differentiation of interests with which the various parties
(niches) approach the resources as a whole, therefore limiting interference
between reciprocal sectors of interest. In contrast, according to model
(13.5), it is possible that in an undifferentiated environment, i.e. where
the two species have the same carrying capacity, no division into niches
takes place, and this results in the inevitable disappearance of one of the
operators.
   The Volterra–Lotka model and its variants describe a situation in which
two animal species that live in the same environment compete. These
models, applied in an economic–spatial sphere, as we have said, have
proved to be extremely useful to model any type of competitive scenario
(see the study of three interacting species in May and Leonard, 1975, and
within regional science, the study of the dynamics of a three-population
system, conducted by means of simulations, in Dendrinos, 1991a).
122   13 : The Volterra–Lotka model in regional science

        For example, in an urban model, the services of two separate areas can be
      seen as being in competition with one another to attract users that live in a
      third area. The same can be said of a set made up of a larger number of
      services, or operators, generalizing the Volterra–Lotka model into N di-
      mensions, with any value of N (Reggiani, 1997):
                                                                          !
                                                           X
                                                           N
                                       x_ i ¼ ai xi ki          bij xj          (13:7)
                                                           j¼1


      where xi is the value of the population of species i (i ¼ 1, . . . , N), ai is its
      growth rate, constants ki are a function of the carrying capacity of species i,
      and coefﬁcients bij represent the competitive coefﬁcients between species i
      and j, measurable by the superimposition of the niches. For example, one
      can imagine describing the evolutive dynamics of three different types of
      transport systems along these lines (the predators: railways, roads, airways)
      that in an integrated transport network, compete with each other to ‘cap-
      ture’ the limited available resources (the prey: the passengers and/or the
      goods).
         Finally we can observe that (13.7), for N ¼ 1, becomes simply:

                                             x_ ¼ ax(1  bx)                     (13:8)

      known as the logistic function, which we will be looking at in Chapter 20.
        We conclude our analysis of non-chaotic models here. In Part 2 we will be
      examining a topic that we have already mentioned several times in this ﬁrst
      part: the stability of a system and deterministic chaos.
 PART            From Nonlinearity
  2              to Chaos


If you say that all this, too, can be calculated and tabulated – chaos and darkness
and curses, so that the mere possibility of calculating it all beforehand would stop it
all, and reason would reassert itself, then man would purposely go mad in order to
be rid of reason and gain his point!
Twice two makes four seems to me simply a piece of insolence. Twice two makes
four is a pert coxcomb who stands with arms akimbo barring your path and
spitting. I admit that twice two makes four is an excellent thing, but if we are to
give everything its due, twice two makes ﬁve is sometimes a very charming thing too
                                               Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky,
                                               Notes From the Underground (1864)
This page intentionally left blank
               Introduction
 14

In Part 1 we looked at several examples of linear and nonlinear modelling in
natural and social sciences. We also observed how nonlinear cases generally
require much more sophisticated mathematical techniques, which still only
enable us to obtain a partial description of the phenomena. In the linear
case, on the other hand, we can obtain a complete description; if we have
full knowledge of either the boundary conditions (i.e. the coordinates at
different times) or the initial values of the dynamics (i.e. the coordinates and
their derivatives), the system’s future evolution is preordained and can be
calculated.
   We also observed, however, that linear models are not realistic and
represent merely a mathematical approximation that is only acceptable
when the system is very close to a situation of stable equilibrium. All models
are, without a doubt, mathematical abstractions, but the hypotheses as-
sumed for linear ones are the most drastically simpliﬁcative.
   In Part 3 we will return to the question of the meaning of the abstractions
made in mathematics, and more generally, the sense of mathematics and its
methods. In this second part, however, we are going to examine a matter of
fundamental importance in more depth: a nonlinear mathematical model
can, at times, demonstrate very particular evolutive behaviour, giving rise to
unstable evolutive trajectories that appear to be unpredictable, as if they
weren’t generated by any imposed deterministic law and that we call
chaotic. Behaviour of this nature is not peculiar to abstract mathematical
models alone: even real systems observed experimentally, in both natural
and social sciences, on occasion may demonstrate behaviour that appears to
be unstable and chaotic.
   In this part, therefore, we will be focusing mainly on nonlinear models,
describing some of the elements that characterize their dynamics with
respect to those of linear models. We will begin by discussing, in Chapters
15 and 16 several rather technical aspects of deterministic chaos and some
of the ordinate structures that sometimes manifest themselves in nonlinear
dynamics: chaotic and strange attractors. We have already come across
some types of attractors in Part 1, but they were ordinary attractors,
126   14 : Introduction

      whose structure is profoundly different to that of strange attractors, as we
      will see. In Chapter 17 we will clarify some of the differences between chaos
      in models and chaos in real systems. The onset or otherwise of chaos in
      models depends on the stability of an orbit in the phase plane, a concept
      that will be examined immediately afterwards, in Chapter 18. In Chapter
      19 we will touch upon a very delicate matter regarding the recognition of
      chaos in data obtained from measurements of real systems. Then in Chapter
      20 we will return to our discussion of growth models, looking at some
      properties of the logistic function. In Chapters 21 and 22 we will examine
      the logistic map, a variant of the logistic function in discrete time, an
      example of one of the simplest and most well-known dynamical systems
      that, in certain circumstances, manifests chaotic behaviour.
         Our discussions will contain some technical mathematical details here
      and there, although we have no intention of providing formal demonstra-
      tions or entering into exhaustive discussions, favouring clear and simple
      explanations over technical ones, in order to enable the reader to better
      understand the key concepts behind the mathematical technicalities.
               Dynamical systems
 15            and chaos



Some theoretical aspects
Before proceeding, we would like to remind readers of a concept that was
stated in Chapter 8: by dynamical system we simply mean a system of
equations that deﬁne the evolution of a set of state variables in discrete or
continuous time. It is therefore important not to confuse the abstract
mathematical concept of dynamical system, with that of system, which
for the sake of clarity we will call real, and which instead refers to the
empirical observation of phenomena and to the measurement of series of
data. The mathematical models we are examining are written in the form of
dynamical systems: therefore the properties of the models that we will be
discussing should be considered properties of dynamical systems.
   In the various types of oscillating systems described in Part 1, the exist-
ence of several geometric objects in the phase space, called attractors, was
acknowledged. We came across them in a number of models: there was an
attractor point in the damped oscillating systems and in some interacting
population models, while, in certain variants of the Volterra–Lotka model,
we encountered limit cycles. In general terms, an attractor is a particular
region in the phase space (a subset of the phase space) that a dynamical
system tends to reach during the course of its evolution. When the system,
following its orbit, approaches an attractor, it does not escape from it unless
external factors intervene and alter the system’s dynamics.
   A basin of attraction is associated to an attractor: a region in the
phase space (it can even be the entire phase space, if the dynamics of
the system envisage a single attractor) characterized by the fact that, starting
from any one point in that region, i.e. from any state, the dynamical
system evolves, always directing itself towards the attractor. If the attractor
is a point, the system moves toward it in a condition of asymptotic stability; if
the attractor is a closed line, called a limit cycle (see Chapter 2), the system
tends asymptotically to travel along it with a constant periodicity.
128   15 : Dynamical systems and chaos

         If the system is relatively simple, such as a pendulum made up of one
      particle only, the oscillating mass, whose position can be obtained given the
      value of one single coordinate, then (see Chapter 11) the model that de-
      scribes its evolution over time identiﬁes the state of the system by a point in
      a phase space that is reduced to one plane, and its evolution can be
      represented by different forms of lines, depending on the mathematical
      model adopted and the values of the parameters. If, on the other hand,
      the system is more complicated and is made up of a large number of
      reciprocally interacting elements (such as a gas, a society of individuals,
      an economic system, etc.), then the model is more complicated. The system’s
      state is now given by a set of points in a region in the phase space. Let us
      attribute a volume55 to this region; so, if the system represented by the
      points contained in that region evolves over time conserving its total energy,
      then it can be shown that the region in question moves within the phase
      space, perhaps changing form as the system evolves, but the volume that it
      occupies remains constant. This is called a conservative, or non-dissipative
      dynamical system (and is the case of the pendulum without friction that
      oscillates periodically, without attractors). In dissipative systems (systems
      that dissipate energy into the environment, like a damped pendulum that
      over time tends towards a state of stable equilibrium), on the contrary, the
      points, that as a whole deﬁne the system’s state, move towards a particular
      region in the phase space, the attractor, with the result that the volume in
      which the points are spread contracts during the course of the dynamical
      system’s evolution.56
         In other words, the dissipative system behaves as if the points that
      characterize it in the phase space ‘slip’ towards an attractor, like an object
      in a gravitational ﬁeld that rolls along the sides of a valley to its bottom. The
      bottom of the valley is an attractor, while the valley represents, in this
      example, the basin of attraction (Figure 15.1).
         In the case of a conservative dynamical system, every point in the initial
      region follows its own particular orbit, which depends only on the initial
      state and is not affected by the presence of any attractor. In the case of a
      dissipative system, on the other hand, all of the orbits tend towards a

         55
            We will use the term ‘volume’ to indicate the extension of the region in question,
      without referring explicitly however to the three-dimensional case only; in the two-dimen-
      sional case, for example, volume is intended to mean area.
         56
            This constitutes the content of a renowned theorem of the French mathematician Joseph
      Liouville: if in a dynamical system the energy is conserved (conservative system), then the
      volume of the subset in the phase space, made up of the points whose coordinates and
      momenta (mass multiplied by velocity) characterize the dynamical system, is a constant of
      the motion (Chavel, 1994).
                                                                       Some theoretical aspects   129


                     Phase space                                   Phase space




                                                                                    attractor




                Conservative system:                          Dissipative system:
       the volume in the phase space is constant    the volume in the phase space diminishes

Figure 15.1 Evolution of a conservative dynamical system and a dissipative dynamical
system in the phase space.



common attractor, which characterizes the general dynamics of said system.
In the latter case, the solutions of the equations that describe the dynamical
system tend towards a ﬁnal stable conﬁguration over time: apart from very
particular situations, two orbits that start ‘fairly’ close together tend to-
wards the same ﬁnal conﬁguration. The evolution of a system that behaves
in this way is predictable; even if the starting state is only known through
approximation, this does not affect the ﬁnal state, which is always the same
attractor.
   The attractor can be an isolated point, such as that in the different models
of the pendulum discussed in Part 1, with the exception of the chaotic
model; it can be a limit cycle, i.e. a regular ﬂat continuous curve with a
tangent at each point, a curve in a three-dimensional space, but also a
geometric object with more than three dimensions, depending on the num-
ber of state variables that make up the phase space; as we know, in fact,
each state variable corresponds to one single dimension (i.e. one axis) of the
phase space. There is also the case of an attractor made up of a set of non-
continuous states, i.e. by a set of isolated points, as we will see in Chapter
21 in the logistic map. This can occur if the system is not described by
differential equations in continuous time, but by maps,57 i.e. by ﬁnite
difference equations. An ordinary attractor (point or closed line) is

  57
      Remember that a map is simply a function f(x) in the phase space that, starting from
state xn , supplies the next state xnþ1 . A map, therefore, is none other than a difference
equation written isolating the (n þ 1)-th value of the variable in the ﬁrst member, i.e. in the
form: xnþ1 ¼ f (xn ). Each differential equation can give rise to a map, increasing the inde-
pendent variable by a unitary step (therefore not inﬁnitesimal) that in dynamical models is
time.
130   15 : Dynamical systems and chaos

      synonymous, therefore, with the stability of a dynamical system, with the
      reproducibility of the evolution, and with the return to the same conditions,
      starting from different initial conditions; that is to say, with the insensitivity
      to variations of the state assumed as initial or disturbances to the same, or to
      ambiguities in its deﬁnition or measurement.
         Up until a few decades ago, it was believed that the only attractors
      possible for systems described by differential equations were made up of
      sets of isolated points or a closed line (a limit cycle) or even by a line that
      wraps itself around a toroidal surface,58 attractors called simple or ordin-
      ary. In the wake of the pioneering work carried out by Poincaré, ﬁrst, and
      later by Fermi, studies that incidentally were not immediately successful,
      the chance discovery of the existence of a new type of attractor (Lorenz,
      1963; Smale, 1967; Ruelle and Takens, 1971), however, opened up entirely
      new perspectives.
         There are real systems that manifest dynamical behaviour characterized
      by a strong dependence on the initial conditions. This means that small
      initial disturbances are increasingly ampliﬁed as the system evolves, giving
      rise to increasingly greater changes in the evolution. In the same way, there
      are models in the form of dynamical systems that give rise to diverging
      orbits. By integrating dynamical systems of this nature, we see that the
      subsequent states of the latter are not dispersed into increasingly larger
      regions in the phase space, but remain conﬁned to limited regions, without,
      however, ever repeating the same sets of values of state variables, as hap-
      pens on the contrary with limit cycles. Basically what happens is that these
      dynamical systems, evolving over time, repeatedly pass close to states they
      have already occupied, without ever displaying constant periodicity, tracing
      orbits that are continuous lines that never intersect each other and are of
      inﬁnite length, even though, we will repeat, enclosed (we could say ‘entan-
      gled’) in limited regions in the phase space. The possible orbits of a dynam-
      ical system of this nature, even though all of an almost equal form, in reality
      depend on the initial state: they are all open lines, conﬁned to the same
      region in the phase space, similar in form, but distinct from one another,
      which are travelled along at different speeds over time, with the effect that
      the states on one orbit and the corresponding states that we would have
      at the same points in time on another disturbed orbit, increasingly distance
      themselves. This is the well-known butterﬂy effect: even initial situations
      that are very close to one another may present a difference that becomes
      sizeable over time.

        58
          A toroidal surface is the surface of a three-dimensional geometric object called a ‘torus’,
      whose form, in practice, is that of a ring or a doughnut.
                                                          Calculating linear and chaotic dynamics   131

   Starting from an initial point, a dynamical system of this nature reaches
an area in the phase space, within which it remains; its subsequent states
construct a curved, open, inﬁnite orbit, that is however permanently con-
ﬁned to that limited region in the phase space; an attractor of this type is
called chaotic. A dynamical system whose dynamics are characterized by
the presence of a chaotic attractor is also called chaotic.
   Situations in which chaotic attractors are encountered can be generated
by nonlinear models, which, in certain circumstances, can manifest evolu-
tive dynamics that appear completely unpredictable, precisely because they
lack ordinary attractors, that is to say they lack states of stable equilibrium
(point attractors) or sets of states travelled periodically (limit cycles).59



Two examples: calculating linear and chaotic dynamics
Certain dynamical systems are characterized by the fact that small differ-
ences between the initial states, over time, result in increasing differences
between subsequent states; this property is called sensitivity to initial con-
ditions. We have already come across a model characterized by said sensi-
tivity in Chapter 10, when we mentioned the chaotic pendulum (Model 4).
Sensitivity to initial conditions means that a (small) disturbance to the
initial conditions of an orbit, assumed to be undisturbed, generates another
orbit, which we will call disturbed, which starts at a point in the phase space
close to the initial one of the undisturbed orbit, but that develops over time,
increasingly amplifying the difference with respect to the undisturbed orbit.
This could lead to the points in the initial region in the phase space being
spread over increasingly larger regions in the phase space, without giving
rise to any attractor (Figure 15.2), or to the points being distanced from one
another, but remaining conﬁned to a limited region in the phase space thus
indicating the presence of an attractor.
   Let us consider an example of a very simple dynamical system: a math-
ematical law like (8:10 ), called a linear map.
   We assume:

                                         xnþ1 ¼ 2xn                                      (15:1)

  59
      Typical examples of dynamical systems of this type are forced oscillating systems, i.e.
systems in which the ‘natural’ oscillatory dynamics are continually altered by an intervention
from the external environment. The Dufﬁng equation, that we mentioned in Chapter 12 (p.
100, note 48), is an example of a dynamical system that can display limit cycles, as we said in
the cited note, but also situations of unpredictability (chaotic), depending on the values of the
parameters.
132   15 : Dynamical systems and chaos

                                               Phase space




      Figure 15.2 Evolution in the phase space of a dynamical system sensitive to the initial
      conditions, which does not have attractors.


      Equation (15.1) is characterized by a single coordinate, x, whose value
      evolves over time simply by doubling itself. If we calculate two sequences
      starting from close initial values, the distance between two corresponding
      values of the two sequences doubles at each step; if, e.g. we (slightly) move
      the coordinates of the initial point of the evolutive trajectory, the latter does
      not return towards the initially undisturbed one, but gets increasingly
      further away.
         Let us iterate the linear map (15.1), a ﬁrst time, starting from x1 ¼ 1; and
      then a second time, starting from a point close to 1. Let us assume for
      example that X1 ¼ 1:1. The ﬁrst terms of the two sequences are shown in
      Table 15.1; the values of the differences between corresponding terms are
      shown together.
         The two sequences can be visualized as shown in Figure 15.3; the ﬁrst
      sequence is represented by the points indicated above the real number axis,
      the second by the points shown below.
         It is immediately apparent that the two sequences are unlimited and that,
      as the iterations progress, they generate numbers, represented by the points


                Table 15.1 First iterations of the linear map (15.1) for two different
                initial values

                n                xn                 Xn                   Dn ¼ Xn  xn

                1                 1                  1.1                      þ0:1
                2                 2                  2.2                      þ0:2
                3                 4                  4.4                      þ0:4
                4                 8                  8.8                      þ0:8
                5                16                 17.6                      þ1:6
                6                32                 35.2                      þ3:2
                                                       Calculating linear and chaotic dynamics   133




∆1∆2 ∆3      ∆4             ∆5                            ∆6

    Figure 15.3 Iterations of the linear map starting from two totally separate values.



on the line in Figure 15.3, that do not remain conﬁned to any limited part of
the line [the phase space for map (15.1) is simply the line of real numbers].
The difference between the coordinates of the two points that are obtained
after the same number of iterations, indicated by Dn, also grows without
limit as n increases according to the same law (15.1).
   Equation (15.1) is the recursive deﬁnition of a simple geometric sequence
of common ratio 2, which does not in any way reﬂect the approximate idea
of unpredictability that we intuitively associate with chaotic situations. The
sequence generated by (15.1) is without doubt sensitive to the initial con-
ditions, as the two trajectories increasingly diverge as the iterations pro-
gress, but the terms can be easily calculated not only using the recursive
formula (15.1), but also using known non-recursive formulae provided in
the elementary arithmetic for geometric sequences.
   When we talk about chaos and chaotic dynamical systems other than
the example we have just seen, we mean something more that a mere
sensitivity to initial conditions. We can only talk about chaos if the orbits
in the phase space remain conﬁned, i.e. if the system does not evolve
towards inﬁnity for any variable, something which does happen, on the
other hand, with the linear map (15.1); sensitivity to initial conditions is
a necessary condition for chaos, but at the same time is not in itself
sufﬁcient.
   In linear dynamics, there can be sensitivity to initial conditions and
unlimited orbits, as in the cases of the open orbits discussed in Chapter
11, or limited orbits, but without sensitivity to initial conditions, as in the
examples of oscillation discussed in Chapters 5 and 8 and in the cases of
cyclical orbits discussed in Chapter 11. Linear dynamics, however, are not
capable of generating orbits that are sensitive to initial conditions and that
remain conﬁned to a limited region in the phase space.
   Sensitivity to initial conditions, in itself, is not an exclusive assumption of
nonlinear dynamics; however, it plays a fundamental role in nonlinear
cases. Brieﬂy anticipating some elements of the logistic map, that we will
be discussing in Chapters 21 and 22, we will use an example to better clarify
what we mean by sensitivity to initial conditions and orbits conﬁned to an
134   15 : Dynamical systems and chaos

      area in the phase space, and in what context this gives rise to unpredict-
      ability.
         Let us take an example of a logistic map and calculate two sequences
      starting from initial values that are close to one another, as we did for the
      linear map (15.1). Let us iterate, for example, the following map:

                                         xnþ1 ¼ 3:7xn (1  xn )                            (15:2)

      once, starting from x1 ¼ 0:5 and a second time, starting from X1 ¼ 0:6. The
      numbers obtained for the ﬁrst six iterations are shown in Table 15.2,
      together with the differences between the corresponding terms (we have
      limited ourselves to nine decimal places, those shown by a normal pocket
      calculator).
         Several differences between the sequences originated by the initial ‘close’
      values, generated by (15.1) and those generated by (15.2) are apparent.
      First of all, (15.1) generates unlimited sequences, while (15.2) generates
      sequences whose terms always fall between 0 and 1 (this is easy to check, by
      continuing with the calculation of subsequent terms). The ease of predicting
      the terms of the sequences generated by (15.1) right from the outset,
      moreover, is contrasted by the fact that the terms of the sequences generated
      by (15.2), even though generated by a deterministic law, do not demon-
      strate easily identiﬁable recurrences, such as those that we can ‘guess’ at a
      glance. In this context, we speak of sequence unpredictability of (15.2),
      referring to the substantial impossibility of identifying its law, if the latter is
      not already known. Lastly, the difference Dn between the corresponding
      terms of the ‘close’ successions also now has a nonlinear, unpredictable
      trend, whereas, for (15.1), Dn increased simply by doubling itself at each
      step.



                Table 15.2 First iterations of the logistic map (15.2) for two different
                initial values

                n         xn                    Xn                      Dn ¼ Xn  xn

                1         0.5                   0.6                     þ0:1
                2         0.925                 0.888                   0:037
                3         0.2566875             0.3679872               þ0:1112997
                4         0.705956401           0.860518696             þ0:154562295
                5         0.626861975           0.444097199             0:182764776
                6         0.865452345           0.913437046             þ0:047984701
                                               The deterministic vision and real chaotic systems   135

   A ﬁnal observation of particular interest regards the sensitivity to initial
conditions that originates from the unpredictability of the terms of sequence
(15.2). Equation (15.2) deﬁnes the dynamics of a chaotic system on two
grounds: (1) because it is characterized by unpredictability, in the context
mentioned on the previous page, and (2) because subsequent states are
conﬁned to between 0 and 1, while this is not true for (15.1).
   We will resume this topic in Chapter 16, returning to these two succes-
sions and further developing our discussions thereupon.



The deterministic vision and real chaotic systems
In real systems we talk of chaos when the prediction of the system’s future
evolution becomes impossible for anything beyond short periods of time,
regardless of the precision with which the initial conditions are measured,
even if the mechanisms that control its evolution are known and can be
transformed into a model. Sensitivity to initial conditions, also in the case of
real systems, means that it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to make predic-
tions about the system’s future evolution the further into the future we wish
to look, due to the ampliﬁcation of measurement errors that originate from
approximations in measuring the state variables.
   Improving the precision of measurements can, in some way, extend the
time interval within which predictions can be considered meaningful, the
so-called predictability horizon. However, as the predictability horizon
typically only grows according to the logarithm of measurement precision
(see Chapter 18), even though we may make considerable efforts to improve
observations, in practice we obtain only modest results regarding the pre-
dictability of the system’s future evolution.
   At least until questions related to quantum uncertainty are introduced,60
the limit to measurement precision might be thought to be imposed by
purely practical difﬁculties. Improving measurement precision, in principle,
would enable new decimal places to be added to the number obtained from
each measurement. However, in no way would this enable the predictability

   60
      The uncertainty principle is one of the fundamental principles of quantum physics.
Formulated by Werner Heisenberg (1927), it maintains the existence of speciﬁc pairs of
magnitudes, called conjugates (for example, the x coordinate of a particle and its speed in
the direction of the x coordinate, or energy and time), that cannot be measured simultan-
eously with arbitrary precision; the measurement precision of one of the two magnitudes is
inversely proportional to the measurement precision of the other magnitude, conjugated to it.
This principle can be ignored for magnitude values typical of everyday experience and is
relevant only with regard to atomic or subatomic phenomena.
136   15 : Dynamical systems and chaos

      horizon to be extended to inﬁnity, as this would require ‘absolute’ precision
      at the time of the measurement of the initial state and the maintenance over
      time of the same ‘absolute’ precision with regard to the deﬁnition of the
      system’s subsequent states.
         First of all, the idea of ‘absolute precision’ in determining a system’s
      state is an abstract concept (or even intrinsically wrong), completely
      lacking in meaning in practice, absolutely unachievable in any measure-
      ment, at least (but not only) due to the constraints posed by the principle
      of quantum indetermination. At most, increasingly improving the preci-
      sion of measurements enables us to relegate the approximation towards a
      decimal place that is increasingly further from the point, but not to
      eliminate it and obtain absolute precision. If we use the approximate
      result obtained from the measurement of the present state as an input
      for a model that simulates the evolution of a real system to calculate its
      future states, then, if the model is an unstable dynamical system, the error
      introduced by the approximation does not remain conﬁned, over time, to
      the ﬁgure on which the approximation was initially based, but increas-
      ingly ampliﬁes itself.
         We can never have thorough knowledge of reality, because we cannot
      measure any of the state variables with absolute precision, even if we
      assume that we have identiﬁed all of the state variables needed to fully
      deﬁne a system (which, if the system is complicated, is by no means
      necessarily easy, or may even be impossible). The (small) inevitable approx-
      imations in measurements may hide small immeasurable (i.e. we cannot
      know them) differences between the initial states of the orbits. In general,
      we are not at all sure whether these small immeasurable differences will
      remain small during the course of the dynamical system’s evolution or
      whether they will tend to disappear, or, on the other hand, whether they
      will progressively grow. It depends on the mechanisms that control the
      system’s evolution. Similarly, we are not at all sure whether small disturb-
      ances that intervene during the system’s evolution have effects that, in the
      long term, become signiﬁcant, substantially changing its evolution. This is
      exactly the fundamental point that Laplace was unaware of and where
      classical determinism erred: the small, negligible approximations (or im-
      precisions or disturbances, however you wish to call them) that intensify
      over time and cease to be negligible. This is therefore the unpredictability
      that characterizes an unstable dynamical system (i.e. a model), which is
      sensitive to initial conditions. This concept is in complete antithesis to the
      Laplacian deterministic vision; as accurate as our knowledge of the present
      state may be, there may be intrinsic instability in the evolution of the
      dynamical system (model), which limits the predictability horizon, i.e. the
                                        The question of the stability of the solar system   137

interval of time within which the predictions provided by the model, i.e.
from our representation of the situation, can be considered realistic.



The question of the stability of the solar system
Laplacian determinism was also the result of a series of studies and calcu-
lations regarding the problem of describing the movements of the planets.
The idea that small errors (or approximations or disturbances) could only
generate small consequences appeared in classical science, not only because
it was intuitive, but also following the success of Newtonian physics applied
to several aspects of celestial mechanics. Studies regarded in particular the
problem of two bodies in gravitational interaction: Sun–Earth, Earth–
Moon, etc., namely the initial historical problem from which classical
physics and the methods of differential calculus and integral calculus ori-
ginated and were developed. However, this notion of a strict proportional-
ity between cause and effect is wrong, in general, even for many other
problems of celestial mechanics.
   One of the fundamental questions that is posed in celestial mechanics,
where this vision fails, is the study of the consequences of the interaction
between the Sun and the various planets of the solar system, not in pairs, but
taken as a whole.
   The roots of the problem can be found in astronomical studies in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries: it regarded the problem of the n bodies,
which we mentioned in Chapter 2, a problem that was tackled by Lagrange
and Laplace himself, among others. The movements of the planets appear
regular in human time-scales, i.e. from the existence of historic documents
to date; this, on the surface, would appear to conﬁrm the idea that the small
disturbances in the dynamics of the planets that the planets themselves,
taken as a whole, reciprocally cause to each other do not intensify and do
not end up by compromising the general stability of the solar system.
However, even for the solar system, like any other system, we are faced
with the problem of whether the apparent stability maintains itself on a
time-scale that is much longer than the human one.
   The question has various aspects that complicate it further. One particu-
lar problem is emblematic and is worth remembering: the problem of the
resonance between the revolution movements of Jupiter and Saturn. It has
been known from ancient times that the ratio between the revolution
periods of these two planets was circa 2/5: for each two orbits that Saturn
makes, Jupiter makes ﬁve. This means that Saturn and Jupiter, periodically,
ﬁnd themselves in a position of maximum reciprocal vicinity always at the
138   15 : Dynamical systems and chaos

      same point in their orbits and in the same position with respect to the Sun.
      We would therefore expect the following type of resonance phenomenon:
      the mutual attraction between Jupiter and Saturn causes periodic disturb-
      ances to the movement of the two planets, which are always equal and
      always occur at the same position in each of the two orbits. These individual
      periodical disturbances caused by the Jupiter–Saturn attraction, even if the
      latter is small with respect to the attractive force of the Sun–Jupiter and the
      Sun–Saturn, and if the two periods are exactly in the ratio 2/5, should give
      rise to a bona ﬁde resonance phenomenon and cause increasingly signiﬁcant
      effects over time, in line with the typical behaviour of chaotic dynamics: the
      ampliﬁcation of small disturbances. The orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, if this
      schema is correct, would not be stable.
         The issue is that the precision of the available measurements does not
      enable us to determine whether the said 2/5 ratio is ‘exactly’ the rational
      number that is written in decimal form 0.4000 . . . This 2/5, therefore,
      should be understood as a number ‘close’ to 2/5: not necessarily
      0.4000 . . . Perhaps it could be an irrational number, for instance,
      0.400010010001 . . . in which the ﬁrst ﬁgure that is not 0 does not appear
      because the precision of the measurements is not able to provide it. If the
      periods were incommensurable, there would not be long-term resonance
      and there would not be an accumulation of disturbances causing instability.
      The mathematician Karl Weierstrass, in the 1870s, however, had observed
      how difﬁcult it was to accept the idea that the answer to the question of the
      solar system’s stability had to depend only on the precision of a measure-
      ment of periods.61

        61
            Weierstrass linked this point to the problem of the non-convergence of certain trigo-
      metric series that were obtained when trying to write the equation of the orbit of the planets
      around the Sun, taking into account the mutual interactions between the bodies of the solar
      system. In particular, the problem originated from the use of the Fourier series development of
      functions, a technique of linear mathematics commonly used to describe periodic phenom-
      ena, whose convergence, however, in that case, presented grave difﬁculties. The issue
      extended and then ended up touching on the problem of the continuity of the set of real
      numbers and the foundations of mathematics itself. The problem is very delicate, and is at the
      origin of Poincaré’s studies, which ﬁrst led to the ‘discovery’ of chaos. Weierstrass convinced
      himself that the problem of the stability of the planetary orbits and, in general, of a system of
      n bodies had to be tackled in a completely new way with respect to the ordinary techniques of
      mathematical analysis of that era. The prize that the King of Sweden, Oscar II, who wished to
      provide proof of his interest in scientiﬁc progress, had decided to award an important
      discovery in the ﬁeld of mathematical analysis, gave Weierstrass the opportunity to invite
      the mathematicians of that period to investigate whether there was a new way to solve the
      problem. The prize, as we have already mentioned (p. 24, note 12), was awarded to Poincaré
      the following year, for his fundamental study that appeared, more than a century later, as the
      ﬁrst real description of chaos in mathematical terms (Bottazzini, 1999).
                                        The question of the stability of the solar system   139

   An important element in the solution of the problem of the stability of the
orbits was proposed at a later date, when, in 1954, the Russian mathemat-
ician Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov formulated a renowned theorem,
which was then demonstrated in 1962 by Vladimir Igorevich Arnold and
Jürgen Moser, known as the KAM theorem, taken from the initials of the
three scholars (Arnold, 1987; Peterson, 1993; Burke Hubbard and Hub-
bard, 1994). According to the KAM theorem, in certain conditions, stable
orbits, in reality, are much more numerous than the unstable ones, because,
for sufﬁciently small perturbations, such as the Jupiter–Saturn attraction
with respect to the Sun–Jupiter and Sun–Saturn attractions, they can have
orbits that are not periodic but so-called quasiperiodic, the possibility of
which had already been foreseen by Lagrange and Laplace; orbits that
remain, so as to speak, in a region of stability in the neighbourhood of the
unperturbed orbit, even for irrational values of the ratio between the two
periods, as long as they are close to 2/5. However, it has never been proven
that the solar system satisﬁes the conditions established by the KAM
theorem.
   The stability properties of the model and therefore of the solar system
remained unclear. The problem lay not so much in the technical limitations
of astronomy, as rather in the lack of clarity regarding mathematical con-
cepts of the stability of dynamical systems that was encountered and in the
technical failings resulting from this.
   In more recent years, Jacques Laskar (1989) conducted numerical simu-
lations of the evolution of the solar system. According to the results, there
are numerous resonances, the solutions of the equations of motion do not
converge in stable, or periodic or quasiperiodic orbits. The dynamics of the
solar system are such that they would appear to exponentially amplify a
disturbance Dx0 according to a law such as the following:

                              Dx(t) ¼ Dx0 et=5

expressing time t in millions of years.
  This means, for instance, that an error in the determination of the initial
conditions of the motion of a planet to the order of a ten billionth would
become a 100 per cent error in approximately 100 000 000 years. In other
words, considering the solar system in its entirety, the conclusion of Las-
kar’s simulations is that the movements of the planets are chaotic and that,
basically, in an interval of time in the order of 100 000 000 years, they
become unpredictable. As Laskar himself observed, however, in reality,
even though the idea of a chaotic solar system may seem surprising, and
140   15 : Dynamical systems and chaos

      may even turn our conception of the world, built on centuries of stability,
      upside down, it is rather the opposite that should seem extraordinary,
      knowing, after Poincaré, that the majority of dynamical systems cannot
      be integrated and are therefore not subject to this type of behaviour.
         The problem of whether the solar system is stable or not, in any event, is
      far from being solved for good. On one hand, in fact, there is the intrinsic
      stability of the evolution of the dynamical system that we use as a model of
      the solar system (Newton’s renowned law); but on the other hand, assuming
      that we possess the complete law of motion of the solar system is asking too
      much. In reality, what we possess here, as in all natural and social systems,
      is merely a set that is very large but not unlimited, of observations regarding
      how the system has behaved in the past; based on these, we have attempted
      to deﬁne a valid law for future evolution without limitations of time (Casti,
      2000), forgetting that the model constructed is inevitably an approximate
      model, as are all models, due to the limited nature of the data on which the
      dynamic law is based.
                   Strange and chaotic
 16                attractors



Some preliminary concepts
In the early 1970s, mathematicians David Ruelle and Floris Takens intro-
duced the concept of the strange attractor to describe the phenomenon of
turbulence (Ruelle and Takens, 1971; see also Ruelle, 1991). A strange
attractor is a subset of points in the phase space that is fundamentally
different to that of the objects belonging to ordinary Euclidean geometry;
it is a geometric object characterized by a dimension that is not an integer
number. The French mathematician of Polish origin Benoı̂t Mandelbrot,
also in the 1970s, coined the expression ‘fractal’ to indicate geometric
objects whose dimension is not integer62 (Mandelbrot, 1975): strange
attractors are fractal objects.
   An ordinary attractor and a strange one are different objects from a topo-
logical point of view,63 as we cannot obtain a strange attractor simply by de-
forming an ordinary attractor, without generating the fragmentation of such.
   Chaotic attractor and strange attractor are different concepts. By indi-
cating an attractor as ‘chaotic’, we are referring to the chaotic dynamics of

   62
      To discuss the non-integer dimension of fractal objects necessitates the introduction of a
new (and more general) deﬁnition of the concept of dimension, with respect to the one
commonly used in Euclidean geometry, within which we speak only of spaces with dimension
one, two, three or, possibly, any integer number greater than three. A redeﬁnition, that includes
the ordinary Euclidean dimension as a particular case, can be given in various ways; the one
most frequently used was provided before the birth of fractal geometry by the work of Felix
Hausdorff (1919) and Abram Samoilovich Besicovich (1934, 1935) and this is why it is
referred to as the Hausdorff–Besicovich dimension (we will return to this in chapter 19).
The concepts of dimension and fractal objects are illustrated in numerous texts, for example:
Mandelbrot (1975); Peitgen and Richter (1986); Falconer (1985, 1990); Pickover (1990,
1994); Crilly, Earnshaw and Jones (1991); Jones (1991); Schroeder (1991); Peitgen, Saupe
and Jürgens (1992); Czyz (1994); Frankhauser (1994); Vulpiani (1994); Abarbanel (1996).
   63
      Two geometric objects are equivalent from a topological point of view if there is a
transformation that enables us to pass from one to the other without breaking them. For
example, a circumference and a square are topologically equivalent, just as a sphere and a cube,
while an annulus and a rectangle are not, just as a torus (see p. 130, note 58) and a cube are not.
142   16 : Strange and chaotic attractors

      the system in which the attractor originates, not to the geometric shape of
      the latter: we are therefore referring to an attractor generated by a dynamic
      which largely depends on the initial conditions, but whose orbits are con-
      ﬁned to a limited region in the phase space. By indicating an attractor as
      ‘strange’, on the other hand, we are referring to its geometric properties,
      because we say that it is a fractal object. The question we ask ourselves is
      whether the strangeness, i.e. a characteristic of the geometric form, and
      chaoticity, i.e. a characteristic of the underlying dynamics, are two different
      perspectives, on the basis of which we can deﬁne the same object, or
      whether strange attractors and chaotic attractors are, on the contrary,
      fundamentally different objects.
         In most cases chaotic attractors are strange and strange attractors are
      chaotic, which forms the common premise to distinguish between the two
      concepts (this was true for the ﬁrst non-ordinary attractors encountered).
      However, cases of strange attractors that are not chaotic have been de-
      scribed, both in a theoretical ambit (Grebogi et al., 1984) and in experi-
      mentally observed phenomena (Ditto et al., 1990), as well as cases of
      chaotic attractors which are not strange (Holden and Muhamad, 1986;
      Grebogi, Ott and Yorke, 1987).
         In this regard, we ﬁnd the renowned example of the two-dimensional
      map, known as Arnold’s cat map (Schroeder, 1991), proposed by the
      Russian mathematician Vladimir Arnold, who demonstrated it using the
      image of a cat’s head (Figure 16.1).
         We assume a square with side l whose points are identiﬁed by a system of
      x and y coordinates, centred at the bottom left vertex. Each iteration of
      Arnold’s map involves three steps:

      (1) extension along the x axis, according to the following map:

                                            xnþ1 ¼ xn þ yn                              (16:1)

      (2) extension along the y axis, according to the following map:

                                            ynþ1 ¼ xn þ 2yn                             (16:10 )

      (3) recomposition of the square with side l, starting from the ﬁgure
          obtained from the previous deformations, subtracting l from the xnþ1
          and the ynþ1 that exceed l.64

        64
           The operation described in step (3) as a geometric operation can be seen, from an
      arithmetic point of view, as the result of a calculation that attributes the values of the
                                                                       Some preliminary concepts     143




                                    (a)



                            (b)




                                                         (c)




                     Figure 16.1 The ﬁrst iteration of Arnold’s cat map.


   The steps of Arnold’s cat map are shown in Figure 16.1: steps (1) and (2)
in the transformation are indicated by (a), and step (3) is indicated by (b)
and (c).
   In the subsequent iterations, repeating steps (1), (2), and (3) in sequence,
the points increasingly distance themselves from one another, while remain-
ing within the surface of the square that contained the original image,
according to a typical chaotic evolution. However, at a certain point, and
this is the interesting aspect, the original image recomposes itself as it was at
the start (this is known as the Poincaré recurrence65 phenomenon; see
Crutchﬁeld et al., 1986). The image is therefore a chaotic attractor, due to
the progressive distancing of the points from one other, which indicates the
instability of the trajectories, but it is not strange, because the points,
moving in a limited space, end up in their initial positions, re-forming the

remainders of the divisions xnþ1 =l and ynþ1 =l to xnþ1 and ynþ1 , respectively; the operation is
called ‘modulus’ (mod):

                                      xnþ1 ¼ xnþ1 (mod l)
                                                                                           (16:2)
                                      ynþ1 ¼ ynþ1 (mod l)

  65
      It can be proved (Poincaré recurrence theorem) that systems of limited size that contain
only discrete elements repeat their evolution after a sufﬁciently long time; more generally, if
the system has a ﬁxed total energy that restricts its dynamics to bounded subsets of its phase
space, then the system will eventually return closer to any given initial state than any arbitrary
distance.
144   16 : Strange and chaotic attractors

      initial image. This is a simple and elegant demonstration and illustration of
      one of the principles of chaos: the underlying order of an apparently
      random evolution of a system.
         In all the cases of models of oscillating systems described in Part 1, with
      one exception, the chaotic pendulum (Model 4), we used a two-dimensional
      phase space in which we observed ordinary attractors made up of one point
      or a closed line (the limit cycle). It is important to note that systems of
      differential equations with two variables cannot give rise to strange attract-
      ors. In fact the latter cannot exist in two-dimensional phase spaces, but can
      only exist in phase spaces with more than two dimensions; on a two-
      dimensional surface, in fact, the orbit generated by a system of differential
      equations is a closed line, as with the harmonic oscillator (Chapter 9), or
      gives rise to an ordinary attractor, i.e. it aims towards an attractor point or a
      limit cycle, as occurs, for example, with the orbit of a damped pendulum
      (Chapter 8). An orbit different to the two preceding ones would be a line of
      inﬁnite length, which, because it is contained in a limited region of a
      surface, necessarily has to intersect itself in one or more points. This latter
      case, however, cannot occur, because, if it did, for a point in the phase space
      in which the orbit intersects itself, we would have two possible directions of
      the dynamics, which would go against the theorem of existence and unique-
      ness of the solutions of a differential equation.66 In other words, this means
      that models in the form of differential equations (i.e. the dynamical systems)
      can be chaotic only if characterized by at least three independent
      state variables. Only in this case can an orbit be a line of inﬁnite length
      which, although conﬁned to a limited region, never intersects itself, because
      it has at least a third dimension available for ‘lifting itself’ above the branch
      of the encountered curve and thus, we could say, ‘climbing over’ the
      intersection.

        66
            The theorem of existence and uniqueness, as it is sometimes called for the sake of
      brevity, can be applied to the case of a dynamical system because the hypotheses on which
      the theorem is based are satisﬁed due to the fact that a dynamical system, basically, describes a
      movement in the phase space, which is necessarily characterized by continuity, and instant-
      aneous, univocally deﬁned and non-inﬁnite velocities. By virtue of the theorem of existence
      and uniqueness, an orbit cannot intersect itself at any point, neither by having two different
      directions (i.e. two separate tangents), nor by passing through the same point again in the
      same direction (i.e. with the same tangent); given a dynamical system and a point, the orbit
      passing through that point is unique. This is the foundation of determinism: given the
      evolutive law and the initial state, the evolution is univocally determined. The impossibility
      of the existence of different attractors in a two-dimensional space, other than a point or a
      limit cycle, is substantially the concept of the renowned and fundamental theorem of Poin-
      caré–Bendixon (for a discussion of this theorem, see for example Hirsch and Smale, 1974;
      Beltrami, 1987; Bellomo and Preziosi, 1995).
                                                                     Some preliminary concepts     145

   If the dynamical system is controlled by forces that depend on time (this
can occur only if the forces considered are external to the system in ques-
tion, such as the forced pendulum, Model 4, described in Chapter 9),
namely if the system is not autonomous, then time also comes into play,
directly or indirectly, as a third coordinate needed to describe the dynamics.
In this case chaos can arise even with two coordinates only, because time is
added in what is called an ‘essential’ way, i.e. in such a way that it cannot be
ignored without losing a fundamental element that characterizes the sys-
tem’s evolution.
   The forced pendulum, in certain particular situations, can demonstrate
chaotic evolution. To describe its dynamics we need to consider, more than
for the other non-chaotic models of the pendulum, a variable dependent on
time, imposed by the fact that a force that varies with time acts externally to
the system. This is, in actual fact, a non-autonomous system, in which the
total resulting force depends explicitly on time; therefore, the differential
equation that describes the system is also non-autonomous. Basically we
also need to take into account the fact that the force acting on the system is
not only determined by the state of the pendulum during oscillation.
   In order to be able to ‘contain’ the system’s orbit, the phase space must
now have an extra dimension with respect to the other cases of oscillation,
that regarding the dependence of the force on time, or even simply time.
Therefore, there must be a three-dimensional phase space. It is precisely the
presence of the third dimension that enables the orbit of the dynamical
system in question to pass through the same pair of coordinates q and q_
again, while continuing to satisfy the conditions of the theorem of existence
and uniqueness; in actual fact it is the third coordinate, time t, or a third
state variable in addition to the previous ones, that now assumes different
values at the two moments in time when the orbit passes through the same
values q and q_ .
   While a one- or two-dimensional dynamical system cannot be chaotic if it
is in continuous time, it can be, however, if it is in discrete time, i.e. if it is a
map. For dynamical systems described in discrete time by ﬁnite difference
equations, such as the logistic map that we introduced in Chapter 15 and to
which we will return in Chapters 21 and 22, we saw, in fact, that it is also
possible to have chaotic dynamics in a single dimension, i.e. even if the
system is described by a sole variable.67

  67
      More generally, it can be demonstrated that this can occur only if the map is not
invertible, i.e. if one can obtain the value xnþ1 starting from more than one value of xn .
This is precisely the case of the logistic map, which can be easily veriﬁed by using map (15.2):
xnþ1 ¼ 3:7xn (1  xn ). For example, we have the same xnþ1 in two cases:
146   16 : Strange and chaotic attractors

         Still on the subject of the different behaviour of differential equations and
      ﬁnite difference equations, it is important to note that the use of numerical
      methods to search for an approximate solution necessarily involves, in some
      way, the transformation of a differential equation into a ﬁnite difference
      equation, i.e. into a map. This occurs both because any numerical method,
      in itself, is not able to conceive inﬁnitesimals, and because any computer,
      used to obtain the numerical solution of an equation, works on a discrete set
      of numbers. Therefore, it might occur that the numeric algorithm also gives
      rise to chaos for a one-dimensional dynamical system, not because the
      model intrinsically envisages chaos, but because chaos can have been gen-
      erated by the approximate integration method used in practice.



      Two examples: Lorenz and Rössler attractors
      A chaotic system evolves towards a chaotic attractor that is almost always
      also a strange attractor: a curve (orbit) of inﬁnite length, because the
      evolution of the dynamical system may occur in inﬁnite time, at least in
      principle, that remains enclosed in a ﬁnite volume, without ever passing
      through the same point (Crutchﬁeld et al., 1986; Sprott, 1993). An open
      curve of inﬁnite length contained in a ﬁnite volume is possible only if the
      structure of the attractor is that of a curve that folds back on itself, that
      continually passes close to points that it has already passed, but never
      through the same points.
         Curves of inﬁnite length enclosed in a ﬁnite volume are not a new
      concept to geometry; they had already been studied towards the end of
      the nineteenth century, well before the study of strange attractors, in par-
      ticular by the Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano. One example that is
      particularly famous is that of a continuous curve of inﬁnite length (one of
      the so-called monster curves), known as ‘Peano’s curve’, that ‘ﬁlls’ the
      surface of a square (its description appears in numerous texts, for example:
      Simmons, 1963; Schroeder, 1991; Vulpiani, 1994; Bertuglia and Vaio,
      1997b).
         With the sole aim of presenting some examples of curves of inﬁnite length
      enclosed in a limited volume, without entering into the theoretical details of

                               xn ¼ 0:25 ) xnþ1 ¼ 3:7xn (1  xn ) ¼ 0:69375
                               xn ¼ 0:75 ) xnþ1 ¼ 3:7xn (1  xn ) ¼ 0:69375

      The linear map (15.1), xnþ1 ¼ 2xn , on the other hand, is an invertible function, i.e. we can
      obtain xnþ1 from a single xn (in this case this is called a bijective map) and does not give rise
      to chaos.
                                                               Lorenz and Rössler attractors   147

the models, Figures 16.2–16.4 show the two-dimensional projections of
two cases, from among the numerous renowned ones, of strange attractors
in a three-dimensional space that have nowadays become classical.
   The ﬁrst case, probably also the most famous example of a strange
attractor, as well as being the ﬁrst to be discovered, is the Lorenz
attractor (1963). It originates from a model that aims to describe the
stability and the onset of convective or turbulent motion in a ﬂuid heated
from the bottom and cooled from the top. The system’s equations are as
follows:
                               8
                               < x_ ¼ s(y  x)
                                 y_ ¼ xz þ rx  y                                  (16:3)
                               :
                                 z_ ¼ bz þ xy

in which parameters s, r, and b have a speciﬁc meaning within the physical
phenomenon that the model is aiming to describe, atmospheric dynamics,
which we will not be examining here. Variables x(t), y(t), and z(t) are not
spatial variables, but represent magnitudes referring, respectively, to the
remixing of the ﬂuid and to the horizontal and vertical variations in tem-
perature.




Figure 16.2 Lorenz attractor calculated for the following parameter values: s ¼ 5, r ¼ 15,
b ¼ 1 (two-dimensional projection on the xy plane).
148   16 : Strange and chaotic attractors




      Figure 16.3 Rössler attractor calculated with the following parameter values: a ¼ 0:2,
      b ¼ 0:2, c ¼ 5:7 (two-dimensional projection on the xy plane).


        A two-dimensional projection of the Lorenz attractor is shown in Figure
      16.2.68 The Lorenz attractor was generated by transforming the system into
      discrete time (dt is now the ﬁnite step from which the system’s variables
      have evolved at each iteration), i.e. in the form of the following map:
                              8
                              < xnþ1 ¼ xn þ s(yn  xn )dt
                                y    ¼ yn þ (  xn zn þ rxn  yn )dt                          (16:30 )
                              : nþ1
                                znþ1 ¼ zn þ (  bzn þ xn yn )dt

        The phase space in Figure 16.2 is obviously an abstract space and the
      attractor shown has nothing to do with the actual motion of the ﬂuid or of
        68
            The aspect of the broken line that the curves in Figures 16.2–16.4 show, particularly in
      certain parts of them, is due to the numerical generation of the attractor, which is conceived as
      a continuous and differentiable curve, but is drawn in ﬁnite steps.
                                                              Lorenz and Rössler attractors   149




Figure 16.4 Enlarged view of Figure 16.3 (two-dimensional projection onto the xy plane).



one of its molecules. The curve shown, obtained by integrating the equa-
tions of the model numerically, is the strange attractor of the Lorenz model,
a curve of inﬁnite length, if the steps of integration are inﬁnite, which never
intersects itself, while remaining conﬁned to a limited region in the phase
space (in Figure 16.2, the curve appears to intersect itself only due to the
effect of the projection of the depiction of the three-dimensional attractor
on the xy plane).
   The second example that we are going to illustrate is also very famous,
and is the attractor obtained by Otto Rössler (1976ab; see also Eubank and
Farmer, 1989), who attempted to write the simplest example of a dynamical
system featuring a chaotic attractor. The equations, which have a purely
abstract meaning and are not intended for the modelling of any phenom-
enon whatsoever, are as follows:
                               8
                               < x_ ¼ y  z
                                 y_ ¼ x þ ay                                       (16:4)
                               :
                                 z_ ¼ b þ z(x  c)

  Figure 16.3 shows a two-dimensional projection of the Rössler attractor.
  To generate the attractor, we wrote the system in the form of a map, using
the version of the equations in discrete time:
150   16 : Strange and chaotic attractors
                                 8
                                 < xnþ1 ¼ xn  (yn þ zn )dt
                                   y    ¼ yn þ (xn þ ayn )dt                    (16:40 )
                                 : nþ1
                                   znþ1 ¼ zn þ (b þ xn zn  czn )dt

         Figure 16.4 shows an enlarged view of a detail of Figure 16.3, the region
      in which the line (which is always the same one) seems to cross over itself
      numerous times (but the coordinates of the z variable are different, as the
      latter has been ‘squashed’ by the projection).
         Sensitivity to initial conditions is reﬂected in the fact that for these
      attractors, as for any strange or chaotic attractor (sacriﬁcing a little rigour
      for the sake of simplicity, from now on we will consider the two concepts
      to be identical), two initially close points, corresponding to two initial sets
      of values of the state variables close to one another, evolve distancing
      themselves from one another, but tend to move along the attractor inde-
      pendently. The result is that the initial set of points is dispersed as the
      evolution proceeds, scattering themselves on the attractor.



      A two-dimensional chaotic map: the baker’s map
      To better understand how a curve of inﬁnite length can be enclosed in a
      ﬁnite volume, it is useful to refer to some of the laws of transformation of a
      surface in itself and to trace the movements of a point on it, speciﬁed at the
      start of the series of transformations (we encountered an example of these
      transformations in Arnold’s cat map: equations (16.1), (16.1’) and (16.2)).
      For certain transformations, all points travel along open trajectories, i.e.
      they never return to a position that they have already occupied (this,
      however, is not true for Arnold’s cat map, which, after the transformation
      has been repeated a certain number of times, re-forms the original image; in
      fact we used this map as an example of an attractor that was not strange).
         We can imagine how a curve of inﬁnite length contained in a closed
      surface originates if we think of the movement of the points of that surface
      according to a determined law. The trajectory travelled by each point of
      that surface is an inﬁnite line, at least in principle, if the motion lasts for an
      inﬁnite time; the trajectory of each point remains conﬁned to the surface,
      but in general no point passes the same position that it has previously
      occupied (Arnold’s cat map is an exception to this).
         A renowned example of a deterministic law with two variables, the two
      coordinates of the points of a surface, that ‘remixes’ the points of the surface
      itself is the so-called baker’s map (Farmer, Ott and Yorke, 1983; see also
      Nicolis and Prigogine, 1987; Schroeder, 1991; Moon, 1992). It can be
                                                           A two-dimensional chaotic map   151

expressed in mathematical terms and depicted in a fairly simple way. Each
point, identiﬁed by a pair of coordinates x, y, belonging to the surface of a
unit square, undergoes a change of coordinates according to the following
law:

      for 0 # x < 1=2        xnþ1 ¼ 2xn           ynþ1 ¼ yn =2
                                                                                (16:5)
      for 1=2 # x # 1 xnþ1 ¼ 2xn  1 ynþ1 ¼ yn =2 þ 1=2

   The transformation represented by the map (16.5), even if it occurs in a
single step, can be visibly understood very simply if we identify two subse-
quent phases for them, as shown in Figure 16.5, in which the circle and
the cross approximately demonstrate the dynamics of the two points of the
surface: ﬁrst of all, for each point, the x coordinate is doubled and the
y coordinate is halved; therefore a square with a side of 1 is transformed
into a rectangle with a side of 2, along the x axis and with a side of 1/2,
along the y axis; subsequently, the right half of the rectangle is superposed
over the left half.
   The result of the transformation is a square again, but the points on its
surface are arranged differently with respect to the previous step (with the
exception of the point on the vertex of the coordinates (0,0), which is a ﬁxed
point of the transformation).
   The transformations that the points of the surface progressively undergo
recall those that a baker performs when, during the remixing of the dough,
stretches the dough in one direction, squashing it and ﬂattening it with his
hands, cuts it and brings a part back upon itself, returning the dough to its
original shape, but with the points of the dough in new positions. In map
(16.5), excluding the cited ﬁxed point, as the transformation is repeated, no
point will ever return to the same coordinates that it had in a previous
transformation, and will travel an open trajectory of inﬁnite length (if




                   n=1                                        n=2




                   n=2                                       n=3

     Figure 16.5 Transformation generated by two applications of the baker’s map.
152   16 : Strange and chaotic attractors

      subsequent transformations are inﬁnite), conﬁned to the surface of the
      square: a curve with fractal properties.
         One aspect needs to be clearly understood: the remixing that the map
      (16.5) causes is not due to the fact that each point goes ‘all over the place’
      jumping here and there inside the square, something which is not really
      true,69 as rather the fact that close points travel along diverging trajectories.
      The trajectories are obviously conﬁned to the unit square, whose area
      remains constant (i.e. the system is conservative); therefore the trajectories
      have to fold back on themselves, with the result that a cloud of points initially
      gathered in one part of the surface disperses over the course of the evolution
      to all the regions of the square (see the examples shown in Figure 16.6).
         We are faced with a dynamic that shares several important aspects with
      that of the logistic map illustrated in (16.2): for (16.5), as for (16.2), the
      dynamics are described by known, deterministic laws of motion, that can be
      calculated recursively. Furthermore, the distances travelled by a point in an
      iteration do not observe laws of linear proportionality, as occurs instead
      with the linear map (16.1). Finally, the distances between two points can
      increase or decrease during an iteration (16.5), as for map (16.2); it is easy to
      recognize this, even without calculations, simply by looking at Figure 16.6.
      The fact that two points, that are close to each other after an iteration, can
      considerably distance themselves from one another after the next iteration,
      as occurs for example with points A and B, is an index of the sensitivity to
      initial conditions, one of the elements that characterizes the chaotic situ-
      ation. Both the logistic map (16.2) and the baker’s map (16.5) are nonlinear
      maps, the ﬁrst one-dimensional, the second two-dimensional, that both give
      rise to chaos (with the logistic map, in reality, chaos is generated only in
      speciﬁc circumstances, as we will see in Chapters 21 and 22).
         It is evident that the analogy between transformation (16.5) and the
      transformation that the baker actually makes on the dough is only
      partial and approximate. There are various reasons for this. First of all,
      because in the case of the remixing of dough, it is extremely unlikely (but in
      principle not impossible) that the particles of dough, at random, return fully
      or partly to the same initial coordinates; in map (16.5), which, on the other
      hand, is a mathematical model, the evolution is deterministic, and not
      probabilistic, and therefore the points deﬁnitely never return to their initial
      coordinates.

        69
           The remixing of the points caused by (16.5) in reality is not complete, as there are some
      invariants; for example, the points of rational coordinates remain conﬁned to the square’s
      subset made up of the pairs of rational coordinates; in the same way, the points of irrational
      coordinates will continue to have irrational coordinates.
                                                                        A two-dimensional chaotic map   153


                                            C3(0.6; 0.925)

                                                                                 C2(0.8; 0.85)
                                       D1(0.4; 0.8)

            E2(0; 0.75)
                                                             D3(0.6; 0.7)

                                                                                  C1(0.9 ;0.7)

                 B3(0.2; 0.55)


                                                 E1(0.5; 0.5)


             E3(0; 0.375)                                                      D2(0.8; 0.4)

                            A1(0.2; 0.3)

                                 B1(0.3; 0.2)


                                 A2(0.4; 0.15)                  B2(0.6; 0.1)
                                                                                A3(0.8; 0.075)

        Figure 16.6 First two iterations of the baker’s map (16.5) for some points.



   A similar phenomenon in physics, the mathematical formulation of which
is however much more complicated, if not impossible without the use of
drastic approximations, is, for example, the remixing of a liquid, or the
mixing of two different liquids (Crutchﬁeld et al., 1986). By remixing a liquid,
molecules that were initially close to one another, distance themselves from
one another, then get closer again and then distance themselves and so on, but
the orbit of each molecule remains conﬁned to the container. In principle, the
orbits are of inﬁnite length, because the action of remixing, i.e. the succession
of transformations of the coordinates of each molecule, can be inﬁnite.
   Abstracting a little, we can talk of points in the liquid that, under the
action of successive transformations, follow an orbit of inﬁnite length that
takes them ‘close’ to any other point in the liquid, where ‘close’ means a
distance that is less than any arbitrary pre-established distance. In a model
of this nature, each point in the liquid follows a trajectory with fractal
properties.70

  70
      A dynamics of this type, i.e. with fractal properties, also occurs in the irregular motion
of solid particles of small dimensions suspended in a ﬂuid, called Brownian motion (Nicolis
and Prigogine, 1987; Moon, 1992).
               Chaos in real systems and
 17            in mathematical models


Phase space, orbit, basin of attraction and attractor are all mathematical
concepts and as such are abstract; this means that they relate more to the
abstract models that we construct of the processes observed, rather than to
the processes themselves. In a certain sense, we imagine attractors and
dynamical orbits on the basis of our mathematization of phenomena
(when we succeed in doing so). But the passage from the real system, that
we assume to be deterministic, despite the fact that its evolution might seem
unpredictable to us, to the mathematical model that describes it, from a
certain viewpoint, is an arbitrary passage, because a real system and its
mathematical model are conceptually found in two completely different
spheres. The correspondence between the two is based only on the fact that
very often the model created ‘works well’ in predicting the behaviour of the
real system, as we have already seen. The differential equations of the model
are nonlinear (in general) and deterministic, so much so that often we call
them the law that controls the real corresponding process; they give rise to
deterministic chaos that seems to do a good job of reproducing the phe-
nomenology observed. But it is still the chaos of a model, i.e. a chaos of a
mathematical nature; the problem is linking this with the chaos observed.
This passage, however, is not always easy to make.
   The fact that chaos is possible starting from even very simple determin-
istic laws, and that the chaos encountered in models corresponds to the
evolutive processes of real systems, was an important discovery, and has led
us to hope that the phenomena considered up until now to be random, i.e.
impossible to describe without the use of statistical laws, are in reality
chaotic, i.e. dependent on deterministic laws. If this is true, once the laws
have been identiﬁed, the systems would always remain unpredictable, but in
some way would be more comprehensible. Attractors (mathematical con-
cept) are characterized by a basin of attraction that provides the attractors
themselves with the stability that distinguishes them. Other phenomena,
whose manifestations are (apparently) characterized by unpredictability,
such as ﬂuctuations in the stock market, heartbeats, the metabolism of a
cell, life itself in biological terms, etc., according to this version, could
                                       Chaos in real systems and in mathematical models   155

(perhaps) be ‘controlled’ by chaotic attractors which, despite their
unpredictable nature, would nevertheless intrinsically maintain them in a
condition of relative stability, as long as variations in external conditions
are not too large. In other words, chaotic phenomena, unlike stochastic
ones, are in a certain sense ‘robust’ phenomena, because they are driven by a
strange attractor that ‘sucks them back’ into a state of dynamic stability,
until such time as a too large a perturbation removes them from the basin of
attraction of that attractor, transferring them to the basin of attraction of
another attractor. Basically, if this is true, it would be sufﬁcient to identify
the attractor (or attractors) that an effective model of the process envisages,
to ‘understand’ the dynamics of an apparently unpredictable real process.
   Chaos in models is also linked to another matter that becomes important
only when a dynamical system is made to evolve. This is a concept funda-
mental to mathematics in general, that of real numbers, and the fact that the
onset of instability can in some way be linked to the numerical approxima-
tion that we inevitably have to make when a real number has to be replaced
by a rational number ‘close’ to it, in order to be used in practice, namely in
measurements.
   To better clarify this point, let us return to the question raised by Weier-
strass regarding the assumption of a rational ratio equal to 2/5 between the
periods of revolution of Jupiter and Saturn, which we mentioned in Chapter
15. Weierstrass found it unacceptable that the stability of the orbits could
depend on the rationality or otherwise of a certain ratio that, above all,
could only be measured approximately. Stating that the ratio between the
periods of the two planets is exactly 2/5 is the same as stating that all the
inﬁnite decimal places of that ratio are known and equal to 0, and that this
number is 0.40000 . . . This only makes sense from a mathematical, i.e.
abstract, point of view, whereas physics, like all the experimental sciences,
is founded on experimental measurements. We will never be capable of
formally establishing, on a purely mathematical level, whether the value
obtained from measurements is an approximate value of a rational or an
irrational number. Therefore, if this is true, how can the stability of an
observed orbit be established? In other words, does an orbit that becomes
perturbed in some way behave like a limit orbit, towards which all orbits
‘very close’ to it tend, or not?
   In chaotic systems, like in chaotic models, small initial differences be-
come increasingly less negligible over time, and, so to speak, emerge from
the shadows and in the long term give rise to evolutions that are macro-
scopically different. This is deterministic chaos: the substantial and intrinsic
unpredictability of the future evolution of both a real system and an
abstract model.
156   17 : Chaos in real systems and in mathematical models

         The result that Poincaré was the ﬁrst to unexpectedly stumble upon in his
      study of the stability of planetary orbits, i.e. the emergence of chaotic
      phenomena, was disconcerting even on a philosophical level. The fact that
      a small perturbation that he introduced into the equation (namely the
      model) of a periodic, stable orbit, through a parameter with a very small
      value, gave rise to an orbit which behaved in a way that we now call
      chaotic, clashed with a deep-rooted conviction. As Poincaré himself wrote
      in his book Science et méthode: ‘A very small cause which escapes our notice
      determines a considerable effect that we cannot fail to see, and then we say
      that the effect is due to chance. If we knew exactly the laws of nature and
      the situation of the universe at the initial moment, we could predict exactly
      the situation of the same universe at a succeeding moment. But even if it
      were the case that the natural laws had no longer any secret for us, we could
      still know the situation approximately. If that enabled us to predict the
      succeeding situation with the same approximation, that is all we require,
      and we should say that the phenomenon had been predicted, that it is
      governed by the laws. But it is not always so; it may happen that small
      differences in the initial conditions produce very great ones in the ﬁnal
      phenomena. A small error in the former will produce an enormous error
      in the latter. Prediction becomes impossible, and we have the fortuitous
      phenomenon’ (1908, Part I, Chapter 4).
         As we said in Chapter 3, the vision developed by classical determinism
      fails on this point. According to the latter we assume that the same cause, in
      similar circumstances, produces similar effects and, vice versa, similar
      effects correspond to similar causes, according to a rigid conception of the
      relations between the phenomena. In the evolution of real systems, this is
      not always true, and therefore we talk about the sensitivity of a system to
      the initial conditions, which, however, can never be ‘completely’ known
      and, therefore, different evolutions can originate ‘within’ the area of ap-
      proximation with which we deﬁne the initial state. In the model that we
      construct of the system, on the other hand, we talk about a deterministic
      law also characterized by sensitivity to the initial conditions; in this case,
      this means that in the numbers that quantify the values of the state functions
      it makes small differences or small approximations, relegated to decimal
      places far from the point, emerge from the ‘negligible’ zone.
         The problem, as we have said, is strictly linked to the concept of a real
      number and to the fact that we generally associate a real number to a
      coordinate on a straight line, i.e. to a point on that same line. We imagine
      a geometric object made up of points like the line to be continuous, and at the
      same time, we conceive the set of real numbers to be continuous (whereas
      neither the inﬁnite set of natural numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . , nor that of rational
                                               Chaos in real systems and in mathematical models     157

umbers is continuous).71 The real number concept is a cornerstone of
mathematical analysis and, therefore, of the very idea of the differential
equation, the fundamental tool used to construct dynamical systems. Any
measurement, however, provides a number that cannot have inﬁnite decimal
places; this means that when we measure and operate on measured data, we
do not use the set of real numbers, but a much more limited subset of the
same, that of rational numbers, ﬁnite or periodic decimals.72
   We associate the idea of ‘inﬁnite’ precision to real numbers, but in practice
we necessarily ‘confuse’ them with their subset made up of rational numbers.
Rational numbers have a mechanism, known as a ‘period’ that enables any
decimal place to be obtained, without having to explicitly calculate all the
previous numbers: in fact the result of the division between two whole
numbers (by deﬁnition a rational number) always gives a periodic result,
this property allows us to know any decimal place by just iterating the
period, once this has been identiﬁed, without going on computing the
division explicitly. For real, non-rational numbers, on the other hand, this
is no longer true and each of the inﬁnite decimal places must be calculated
step by step in order to determine that number with ‘absolute’ precision.

  71
       A renowned theorem of Georg Cantor proves that between the set of natural numbers
and that of rational numbers there exists a one-to-one correspondence (i.e. they are bijective
sets): these sets, so as to speak, are ‘inﬁnite to the same order’ or ‘equipotent’, which, in
practice means that they are interchangeable. Another of Cantor’s theorems demonstrates
that it is not possible to establish any one-to-one correspondence whatsoever between the set
of rational numbers and that of real numbers; they are sets of different cardinality, so to
speak; the inﬁnity that characterizes the set of real numbers, for example, is of an order higher
than that of the set of rational numbers (and therefore also of the set of natural numbers). The
ﬁrst, in a manner of speaking, is an inﬁnite ‘more inﬁnite’ than the second. More precisely, we
say that the rational numbers are countably inﬁnite, i.e. it is possible to enumerate all the
rational numbers by means of an inﬁnite sequence of ordinal numbers. By contrast, the real
numbers are uncountable, i.e. it is impossible to enumerate them by means of an inﬁnite
sequence of ordinal numbers, as the latter are not ‘numerous’ enough. These discoveries
underlie the idea of cardinality, which is expressed by saying that two sets have the same
cardinality if there is a bijective correspondence between them.
   72
       The standard division of rational numbers into ﬁnite decimals and periodic decimals, in
reality, is merely a scholastic habit that doesn’t consider any intrinsic property of rational
numbers. Any rational number, in fact, can be written in an inﬁnite number of different ways,
some with a period, others without, depending on the numerical base adopted to represent
the number in question. However, apart from this, if we remain on the standard numerical
base of 10, any number usually called an ‘ﬁnite decimal’ can be written as a periodic number
in two different ways: (1) by adding a period made up of the single ﬁgure 0, or (2) by writing
the number with the last decimal place decreased by one unit and followed by the period 9.
For example, the number 2.3 (non-periodic) can also be written as 2.3000000 . . . (period 0)
or as 2.299999 . . . (period 9). It is not wrong, therefore, to state that the property that
characterizes any rational number is in fact the presence of a period; whether this is actually
written or not is simply a matter of representation.
158   17 : Chaos in real systems and in mathematical models

         In this profound difference between real numbers and rational numbers
      that we use to approximate them, we have the seed that generates chaos in a
      dynamical system (we will return to this point in Chapter 33). Let us
      imagine that we are using a set of real numbers, as we usually do when
      we apply mathematical analysis: for each particular ‘collection’ of real
      numbers that characterizes a state of a system, we have, in the evolution
      of the system, a particular sequence of ‘collections’ of real numbers that
      form the orbit of the system in question. As the use of any measurement tool
      and of any calculator necessarily imposes the use of ﬁnite decimal numbers,
      the result is approximate with respect to the ideal case already after the ﬁrst
      iteration. This means that, instead of continuing along the starting orbit, the
      system necessarily ‘jumps’ to a nearby orbit: if the system is unstable, the
      new orbit will increasingly distance itself from the initial theoretical, aban-
      doned one. The chaos actually lies in the fact that, taking a certain number
      of close points in the phase space, these will disperse over time to a region
      that is a chaotic (strange) attractor and that, as time passes, the dispersion
      into the chaotic attractor continues to increase, without the appearance of
      any ordinary attractor (point or closed line).
         We will return to chaos in real systems in Chapter 19, after we have
      clariﬁed some technical aspects regarding the problem of the stability of
      dynamical systems. In Chapter 18, therefore, we will be discussing the
      concept of stability with regard to models, with the primary aim of being
      able to establish the sensitivity of a dynamical system to the initial condi-
      tions, and therefore, of being able to characterize the degree of stability of
      the orbit and obtain an indication on the predictability of the same.
               Stability in dynamical
 18            systems



The concept of stability
As a mathematical model in the form of a dynamical system evolves, it
generates a sequence (sets) of numbers that represent states in a phase space,
i.e. an orbit; the meaning that is attributed to these (sets of) numbers
depends on different factors, as we have discussed on several previous
occasions. Of these, we have the problem of sensitivity to (small) changes
in the initial conditions, that is to say the study of ‘by how much’ said
changes inﬂuence (‘propagate’) the numerical values calculated for future
states, provoking large or small variations of the same. The stability char-
acteristics of the orbit have to be analysed, which requires, ﬁrst and fore-
most, a deﬁnition of stability and a method to quantify it. We will be
examining this in this section.
   A dynamical system appears unstable if its evolution is unpredictable,
because, as time passes, a small variation of the orbit can become increas-
ingly larger. This means that a small perturbation can cause large alterations
of the orbit that follows and that the evolution displays very particular
phenomenologies. From this point of view, even very simple models can
become unstable in certain conditions, a phenomenon overlooked by eight-
eenth century mathematicians.
   A dynamical system is unstable, in general, if the orbits established from
points near the phase space diverge exponentially, over time, i.e. if the
distance between the trajectories grows proportionally by a function et=t
where the t, called the Lyapunov time, is the time-scale according to which
two trajectories diverge from one another. The Lyapunov time therefore
characterises the actual ‘time horizon’ of the dynamical system; the smaller
it is, the more the system is unpredictable, chaotic, and the linear approxi-
mation becomes even less acceptable. We need to examine, therefore, to
what extent the solution of a differential equation (or of a map in discrete
time) is effectively a function that is sensitive to small variations of the
parameter values or of the boundary conditions.
160   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

         The stability of a model means ‘robustness’ of the function which solves a
      system of differential equations, that is to say its lack of sensitivity to small
      changes in the initial conditions. We can refer to stability at particular
      points of the evolutive trajectory (local stability), but we can also refer to
      stability of the entire trajectory, as in asymptotic stability. We could also
      discuss how an entire family of trajectories converges towards a set of stable
      points, an attractor, as well as the existence and characteristics of the latter.
         Furthermore, we can distinguish between two types of stability, depend-
      ing on the type of perturbation that is applied to the system. We talk, in fact,
      about the dynamic stability of the dynamical system (or of the model) if we
      are referring to the behaviour of the system in the face of a perturbation of
      the states at a certain point in its evolution. In this case, the stability of the
      system following the perturbation originating from the environment exter-
      nal to the system is under discussion. On the other hand, we talk about
      structural stability if we are referring to the behaviour of the dynamical
      system (or of the model) following perturbations that affect the values of
      the dynamical system’s parameters. In this second case, our attention is
      focused on the operating mechanism of the system, overlooking any alter-
      ation in environmental conditions.
         The point we are most interested in is the study of how a dynamical
      system reacts to perturbations to the initial conditions, namely the study of
      dynamic stability. This area has two main aspects. The ﬁrst regards the way
      in which the real system that the model reﬂects responds to actions origin-
      ating from outside the system itself, due to interference of some environ-
      mental element. The second aspect regards how the inevitable imprecision
      of measurements of the real system affect the determination of the initial
      conditions, in other words, how sensitive the dynamical system is to an
      improvement in the precision of the measured data.
         In this regard, we saw in Chapters 16 and 17, how the very discovery of
      the existence of a chaotic phenomenology by Poincaré towards the end
      of the nineteenth century originated from the problem of the stability of
      planetary orbits subjected to small perturbations caused by the presence of
      other planets, stability that was explored using mathematical techniques on
      a model obviously derived from that of Newton, and referred to the ﬁrst of
      the two cited aspects: how a planet reacts to its interaction with all of the
      others. More recently, however, Lorenz (1963), who we cited in Chapter 16
      with regard to the attractor that bears his name, returned to the question of
      chaos in a model, but this time concerning a problem that regards the
      second aspect, i.e. the different approximations with which he entered the
      numerical data describing the state of the atmosphere in different simula-
      tions in a program. In fact, James Gleick (1987) recounts how Lorenz
                                       A basic case: the stability of a linear dynamical system   161

realized that by iterating the system (16.3) starting from numerical values of
the state variables approximated in different ways, even simply by cutting
off numbers with different decimal places, different orbits were obtained
and, what is fundamental, the difference did not appear to disappear as the
system evolved, but became increasingly larger. The result was that the
points in the phase plane, during the course of their evolution, dispersed
following different orbits, which did not tend to gather in a single orbit, as
would have been the case, on the other hand, for a stable system with an
ordinary attractor. The different orbits that originated from the different
truncations, on the contrary, all tended towards the same region in the
phase space, the chaotic attractor shown in Figure 16.2.73
   Structural stability, as we have said, refers to the system’s behaviour
following changes that affect its parameters; the study of structural stability
mainly concerns, therefore, the creation and validation stages of a model. A
mathematical model, as we discussed in Chapter 2, is never a loyal and
complete reﬂection of any objective situation, but provides a picture of the
situation that is able to include only some aspects, which can be represented
by a great number of very different, and at times contradictory, models. The
modelling perspective implies, therefore, abandoning the vision of the
relationship between mathematics and reality as a one-to-one correspon-
dence (Israel, 1994, 1996, 1999; Boncinelli and Bottazzini, 2000). The
problem of choosing which elements to consider as the main ones of the
model and which as its corrections, and therefore which parameters to
insert in the model and in what form, is therefore fundamental. A ﬁrst
point that concerns structural stability, therefore, refers to the study of
how a change made to certain elements of the form of the equations
inﬂuences the dynamics generated by the model, while a second point refers,
on the other hand, to the effects that originate from the presence of con-
ceptual errors in the model itself or even just to the consequences of
imprecision and approximations in the values of the constants and the
parameters (Bellomo and Preziosi, 1995).


A basic case: the stability of a linear dynamical system
Let us further explore the stability of a linear dynamical system; to this end
we will actually be referring to the differential equation that deﬁnes its
evolution in the simplest case of all: a ﬁrst order equation with constant
  73
     Only later in the 1970s were the fractal properties of the Lorenz attractor and of
geometric ﬁgures in general deﬁned; when Lorenz described the attractor that bears his
name, the concept of fractal geometry had not yet emerged.
162   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

      coefﬁcients, focusing our attention on the stability of the solution function.
      We will reconsider Malthus’ law (4.2):

                                             x_ (t) ¼ k x(t)                               (4:2)

      where k is a constant parameter and t is time, an independent variable. If the
      initial condition is known, x(t0 ) ¼ x0 , then the general solution of (4.2) can
      be written as:

                                            x(t) ¼ x0 ek(tt0 )                           (18:1)

         When x0 ¼ 0, the solution becomes simply x ¼ 0 which we will call the
      unperturbed solution.
         Let us now suppose that the initial value x0 is not 0, but close to 0. In other
      words we are changing the previously established initial condition by a small
      value; we will call the new solution perturbed. How will the perturbed
      solution now act with the passing of time? Will it tend to return to the
      unperturbed solution x ¼ 0, thus progressively reducing the initial perturb-
      ation with a form of exponential decay, or will the small alteration intensify
      over time, giving rise to the increasing divergence of the function x(t) of the
      unperturbed solution? This depends on the sign of the parameter k.
         If k > 0, solution (18.1) is a function that increases (in absolute values)
      over time t. In this case the unperturbed solution x ¼ 0 is unstable, because
      small perturbations generate an x(t) that increasingly distances itself from
      x ¼ 0 as time passes; the initial perturbation x0 intensiﬁes and the system is
      unstable (Figure 18.1).
         If k < 0, (18.1) immediately shows that, as t increase, the x(t) solutions
      tend to return to x ¼ 0. In this case, the unperturbed solution x ¼ 0 is
      asymptotically stable with respect to the perturbation of the initial condi-
      tions (Figure 18.2).


                                 x
                                     k>0
                                                                          Perturbed
                                                                          solutions
                          x0
                                                                      Unperturbed
                     x=0                                              solution: x = 0

                                             t0                   t


      Figure 18.1 Perturbed solutions of the linear model (18.1): x ¼ 0 is the unstable solution.
                                                            Poincaré and Lyapunov stability criteria   163

                          x
                                                 k<0                     Perturbed
                   x0                                                    solutions


               x=0                                                   Unperturbed
                                                                     solution: x = 0

                              t0                                 t


  Figure 18.2 Perturbed solutions of the linear model (18.1): x ¼ 0 is the stable solution.



   If k ¼ 0, then (18.1) simply becomes x ¼ 0. If the initial state x0 ¼ 0 is
altered, the perturbed solution does not tend towards zero, nor does it
distance itself from zero, but it remains constant; we are in a condition of
indifferent equilibrium.
   The above can be generalized to the case of a linear equation of any order.
If the order is above the ﬁrst, however, the graphic representation is not as
simple and obvious as the case of the ﬁrst order differential equation
described above, because the geometric representation of the successive
derivatives is not as immediate as for the ﬁrst derivative.74



Poincaré and Lyapunov stability criteria
Let us now look more closely at what we mean by the dynamic stability of a
dynamical system such as (8.1):

                        dxi
                            ¼ Fi (x1 , . . . , xn , t)   i ¼ 1, 2 . . . , n                   (8:1)
                        dt

with t extended to arbitrarily large intervals and with initial conditions
xi (t0 ). We want to deﬁne criteria that can be adopted to establish, beyond

  74
      The case of a second order linear system like those discussed in Chapter 11 is particularly
interesting because in the latter a perturbation of the solution x ¼ 0 produces oscillations that
amplify and dampen, according to the values of the equation’s coefﬁcients. A real unstable
system that can be described effectively by a second order linear model occurs, for example, in
the case of noise captured by a microphone situated in front of the speaker that diffuses,
ampliﬁed, the sound captured by the microphone. In this situation, a small noise (perturbation
of the silence corresponding to the initial unperturbed state), passing from the microphone to
the ampliﬁer and to the speakers, and from these back to the microphone, ampliﬁer and
speakers again, and so on continually, again and again, intensiﬁes, generating a increasingly
louder whistle, a typical phenomenon of positive feedback, commonly called the Larsen effect.
164   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

      the simple approximate idea of instability based on intuition, when we can
      say that a (small) change in initial conditions generates a new orbit that,
      after a certain period of time, ‘has distanced itself’ from the unperturbed
      one beyond a pre-established distance. Obviously the term ‘change’ can be
      understood as a perturbation or as an effect of the improvement in the
      precision of measurements, which, inevitably, are affected by approxima-
      tions (errors).
         There are a number of criteria for dynamic stability.
         A ﬁrst criterion is that of stability according to Poincaré. Poincaré’s
      problem, as we have mentioned on several occasions, concerned the study
      of the stability of the planetary orbits. The deﬁnition of stability adopted in
      Poincaré’s era dated back to Siméon Denis Poisson and was the following:
      the trajectory of a moving point is stable when, tracing a circle or a sphere
      with radius r around an initial point, the moving point, after having exited
      this circle, or this sphere, re-enters it an inﬁnite number of times, regardless
      of how small r is (Sur les inégalités séculaires des moyens mouvements des
      planètes, Journal of the École Polytechnique, 1809, see Bottazzini, 2000,
      p. 67). In his book Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste (1892–
      99) Poincaré added the conditions that no body may distance itself to
      inﬁnity and then return, and that the distance between any two bodies of
      the (planetary) system considered cannot fall below a certain limit.
         The stability criteria adopted by Poincaré, basically, introduced a band,
      or better still, a sort of ‘tube’ of stability around the unperturbed orbit,
      within which a planet can move ‘jumping’ here and there, following per-
      turbations, but without ever distancing itself ‘too far’ from the unperturbed
      orbit. If this is so, the orbit of the planet is stable, even if subjected
      to perturbations due to the effect of its interaction with other planets75
      (Figure 18.3).
         In this criterion, all of the aspects of the system’s dynamics are not taken
      into consideration, only the system’s orbit in the phase plane; it must be
      stationary, i.e. it shouldn’t depend on time, which, in fact, never directly
      comes into play. This is a relatively undemanding criterion of so-called
      orbital stability that can only be applied to autonomous models, i.e. to
      dynamical systems governed by laws that do not expressly depend on time,
      made up of autonomous equations.


         75
            More precisely, a system is stable according to Poincaré, if by taking a positive number «,
      one can determine, as a consequence, another number d, with 0 < d # «, such that all the
      (stationary) trajectories that originated within the distance d from the initial point of the
      unperturbed orbit permanently remain within the maximum distance « from the unperturbed
      orbit (Jordan and Smith, 1977).
                                                                    Poincaré and Lyapunov stability criteria   165

                                 Perturbed orbits
             y
                                                                                 Unperturbed
                                                                                 stationary
                                                                                 orbit




                                                        Phase
                                                        space
                                 Band of stability
                                                                         x


       Figure 18.3 Orbital stability according to Poincaré in the phase space xy.




   This criterion, apart from its limitation of only being applicable to
stationary states generated by autonomous dynamical systems, is not ef-
fective in highlighting certain situations where divergences evolve over
time. For example, let us consider the oscillation of a linear pendulum
again (Model 1) and let us perturb the stationary movement by increasing
the ‘small’ initial amplitude. As we discussed in chapter 6, in a situation of
this nature, linear approximation is no longer acceptable; in this case the
dynamic law of the pendulum is system (7.1), that of the nonlinear pendu-
lum (Model 3). This means that the orbit in the phase plane (Figure 18.4)
deforms with respect to that of the elliptic form of the linear pendulum,
remaining, in any event, in the vicinity (‘close’, in the Poincaré sense) of the
elliptic orbit of the linear case.



                                     Perturbed stationary trajectories: xi (t)
        xi
                          d                                                        Unperturbed
                                                                                   stationary
                                                                                   orbit: Xi (t)



                 ε

                 ε

                                 d
                                                                             t
                     t0

                              Figure 18.4 Lyapunov stability in the space tx.
166   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

         As the oscillation periods are now different, the ellipse of the linear case
      and the orbit of the perturbed case are travelled in different times; in par-
      ticular, the pendulum that follows the perturbed orbit accumulates an in-
      creasing delay with respect to the one that follows the unperturbed orbit.
      This different behaviour over time escapes Poincaré’s criterion, which is only
      a criterion of orbital stability and doesn’t consider the increasing distance
      that is created between successive states, due no so much to the geometrical
      form of the orbits, but rather to the speed with which the latter are travelled.
         The criterion of stability introduced by Lyapunov,76 is more speciﬁc to
      the subject we are interested in, as the latter is also applicable to non-
      autonomous systems and is more restrictive than that of Poincaré [there is
      a vast amount of literature on the subject; see for example Elsgolts (1977);
      Jordan and Smith (1977); Beltrami (1987); Anosov and Arnold (1988);
      Arnold (1992); Bellomo and Preziosi (1995); Puu (2000); Riganti (2000)].
      In Lyapunov’s deﬁnition, the fact that the perturbed orbit stays ‘close’ to the
      unperturbed orbit is no longer satisfactory; now we ask that the evolution
      over time maintains the system close to that which evolves unperturbed.
         More speciﬁcally, the solution Xi (t) with i ¼ 1, 2 . . . , n of the system
      (8.1) is Lyapunov stable on t $ t0 if, given a positive arbitrary number «,
      a number d can be determined such that, for any other solution xi (t) of the
      system, whose initial value xi (t0 ) is such that:

                             jxi (t0 )  Xi (t0 )j < d with i ¼ 1, 2 . . . , n              (18:2)

      the following inequality is satisﬁed for each t $ t0 :

                              jxi (t)  Xi (t)j < «   with i ¼ 1, 2 . . . , n               (18:3)

      (compare Figure 18.4 with Figure 18.3, concerning stability according to
      Poincaré, in which time does not appear explicitly; note that in Figure 18.4,
        76
            The Russian mathematician Alexandr Mikhailovich Lyapunov, towards the end of the
      nineteenth century, an era that marked a fundamental stage in the long process of establishing
      the fundamentals of inﬁnitesimal calculus, which had started at the end of the seventeenth
      century, conducted a series of studies in which he investigated, on a very general level, the
      problem of the stability of the solutions of a differential equation (republished in Lyapunov,
      1954; see Parks, 1992). It is worth remembering that his studies on instability led to an open
      debate, starting from 1905, with the astronomer George Darwin, son of Charles Darwin,
      who sustained that the Moon had separated from the Earth when the latter was still a liquid
      mass. According to George Darwin, the process of detachment had given rise to a stable
      conﬁguration: the Moon. According to Lyapunov, on the contrary, the solution of the process
      was unstable and the liquid mass would not have been able to break and cause the detach-
      ment of the satellite. Only in 1915 was George Darwin’s idea demonstrated to be wrong by
      the astronomer James Jeans (Bottazzini, 1999).
                                                            Poincaré and Lyapunov stability criteria   167

the independent variable is time, while Figure 18.3 displays the phase space
in which there is no real independent variable).77
   Systems (18.2) and (18.3) state that the perturbed orbit and the unper-
turbed orbit never distance themselves from one another, at any time, while,
according to Poincaré’s orbital stability criterion, they should not distance
themselves from one another, at any place. Moreover, if solution Xi (t), as
well as being stable according to Lyapunov, is such that, as time passes, the
perturbed orbit xi (t) tends to return towards the unperturbed Xi (t), this
means it also satisﬁes the following condition:

                     lim jxi (t)  Xi (t)j ¼ 0      with i ¼ 1, 2 . . . , n
                    t!1


then Xi (t) is said to be asymptotically stable (Figure 18.5).
   Lastly, we observe, without going into detail, that for an autonomous
system, it can be shown how stability in the Lyapunov sense also implies
stability in the Poincaré sense.78




                   xi


                            Xi (t)
                        δ

                        δ


                                                                            t
                            t0

                 Figure 18.5 Asymptotic Lyapunov stability in the space tx.

  77
       To be thorough, the criterion deﬁned in the text is of uniform stability. As a matter of
fact, we should consider d, in principle, as a function not only of « but also of t0 , that is
different values of d for the same « might be chosen along an orbit Xi (t) if a perturbation
arises at different instants t which therefore become the different initial values t0 of a
perturbed orbit xi (t). The stability is said to be non-uniform in this case. It is clear that any
stable solution of an autonomous system must be uniformly stable, since the system is
invariant with respect to time translation.
   78
       The Lyapunov stability criterion described in the text is also called the ﬁrst method of
Lyapunov. In fact there is also a second, very generalized method of Lyapunov, for the study
of the system’s stability, which claims that a system is stable at point xi ¼ 0 in the phase space,
if a differentiable function v(xi ) exists, known as the Lyapunov function, that satisﬁes the two
following conditions in a neighbourhood of xi ¼ 0:
168   18 : Stability in dynamical systems




      Application of Lyapunov’s criterion to Malthus’
      exponential law of growth
      In the light of the previous discussion, let us apply the deﬁnition of Lyapu-
      nov stability, for example, to the basic case of a population model (or a
      capital model with compound interest) that grows according to Malthus’
      law (4.2), that we have already used in this section:

                                             x_ (t) ¼ k x(t)
      Let us study the stability of the solutions of (4.2) for two values of k: ﬁrst
      Case A, when k ¼ 1; then Case B, when k ¼ þ1.

      Case A: k ¼ 1.

      Equation (15.1) is therefore written:

                                             x_ (t) ¼ x(t)                                  (18:4)

      and its general integral is a decreasing exponential:

                                             x(t) ¼ x0 et                                   (18:5)

      assuming, for the sake of simplicity, that time starts from instant t0 ¼ 0.
         Imagine, for example, the process of the extinction of a population or a
      resource or of any other magnitude that varies over time, according to a
      decreasing exponential function given by (18.5). Even altering the initial
      value x0 , the different dynamics represented by (18.5) all lead to zero, for
      any value of x0 . The only magnitude in play that deﬁnes the system’s state is
      x(t) (for example, the number of individuals in a population). Regardless of
      the initial value assumed, therefore, the evolution of the dynamical system
      (18.4) is such that, as time tends towards inﬁnity, the number of individuals
      in the population tends towards 0. Small variations in the initial value of
      x(t), as time passes, become increasingly smaller, until they are negligible.
      The population system described by model (18.4) ends up, therefore, losing
      all memory of the initial state of its evolution.

      (1) v(xi ) has a local minimum in xi ¼ 0;
          dv(xi )
      (2)         # 0 for t $ t0 .
            dt
      We will not go into discussions on the demonstration or the illustrations of applications here.
      Interested readers should consult the references cited in this section.
                                                               Malthus’ exponential law of growth   169

   In plane tx, (15.1) represents a set of decreasing exponentials; as all the
exponentials of that type tend to ﬂatten out towards zero, the reciprocal
distance between all of the exponentials tends to diminish as time passes.
This means that, if instead of the solution X(t) passing through the point of
coordinates t0 ¼ 0 and X0 , that we will call unperturbed (Figure 18.6), we
considered a perturbed solution x(t), passing through the point of coordin-
ates t0 ¼ 0 and x0 ¼ X0 þ d, the difference between the two would tend to
cancel itself out. The deﬁnition (18.2)–(18.3) is satisﬁed and therefore
solution X(t) is stable according to Lyapunov (it can be noted that it is
also asymptotically stable).
   A numerical example of evolution of the type (18.4) is shown in Table
18.1, where the values of the two state variables at different instants are
calculated, starting from initial values X0 ¼ 1 and x0 ¼ 1:1. As we can see,
the differences D between the states calculated for the same values of time
decrease as the latter increases.


                    x


            x0=X0+d
                                 d=e

                   X0              Unperturbed trajectory:X(t) = X0e−t

             x0=X0−d                     e     Perturbed trajectories: x(t) = x0e−t


                                         e




                        t0 = 0                                            t

              Figure 18.6 Stability of the solutions of equation x_ ¼ x.


        Table 18.1 Two examples of orbits of system (18.4), starting from initial
        values that are close to one another (approximate numerical values)

        t                X(t)                    x(t)                D ¼ x(t)  X(t)

        0            1.00000                   1.10000                   0.10000
        1            0.36788                   0.40467                   0.03679
        2            0.13533                   0.14887                   0.01354
        3            0.04979                   0.05476                   0.00497
        4            0.01831                   0.00201                   0.00184
170   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

      Case B: k ¼ þ1.

      Equation (15.1) is now written:

                                                    x_ (t) ¼ þ x(t)                    (18:6)

      whose general integral is an increasing exponential:

                                                     x(t) ¼ x0 eþt                     (18:7)

      assuming also here that time starts from instant t0 ¼ 0. In the plane tx,
      (18.7) represents a set of increasing exponentials, the distance between
      which, unlike the previous case, increases as time increases. This means
      that, if instead of the unperturbed solution X(t), passing through the point
      of coordinates t0 ¼ 0 and x0 ¼ X0 (Figure 18.7), we considered the per-
      turbed solution x(t), passing through t0 ¼ 0 and x0 ¼ X0 þ d, the difference
      between the two would tend to increase. Now the deﬁnition (18.2)–(18.3) is
      no longer satisﬁed, the perturbed trajectory and the unperturbed one di-
      verge, increasingly distancing themselves from one another; the given solu-
      tion X(t) of the equation is Lyapunov unstable.
         Let us once again take the same example presented for Case A, and let us
      calculate the values of the two state variables X(t) and x(t), for the same
      values of time, starting from the initial values X(0) ¼ 1 and x(0) ¼ 1:1, but
      now according to (18.7); the results are shown in Table 18.2. As we can see,
      the differences D between the states calculated for the same values of time
      increase as the latter increases.
         In Case B, the dynamical system evolves amplifying the changes in the
      initial state and preserving the memory of such, in the sense that, unlike



                                 x           x(t) = x0e+t perturbed trajectories




                        x0=X0+d
                             X0          e
                        x0=X0−d          e


                                              X(t) = X0e+t   unperturbed trajectory

                                     t0 = 0                                        t

                       Figure 18.7 Instability of the solutions of equation x_ ¼ þx.
                                                                         The Lyapunov exponents   171

        Table 18.2 Two examples of orbits of system (18.6), starting from initial
        values that are close to one another (approximated numerical values)

        t              X(t)                   x(t)                D ¼ x(t)  X(t)

        0            1.00000               1.10000                       0.10000
        1            2.78183               2.99011                       0.20828
        2            7.38906               8.12796                       0.73890
        3           20.0855               22.0941                        2.00860
        4           54.5981               60.0580                        5.45986



what occurred in Case A above, at any instant, the value of x(t) depends
on the initial value of x0 , without ever tending towards a single ﬁnal
asymptotic value. As shown in the numerical example illustrated in Table
18.2, the differences D between the values of the state variable in the two
evolutions become increasingly higher as time passes. We ﬁnd ourselves
faced with a situation of instability. Just as with the example of the map
(15.1) shown in Table 15.1, there is no chaos here either, because the
divergence that originates between close points ampliﬁes and extends to
increasingly large areas in the phase space; the dynamics do not generate
any attractor.
   We are now faced with the problem of identifying a method that allows us
to quantify the degree of instability of an orbit. In order to gain a greater
insight into the evolution of a dynamical system, we therefore need a
method that enables us to establish not only if the ampliﬁcation of a small
initial perturbation takes place over time, but also how fast it grows.



Quantifying a system’s instability: the Lyapunov
exponents
Before concluding our reﬂection on the stability of a system, we need to
deﬁne a parameter that enables said stability, which we have so far dis-
cussed only in qualitative terms, to be quantiﬁed. To this end, we will
introduce the so-called Lyapunov exponents: numbers that provide a meas-
urement of the stability of a dynamical system and that, in a certain sense,
quantify its level of chaos.
  Let us again consider a dynamical system (a model) made up of a system
of differential equations such as (8.1):

                     dxi
                         ¼ Fi (x1 , . . . , xn , t) i ¼ 1, 2 . . . , n
                     dt
172   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

         As previously, we will indicate the stable unperturbed solution of (8.1)
      with Xi (t). We now wish to establish ‘how’ unstable orbit X(t) is, i.e., ‘how
      quickly’ any perturbed solution xi (t) that starts (or passes) close to Xi (t) in
      the phase space, diverges from Xi (t) over time.
         We have often mentioned the concept of sensitivity to initial conditions,
      basically meaning the intensiﬁcation of small divergences from the initial
      values over time. The reference that we assume, so as to speak, as ‘unit
      of measurement’ to quantify the speed of growth of the perturbations
      is the law of exponential growth. This assumption is justiﬁed by the
      fact that, if we ‘test’ the instability of an orbit in its immediate neighbour-
      hood, we can therefore simplify the matter assuming that the instability
      follows, at least in a ﬁrst approximation, a linear law, which, as we have
      observed (see equations (4.2) and (18.1)) envisages orbits expressed by
      exponentials.
         The situation that we are studying can be schematized as in Figure
      18.8, where we assume, for the sake of simplicity, that the system of
      equations (8.1) comprises only three variables xi (t), xj (t) and xk (t). Figure
      18.8 represents an unstable orbit, in all points of which small perturbations
      give rise to new orbits that exponentially diverge from the unperturbed
      orbit.
         In the case of an unstable orbit, the new perturbed orbit does not tend
      towards the unperturbed one, but distances itself according to a trend, the
      initial state of which can be expressed in an exponential form:




                           xi     Perturbed trajectory:
                                 exponential divergence
                                                                             Unstable
                                                                            unperturbed
                                                                             trajectory
                           x0i
                                              t2
                                  t0                  t3   t4
                                         t1


                                       x0j                             xj

                     x0k

                       xk

      Figure 18.8 Dynamics of an unstable system in which we have exponential divergence. The
      dashed arrows represent trajectories that diverge from the unstable trajectory, exponentially
      amplifying the initial perturbation that has generated them.
                                                                         The Lyapunov exponents      173




                                                             Dxi (t)

                                   Dx0i
                                                         xi (t)

                                   x0i


                                Figure 18.9 Divergent orbits.


                                      Dxi (t) ¼ Dx0i eLi t                                (18:8)

   In (18.8) Dxi (t) indicates the difference, expressed as a function of time,
between the values of the i-th state variable xi on the perturbed orbit and the
corresponding value on the unperturbed one, starting from a difference
between the two initial values of the same state variable (two initial states),
indicated by Dx0i (Figure 18.9).
   The parameter Li is the Lyapunov exponent79 for variable xi . Its value
indicates the speed of growth (instability) or reduction (stability) of the
‘small’ perturbation made to xi , that we mentioned earlier.
   For the sake of simplicity, let us examine the variation of just one of the
state variables, xi (t). Isolating Li in (18.8), we have:
                                                     
                                          1 Dxi (t)
                                      Li ¼ ln                                            (18:9)
                                          t    Dx0i 

in which we introduce the modulus, as we do not distinguish between a
positive or a negative direction for the distancing between the perturbed
and unperturbed orbits.80

  79
     In reality, more than a speed in the strict sense, Li represents the rate at which the orbits
diverge, namely the ratio between the speed at which they diverge and the initial perturbation.
The fact that Li is a rate can be obtained by dividing the derivative of (18.8) by (18.8) itself:

                                            Dx_ i
                                                  ¼ Li                                    (18:80 )
                                            Dxi
  80
      As we have said, (18.8) implies that the evolution over time of the difference Dxi (t) is
evaluated through the linear approximation of the dynamical system’s equations for variable xi ;
the said approximation, therefore, only makes sense if we remain in the immediate neighbour-
hood of x0i . In other words, Lyapunov exponents thus deﬁned express to what extent an
inﬁnitesimal variation of the unperturbed orbit inﬂuences the system’s evolution for an inﬁni-
tesimal time. A stricter deﬁnition of the Lyapunov exponent than the one illustrated in the text,
174   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

          The stability of the dynamics of a system with respect to the state variable
      xi , therefore, depends on the sign of the corresponding Lyapunov expo-
      nent Li :

      . Li < 0 ! Convergent orbits with respect to the state variable xi . In this
                 case we have asymptotic stability.
      . Li ¼ 0 ! Constant distance between the orbits with respect to the state
                 variable xi . In this case we have stability.
      . Li > 0 ! Divergent orbits with respect to the state variable xi : the
                 orbits are unstable and diverge exponentially from one an-
                 other. In this case we have chaos.

        The general stability of the dynamical system, therefore, is guaranteed
      only if each of the state variables xi (t), individually, is characterized by a
      negative Lyapunov exponent. On the contrary, a measurement of the degree
      of chaoticity of the dynamical system can be given by the sum of the Li
      exponents of the xi variables for which they are positive. This magnitude is
      known as the Kolmogorov–Sinai entropy (Eckmann and Ruelle, 1985) and
      can be assumed as an indicator of the extent to which the system is
      unpredictable: the higher the Kolmogorov–Sinai entropy, the more unpre-
      dictable the system.
        As we have said, the trajectories of a dynamic deﬁned by n state variables
      are characterized by n different Lyapunov exponents: this set is called the
      Lyapunov spectrum.
        The values of the Lyapunov exponents enable us to draw some important
      conclusions on dynamics:

      1. If all the Lyapunov exponents are negative, then we have a ﬁxed point
         that behaves like an attractor. Each negative Lyapunov exponent pro-
         vides a measurement of the speed with which the corresponding state
         variable directs itself towards the point attractor.

      however, must add two further elements to (18.9): (1) the fact that initial perturbations jDxo j are
      considered inﬁnitesimal, which leads to the introduction of a limit for jDxo j ! 0; (2) the fact
      that, to obtain a measurement of the divergence of the orbits on the whole unperturbed orbit, an
      average of the exponential divergences at the different points along the orbit (in theory at all
      points) needs to be calculated. This involves the introduction of the limit for t ! 1, which
      basically extends the calculation of instability to an average on N points, with N becoming
      increasingly larger. The formal deﬁnition of the Lyapunov exponent for a state variable xi , is:
                                                                      
                                                      1 Dxi (x0i ,t)
                                   Li ¼ lim             ln              i ¼ 1, . . . , n         (18:10)
                                        t!1
                                            jDx0i j!0
                                                      t     Dx0i 
                                                          The Lyapunov exponents   175

2. If some exponents are nil and others are negative, then we have an
   ordinary attractor that is less simple than a ﬁxed point, such as for
   example a limit cycle.
3. If at least one of the Lyapunov exponents, let us suppose the i-indexed
   one, is positive, then we are in the presence of evolutive dynamics which,
   in that particular dimension i, diverge exponentially, and give rise to
   chaos. Vice versa, we can also state that in a chaotic system at least one
   Lyapunov exponent is positive.
In the case of one-dimensional maps such as:

                                xnþ1 ¼ f (xn )

in which the analytical expression of the map f is known, the Lyapunov
exponent assumes the following form (obtained from (18.10), on p. 000,
note 78) that is particularly important, as we will see when we examine the
logistic map (Moon, 1992; Çambel, 1993; Puu, 2000):

                                                
                                1 XN    @f (xn )
                                                
                        L ¼ lim       ln                              (18:11)
                           N!1 N
                                  n¼1
                                          @xn 

where the role of time t is played by the index n which counts the iterations,
the total number of which is N, and the speed of divergence is simply the
derivative of the evolution function.
  A ﬁnal consideration regards the fact that the phase space can also
be of an inﬁnite dimensionality. This happens, for example, if the evolutive
dynamic depends on one or more parameters that vary with continuity,
such as with the logistic map (Chapter 22). In this case, the Lyapunov
exponent becomes a continuous function of the parameter (or of the
parameters), and the values of the parameter (or parameters) in correspond-
ence of which the Lyapunov exponent has a positive value are only those
for which the system is chaotic. (For further details on the subject
of Lyapunov exponents and chaos in dynamical systems see Wolf,
1984; Wolf et al., 1985; Eubank and Farmer, 1989; Rasband, 1990;
Medio, 1992; Moon, 1992; Katok and Hasselblatt, 1995; Abarbanel,
1996; Robinson, 1999, Puu, 2000; Riganti, 2000; Medio and Lines, 2001).
176   18 : Stability in dynamical systems




      Exponential growth of the perturbations
      and the predictability horizon of a model
      Lyapunov exponents, as we have said, provide important quantitative
      information on the chaotic properties of the evolution of a dynamical
      system. Mathematical models are more often than not written in the form
      of dynamical systems; therefore, the concepts that we have illustrated are
      applicable to models, but transferring them to real systems requires some
      adjustments. To conclude this section, we would like to add some consid-
      erations on the meaning of Lyapunov exponents in models, if the latter are
      in the form of dynamical systems; in Chapter 19, on the other hand, we will
      see how concepts regarding a system’s stability can be applied to real
      systems.
         We ask ourselves, in particular, what is the time t beyond which the
      uncertainty of the prediction of a system’s future state exceeds a pre-estab-
      lished tolerance that we will indicate with d. The answer can be obtained by
      isolating time in (18.9) (ignoring, for the sake of simplicity, index i and the
      symbol of the modulus, assuming all magnitudes to be positive):

                                                   1 Dx(t)
                                            t ¼     ln                        (18:12)
                                                   L    Dx0

      Now, Dx0 in (18.8) was the perturbation of an initial state, but can also be
      interpreted as the approximation, or uncertainty, of the measurement of
      the initial state of the evolution. In this sense, we assign Dx0 the meaning
      of an interval of values within which ‘the’ initial value, that we are not able
      to know with any degree of precision, of the state variable x(t) lies;
      assuming an initial value x0 with an approximation Dx0 means that the
      initial value could be very close to x0 , but not x0 . We ask ourselves the
      usual question: to what extent does a ‘small’ difference of the initial state,
      hidden due to our imperfect knowledge of the same, inﬂuence its future
      evolution? If the evolutive trajectory is stable, then it has little or no
      inﬂuence; if it is unstable, however, the effect of the initial uncertainty
      gets increasingly larger over time. It is exactly this initial uncertainty that is
      intensiﬁed over the course of the evolution, if the dynamics of the model
      are chaotic, until it exceeds the pre-established threshold d. The latter
      occurs in correspondence to the time t obtained by assuming Dx(t) ¼ d
      in (18.12). This value of the time t , that depends on d, thus assumes a
      particular role that we can deﬁne as a sort of predictability horizon of the
      model’s future.
                                                      Exponential growth of perturbations   177

   In principle, it should be sufﬁcient to take the initial uncertainty Dx0 that
is sufﬁciently small to generate an arbitrarily large value of t for that given
value of Dx(t) ¼ d. In practice, however, the presence of the logarithm in
(18.12) makes the dependence of t on Dx0 so weak that the term that is by
far the most dominant in determining the predictability horizon is actually
the Lyapunov coefﬁcient L. In other words, to extend predictability, i.e. the
stability of the evolution over time, it would be better, where possible, to
succeed in improving the model, rather than the precision of the initial
values from which we make the model evolve. For the purposes of the
stability of the model, and therefore of the extension over time of the
validity of predictions, basically it is important that Lyapunov exponents
have small values. Lyapunov exponents, in fact, are inversely proportional
to the predictability horizon, while the predictability horizon depends on
the precision of the initial values only in logarithm terms.
   By way of example, let us once more consider the very simple case in
which we employ an exponential model to describe the growth of a popu-
lation (of any nature), using Malthus’ linear model (4.2):

                                    x_ (t) ¼ k x(t)

   As we know, the solution of (4.2) is x(t) ¼ x0 ekt . A variation (or uncer-
tainty) of the initial value x0 will therefore give rise to a variation (or an
uncertainty) of the subsequent states x(t) that increases exponentially over
time we thus have Dx(t) ¼ Dx0 ekt which, if we identify the parameter k with
the Lyapunov coefﬁcient L, is exactly (18.8). For the sake of simplicity, let
us now suppose that the pre-established threshold of the uncertainty of the
prediction is, for example, d ¼ 1; we now obtain that the predictability
horizon t of the model is:
                                          
                                 1     1
                               t ¼ ln
                                  k    Dx0

   Assuming d ¼ 1 means that the uncertainty Dx0 on the initial data must
be Dx0 < 1, because this must be at least less than the threshold of uncer-
tainty of the future evolution d. If we wanted, for example, to double the
horizon of predictability t, wishing to improve only the approximation of
the initial data Dx0 , then we should square the argument of the logarithm,
i.e. replace 1=Dx0 with (1=Dx0 )2 ; this operation, in fact, would double the
value of the logarithm. As Dx0 < 1, squaring Dx0 means, in practice,
replacing the number that expresses the uncertainty of the data with an-
other much smaller one, i.e. considerably reducing the initial uncertainty.
178   18 : Stability in dynamical systems

      The same doubling of the horizon t could be obtained, on the other hand,
      maintaining the same uncertainty of initial data, but improving the model,
      so that the Lyapunov exponent L is halved. In order to extend the time-
      frame of the ‘glance into the future’ that a model enables us to do, based on
      the hypotheses that comprise its foundation, what counts, in practice, is
      almost exclusively the value of the Lyapunov exponent.
         This last observation on the exponential growth of a ‘small’ initial
      approximation can have fundamental practical consequences when a
      model (even if written in continuous time) is made to evolve using, as
      always happens, an approximation in discrete terms and therefore an
      iteration of a map calculated by a computer.81 Remember that any com-
      puter always works on a discrete series of numbers, because each number is
      stored in the computer’s memory (i.e. ‘exists’ for the computer) taking only
      a ﬁnite number of ﬁgures into account; this can mean that a number is
      subjected to an approximation that leads to the elimination of all of the
      ﬁgures that exceed the memory capacity envisaged to represent it. Working
      in this way, however, we end up effectively examining a trajectory (an orbit)
      that is different to the theoretical one along which we had intended to
      follow the system’s evolution, if the latter is unstable; the theoretical evo-
      lution predicted by the model remains, in practice, unknown because it is
      numerically unachievable. In other words, if the model is a dynamical
      unstable system, the evolution that is obtained by materially making the
      calculations, in reality, is different to what would be obtained by solving the
      equations in a formal way, without using numerical approximation. Be-
      cause, with the exception of a few simple cases, we do not have the formal
      methods to solve a system of equations (i.e. to make a model evolve) in
      exact terms, the formally ‘exact’ theoretical orbit, basically, is nothing more
      than a completely abstract concept.

        81
           As we already mentioned at the beginning of this section, it was precisely the compari-
      son between two different evolutions starting from different numerical values as a conse-
      quence of a simple numerical approximation, that drew Lorenz’s attention to the chaotic
      characteristics of the dynamical system that he was studying (Gleick, 1987).
                The problem of measuring
 19             chaos in real systems



Chaotic dynamics and stochastic dynamics
In the previous sections we have mostly talked about the stability and chaos
of dynamical processes in mathematical models. Now we would like to
look at the problem of the stability and chaos (if any) in observed dynamical
processes, i.e. referring to the analysis of historic data series observed in real
systems.
   Deﬁnition (18.9) of the Lyapunov exponents does not have only a theor-
etical meaning, but can be used in important applications to real cases. The
problem we are faced with is how to use a series of data in order to be able
to calculate quantities such as Lyapunov exponents and to identify the
presence, if any, of an attractor and its dimension (fractional or integer).
This would enable us to establish, in particular, if the historic series of data
is produced by a system that ‘functions’ according to a deterministic law,
regardless of whether we have chaos or not, or if the data observed are
stochastic, i.e. if they are the result not of a law, but of that which is
commonly called ‘chance’, and follow a probability distribution. The prob-
lem is anything but easy, in particular for systems in whose dynamics it is
difﬁcult, if not impossible, to observe regularities, as usually happens in
social sciences.
   A historic series of data (i.e. a set of successive measurements of a certain
magnitude that varies over time), in fact, can be identiﬁed by a set of states
in an appropriate phase space, i.e. referring to appropriate state variables. If
with some type of measurement we manage to obtain a set of coefﬁcients
that, with respect to the presumed state variables, plays the role of Lyapu-
nov exponents, then the quantitative analysis of these coefﬁcients can lead
to the empirical veriﬁcation of the system’s stability and the observed
evolution of the real system. A method of this kind can represent an
effective test, valid both in the case of conservative systems and in the
case of non-conservative systems, to diagnose the presence of chaotic situ-
ations (Wolf et al., 1985; Abarbanel, 1996).
180   19 : The problem of measuring chaos in real systems

         In practice, no temporal series can be assumed to consist of data that
      result only from a (hypothetical) deterministic law, i.e. from a so-called
      ‘pure signal’, that has no stochastic components. Any series of experimental
      data, in fact, is always mixed with a stochastic process that superposes on it,
      like a background noise, a so-called ‘white noise’, that reduces the quality of
      the information. This is due to a number of reasons. On one hand, for
      example, there are the inevitable practical difﬁculties of measuring data,
      which, in any event, never constitute a continuous sequence over time; on
      the other hand, any measurement is always affected by approximations of
      various types and of various origin, even those due simply to the truncation
      of the numbers. A deterministic law, precisely because it is identiﬁed (or
      rather, ‘constructed’) starting from an incomplete set of approximated data,
      can never be completely predictable, precisely because in principle all that
      we have available is a set of measurements that may be more or less
      numerous and more or less approximated, but is never an inﬁnite quantity
      and are never absolutely precise.
         The aim of the analysis of a temporal series of data, therefore, is to
      answer questions such as the following:

      1. Is it possible to identify an attractor underlying the temporal series? In
         other words can the data of the series be considered as the expression of
         a deterministic dynamics and not of a stochastic process?
      2. Assuming that the attractor exists, what is its dimension? Is it a chaotic
         dynamics (non-integer dimension of the attractor) or not (integer dimen-
         sion of the attractor)? And what different types of dynamics (limit cycle,
         quasiperiodic orbits, chaotic orbits, etc.) does its dimension allow?
      3. How many state variables are needed to constitute the phase space (the
         dimension of the phase space) to contain the attractor (if such exists)? In
         other words, what is the minimum number of state variables needed to
         identify the system and to deﬁne its dynamics? Which variables are they?

        The methods used to distinguish deterministic processes from stochastic
      ones are based on the fact that a deterministic system always evolves in the
      same way, starting from given conditions. At least in principle, given a
      temporal series of data, we can proceed as follows:

      1. Choose a reference state A in the historic series.
      2. Search for a state B in the same historic series that is as close as possible,
         in the phase space, to the reference state A.
      3. Compare the evolution that state A follows with that of state B and call
         the difference between the corresponding values of the same state vari-
                                             Chaotic dynamics and stochastic dynamics   181

   ables in the two successive evolutions of A and B ‘deviations’. There are
   two alternatives: (a) with a stochastic system, the values of the deviation
   are distributed in such a way that we cannot identify any relationship
   between them, i.e. the data appear to be distributed at random; (b) with
   a deterministic system, the deviations remain small, if the evolution is
   stable, or some of them grow exponentially over time, at least initially, if
   the system is chaotic. In case (b), we can measure (and not calculate, as
   we do in models) Lyapunov exponents by following the two temporal
   series that start from A and B (close to one another in the phase space),
   and simply measuring the trend of the deviations as a function of time.

   The above is from a theoretical standpoint. In practice, we are faced with
the problem of how to determine two states ‘close’ to one another from ‘all’
of the state variables. The systems we encounter in the real world are
deﬁned by very large sets of state variables. In particular, as we have
observed on several occasions, this is true for social systems, where it is
often difﬁcult not only to follow the evolution of the state variables, but also
to identify the most signiﬁcant state variables, or even to establish how
many of them there are.
   One approach to solving this problem entails initially taking a very
limited set of variables that we try to identify as fundamental and analysing
the behaviour over time of the deviations between the successive evolutions
of states A and B, that now, with relatively few state variables, are relatively
easy to identify. If said deviation appears to behave in a random way, this
means that we have not considered a sufﬁcient number of state variables to
construct an effective deterministic law. Therefore the number of state
variables, i.e. the dimensionality of the system’s phase space, needs to be
increased. A higher number of variables could now be sufﬁcient to depict
that deterministic law which previously appeared hidden, camouﬂaged, so
to speak, by the apparent random nature of the data.
   The ﬁrst difﬁculty that we encounter, therefore, regards the construction
of the phase space in which to place the system’s dynamics and an attractor,
if such exists. In principle, it should be sufﬁcient to continually increase the
number of state variables to be certain of obtaining a deterministic law
sooner or later. This would occur, again in principle, when we come to
closing the system, isolating it completely from any relation with the
outside. A system of this nature would certainly be deterministic, because
all of its dynamics would be endogenous, i.e. caused by laws internal to the
system, that do not assign a role to the interaction with the external
environment, which is subject to change and out of the system’s control
(i.e. what we call ‘chance’). Probably, however, the number of variables
182   19 : The problem of measuring chaos in real systems

      needed to consider the system closed would be so high that it would render
      the calculation time unacceptably long, in practice, to effectively identify
      the deterministic law at the origin of the observed dynamics, rather than
      limiting ourselves to imagining its presence.
         On the other hand, a system that contains the entire universe, therefore
      with a very high number of state variables, to describe the entire contents of
      the universe, would certainly be closed and deterministic in theory, but
      absolutely impossible to treat from a practical point of view.
         Basically, if as the number of variables considered increases, at a certain
      point we observe that the deviation between the trajectories, i.e. the appar-
      ent random dispersion of data, continues to grow more or less proportion-
      ally to the number of variables, then we can say that the system is stochastic,
      because the state variables that we are considering are not sufﬁcient to
      identify any underlying dynamic. If, on the other hand, as the number of
      variables considered increases, at a certain point, once a certain number n of
      variables has been exceeded, we observe that the distance between the
      trajectories stops increasing and tends to assume an (almost) stable value,
      which doesn’t increase even if additional new variables are introduced, then
      we can claim to have identiﬁed the ‘real’ number of variables n needed to
      ‘close’ the system and to deﬁne its state and dynamics. If this is so, we can
      state that there is a deterministic process at the origin of the historic series of
      data, whose law involves exactly n state variables, and that the system’s
      dynamics is chaotic and non-stochastic, and can be described by a deter-
      ministic law (Nicolis and Prigogine, 1987; Vulpiani, 1994).
         The simplest case of system dynamics is that in which there is a point
      attractor that acts as the system’s stable equilibrium, regardless of the
      size of the phase space. On the other hand, if we consider n state
      variables, there are, on the contrary, systems whose successive states dis-
      perse over the whole n-dimensional phase space in question, without the
      conﬁguration of any regularity or any attractor; in this second case, we say
      that the evolution appears to be random. Chaotic systems, with their
      strange attractors, fall between these two extremes. The problem, therefore,
      is determining a dimension d (that will not be integer) of the chaotic
      attractor.82

        82
            We will repeat what has already been stated in Chapter 16: the concept of strange
      attractor regards the fact that the attractor is a fractal and is therefore a geometric concept
      that regards the shape of the attractor; on the other hand, the concept of chaotic attractor
      refers to the instability of the orbit and is, therefore, a concept that regards the system’s
      dynamics. In practice the two concepts are often identiﬁed together even though in certain
      cases this is incorrect. In this context, for the sake of simplicity, we will also identify them
      together, as this simpliﬁcation will not effect our discussion.
                                                    A method to obtain the dimension of attractors      183

   If the (assumed) deterministic dynamics of the real system envisages an
attractor whose dimension d is larger than n, then in the n-dimensional
phase space the attractor cannot appear (or at least not entirely) and the
system appears to be stochastic. For example, a set of three state variables x,
y, and z is sufﬁcient to deﬁne a three-dimensional space in which a strange
attractor, whose dimension is less than 3, can be found as in the case of the
Lorenz attractor (Figure 16.2) that is generated by a system of three equa-
tions with three variables [the system of equations (16.3)]; with just two
state variables, the system would not give rise to an attractor. The problem
of recognizing the attractor is strictly linked, therefore, to the problem of
the deﬁnition and of the choice of the minimum number of state variables
needed to contain it.



A method to obtain the dimension of attractors
To attribute a dimension to strange attractors, for which ordinary topo-
logical dimension loses meaning, the dimension known as Hausdorff–
Besicovich is often used (sometimes called capacity dimension), which we
mentioned in Chapter 16 and which we will indicate with dH 83 (Grass-
berger, 1981). From a practical point of view, however, the application of
the Hausdorff–Besicovich deﬁnition of dimension requires very long calcu-
lation times, because the number N(l) of the cells to be considered (see note
83 at foot of page) increases very quickly as their side l decreases, and the
calculations become too onerous if the number of state variables of the

  83
      Imagine dividing the space containing the geometric object (in our case the attractor),
the dimension of which we want to deﬁne, into ‘cells’ of side l: if the space in question is one-
dimensional (a line), the cells are segments of length l; if it is two-dimensional (a plane), the
cells are square of side l; if it is three-dimensional, the cells are cubes of edge l, and so on. The
total number N(l) of cells of side l that are crossed by the object in question is counted: N(l)
depends on the length l assumed and will be a rather small fraction of the total number of cells
into which the space has been divided. In general N(l) is related to l by a power law such as:

                                                   1
                                            N(l) ¼ d
                                                  l H

In the case of ordinary Euclidean geometry objects, dH is a natural number and coincides with
the (topological) dimension usually used. If dH is not an integer, then we refer to a fractal
ﬁgure that cannot be described using the usual techniques of Euclidean geometry, of which dH
is the Hausdorff–Besicovich dimension:

                                                 log (N(l))
                                        dH ¼ 
                                                    log l
184   19 : The problem of measuring chaos in real systems

      system (i.e. the dimensionality of the phase space) is higher than 3 or 4.
      Furthermore, the calculation of dH , is substantially inefﬁcient as the major-
      ity of the N(l) cells in reality are empty.
         James Farmer, Edward Ott and James Yorke (1983) showed that, even
      from a conceptual point of view, the use of dH to measure the fractality of a
      strange attractor is not completely adequate as it does not properly take into
      account the frequency with which an orbit enters the cell (see note 82 on
      p. 00) used to measure dH . In other words, dH does not consider the
      dynamic aspects of a chaotic attractor, only the geometric ones, i.e. those
      relative to the attractor’s shape. For these reasons, in more recent times
      other deﬁnitions of dimension have been developed that are more pertinent
      to the problem in question with respect to the Hausdorff–Besicovich di-
      mension, which, incidentally, had been proposed for other purposes, long
      before the concepts of fractal and strange attractor were introduced (Haus-
      dorff, 1919; Besicovich, 1934, 1935). In particular (Swinney, 1985) from
      the 1980s onwards, the so-called correlation dimension dc has often been
      used.84
         Peter Grassberger and Itamar Procaccia (1983ab) proposed a method to
      obtain an estimation of the value of the correlation dimension dc of the
      strange attractor, if any, that we are attempting to identify in a historic series
      of data, and therefore also to determine the number n of state variables
      needed to obtain the deterministic law that describes the system’s evolution
      and generates the attractor (Rasband, 1990; Schroeder, 1991; Moon, 1992;

        84
            There have been a number of working deﬁnitions of the correlation dimension. One of
      the most popular involves the following operations (Grassberger and Procaccia, 1983ab): (1)
      we take K points of the geometric object (in the phase space) the dimension of which we wish to
      deﬁne, and we consider all of the pairs that can be formed with said points; (2) we calculate the
      distance dij between all of the points of the pairs formed and we use M(r) to indicate the number
      of pairs whose distance dij is less that a pre-established distance r; (3) we calculate, starting
      from the numbers obtained, a function C(r), called the correlation function, deﬁned by:

                                                            M(r)
                                             C(r) ¼ lim
                                                     K!1    K2

      In general, we note that C(r) is related to the distance r by a power law:

                                                 C(r)  r dc

      The exponent dc is the correlation dimension of the set of points considered.
        It should be noted, however, that for many strange attractors, the different deﬁnitions of
      dimension lead approximately to the same results (see Moon, 1992). For Lorenz attractor, for
      example, the Hausdorff–Besicovich dimension is dH ¼ 2:06  0:01, while the correlation
      dimension is dc ¼ 2:05  0:01 (Grassberger and Procaccia, 1983a).
                                                 A method to obtain the dimension of attractors   185

Peitgen, Saupe and Jürgens, 1992; Çambel, 1993; Casti, 2000; Riganti,
2000).
   The method originates from the fact that the calculated value of the
dimension dc of a known strange attractor increases as the number of
state variables n being considered increases, if the latter are not in sufﬁcient
numbers to generate the appearance of an attractor. If, on the other hand,
the number of state variables n that is being considered exceeds the dimen-
sion dc of the attractor, then the phase space has the dimensionality needed
to contain the attractor, and further increases of n do not inﬂuence the
attractor: dc no longer depends on n. For example, the fact that the Lorenz
attractor requires at least a three-dimensional space to appear, while in a
one or two-dimensional space it would not be seen, means that the equa-
tions with one or two variables would not succeed in generating it. In a four
or more dimensional space, the attractor would not be altered: additional
variables would simply be introduced that do not have any effect on the
system’s dynamics.
   Basically, Grassberger and Procaccia’s model assumes that the contrary is
true.85 They assume, that is, that if we observe that the dimension dc of a set
of points that is presumed to be part of an unknown attractor increases
as the number of state variables considered n increases until it reaches a
maximum value dc  , then this can be taken as an indication of the existence
of a strange attractor. In this case, dc  is the dimension of the strange
attractor, and the value of n that we have reached is the minimum number
of state variables needed for a phase space to contain the presumed attractor.
   In practical terms, the method comprises the following steps (Figure 19.1):

1. A function f(n) is constructed by points that relate the correlation
   dimension dc , calculated on the basis of the historic series to different
   values of the number of state variables n that are considered.
2. Initially, for a small n,dc increases as n increases; the state variables
   considered are too few and the system appears to be stochastic.
3. Subsequently, as n increases, if f(n) tends to ﬂatten out and to stabilize at
   a maximum value (i.e. if the slope of f(n) tends to zero) beyond a value of
   n, then n is the minimum number of state variables needed to contain the
   attractor. We conclude that the system represented by the temporal series
   possesses an attractor whose dimension dc  is given by the same max-
   imum value to which f(n) tends. If this is not an integer, then the attractor
   is strange and indicates a chaotic dynamic.

  85
      Their assumption, however, is not strictly justiﬁed; on the contrary, it has been demon-
strated that there are cases that contradict it (Osborne and Provenzale, 1989).
186   19 : The problem of measuring chaos in real systems


                                                       f (n) for a stochastic process without attractors:
                                                        f (n) has no maximum




                        Correlation dimension dc
                                                    Attractor’s
                                                   dimension dc*



                                                               f (n) for a chaotic process with attractor:
                                                               f (n) tends toward a maximum which is the
                                                               attractor’s dimension dc*

                                                                    n: number of state variables considered

      Figure 19.1 Relation between the number n of state variables considered and the correlation
      dimension dc , for the dynamics of a stochastic system and those of a chaotic system.



         Obviously, the most interesting situation is that in which we observe an
      attractor with a low dimensionality, i.e. in a phase space with an n that is
      not too high.
         A method like the one described has been applied, amongst other things,
      to the historic series of (indirect) measurements of the total volume of
      glaciers on Earth that have emerged over the course of the past million
      years, interpreted as an indicator of the average temperature of the Earth’s
      surface. The presence of a chaotic attractor with a dimension of 3.1 was
      observed (the so-called climatic attractor), contained in a phase space of
      n ¼ 4 state variables (Nicolis and Prigogine, 1987). This shows that the
      climatic evolution of the past one million years can be seen as the manifest-
      ation of a deterministic dynamics characterized by a chaotic (strange)
      attractor with a low dimensionality. This result, obviously, is still too
      generic to be able to claim that we have identiﬁed the entire dynamics of
      the climate and from which we can make predictions. The fact that the
      presence of a chaotic deterministic mechanism has been identiﬁed, in any
      event, represents a fundamental step in the description of dynamics that on
      the surface appear to be incomprehensible.



      An observation on determinism in economics
      In dynamical system theory, as we know, chaos means irregular ﬂuctuations
      in a deterministic system; the system behaves irregularly due to its own
      internal logic, not due to the effect of forces acting upon it from the outside.
      In a closed (and therefore also autonomous) system nothing acts externally;
                                                   An observation on determinism in economics     187

a closed economic system can be assimilated to a dynamical system but its
dimensions (i.e. the number of state variables) are usually so high that it is
impossible to identify the determinism to which the chaotic dynamics ob-
served is subjected (provided that we are dealing with chaos). So that the
chaos can be usefully ‘managed’, i.e. identiﬁed as the outcome of a deter-
ministic mechanism that can be given a description, in order to gain some
form of advantage from it, we at least need to identify the deterministic law
that governs (or more correctly that ‘deﬁnes’) the system. A law of this type,
however, can be identiﬁed only if the number of state variables required to
describe the observed dynamics, and in a certain sense to account for them, is
low enough to make the construction of a model possible.
   The basic problem, then, is precisely that of recognizing which state
variables are necessary to characterize the collective dynamics observed,
ignoring the others. These others, however, even if ignored, do not actually
cease to exist and act on the system’s evolution, even if as state variables of a
lesser importance. Ignoring the less important state variables means, in
practice, conferring a certain degree of openness to the system, because
the ignored variables act as if they were external to the system, which,
therefore, ends up operating in an environment that is continually changing,
due to the changing of the values of the variables not taken into consider-
ation (Brock, Hsieh and Le Baron, 1991; Benhabib, ed., 1992).
   Deterministic processes in economics have been studied for almost three
centuries, basically from the foundation of modern economic science. This
has occurred according to very different viewpoints, approaches and
methods, applying both principles and techniques of classical science, and
using techniques developed more recently, above all in the last few dec-
ades86 (for example from Mandelbrot, 1975, 1997ab), but the results have
been poor and partial, especially with regard to the identiﬁcation and the
deﬁnition of general laws and effective models.
   If these deterministic schema exist in economics, then either they are
more difﬁcult to recognize, as they do not clearly emerge from the back-
ground noise created by individual actions, or they last too short a time to
be able to be used, drawing some form of advantage (or even a proﬁt in the
strict sense), or both of the above hypotheses are true.

  86
      With regard to the evaluation of Lyapunov exponents, starting from a temporal series of
economic data, we cite the calculation method proposed by Eckmann et al. (1986) and its
application to the analysis of the trends of ﬁnancial market indices (Eckmann et al., 1988),
which provides an assessment of market unpredictability. The study of economic systems in
general, and of the ﬁnancial markets, in particular, conducted using techniques taken from the
dynamics of physical systems, has led to the development, over the course of the past 30 years,
of a new discipline called econophysics (Mantegna and Stanley, 2000; Mantegna, 2001).
188   19 : The problem of measuring chaos in real systems

         Nevertheless, it should be observed that one of the main difﬁculties that
      obstructs the identiﬁcation of deterministic schema in economics is linked
      to the fact that the numerous actors operating in economic systems are each
      seeking maximum individual utility (proﬁt). A fundamental aspect of the
      matter is that, if in ﬁnancial markets we actually succeeded in identifying
      deterministic laws with low dimensionality, laws that therefore use only a
      few state variables, that were relatively simple to recognize and use to
      effectively account for the small and large ﬂuctuations that we observe
      and to formulate predictions on the future trends of values, then all market
      operators would become aware of such and would use such as rapidly as
      possible, organizing ﬁnancial operations aimed at achieving maximum
      proﬁt.
         The consequence of this, if a ‘deterministic law of economics’ really
      existed, would be that the knowledge of this law, unfortunately, would
      end up making the market inactive; this law, therefore, would be completely
      useless, not to mention lacking in any meaning. Let us suppose, in fact, that
      a law was discovered that described the dynamics of the economy in a
      deterministic way, and that all the operators in a stock market became
      aware of such and used it to make predictions (deterministic and therefore
      equal for everyone) on future price trends. The result of this would be that
      all the operators would act on the market not only with the same objective
      (proﬁt), but also in the same way. All of the operators would want to buy,
      for example, a given stock now, if the deterministic law guaranteed that the
      price will not fall any further. For the same reason, however, none of the
      operators that owned said stock would want to sell it, preferring to wait to
      sell it at a future date, at a higher price. In reality, therefore, transactions
      aimed at seeking proﬁt based on the deterministic law valid for all operators
      would not take place, because there would be no possibility for individual
      operators to make different evaluations of the stock value, nor different
      opinions on future price trends. The rigid ‘deterministic law of economics’
      tool, equal for all operators, if used systematically, would unfortunately end
      up destroying economic trends, as soon as the latter were recognized and
      used in practice, and blocking the market.
         In reality, in economics and in ﬁnance, as in many social sciences, the role
      of the individual opinions of the actors, which conﬂict with one another and
      which change over time, appears to be too important to be able to identify
      deterministic laws applicable to models that predict (or account for) dy-
      namics that are more varied and complex than simple oscillations (cycles).
      Simple oscillations (of prices, of production, of the level of employ-
      ment, . . . ) in fact, are the forms of a supply–demand dynamics based on
      elementary rules, the result of subjective evaluations such as: ‘sell when you
                                           An observation on determinism in economics   189

think that the current price will not rise, and buy when you think that the
current price will not fall’. They are subjective rules of empirical origin, in
which only the interactions between a few variables of very general signiﬁ-
cance are taken into account (this is all one can do), which consider average
values calculated according to some deﬁnition. These rules can be used
without destroying the market, precisely because they are subjective and
therefore lead the various operators to personal evaluations and therefore
to differing decisions.
   Roughly, an oscillatory dynamics similar to that cited also originates
from the linear model in the case of a predation relationship between two
populations (Chapter 11, Cases 2A and 2B), or from the Volterra–Lotka
model (Chapter 2). These models, however, are ineffective in economics
because they do not take a number of aspects into account, for example, the
fact that the cycles never repeat themselves in exactly the same way, insofar
as there are general trends that superpose and render situations new each
time. An effective model should at least take the variability of the individual
actions of operators into account, considering them not as statistical ﬂuc-
tuations with respect to average values, but as real state variables that
follow their own deterministic dynamics. This, however, would lead to a
huge increase in the number of state variables to be taken into consider-
ation, and thus the problem of identifying which variables are necessary to
‘close’ the system would resurface. On the other hand, even if we actually
managed to close the economic system, in accordance with our observations
above, it would cease to work, which would impose a substantial review of
the deterministic law, as soon as such was identiﬁed.
   Precisely due to the effect of the continual individual action of the
operators and the variability of their decisions, in the absence of a (based
on the above, probably useless) ‘deterministic law of economics’, it does not
appear very plausible that the markets would remain in conditions of
stationarity for long enough to be able to identify its chaotic attractors.
We could say that anyone who claims to have recognized the mechanisms of
deterministic chaos in ﬁnancial markets has not learnt anything of any use;
and anyone that really knew something useful would not say so, otherwise
that something would cease to be useful.
                  Logistic growth as a
 20               population development
                  model



Introduction: modelling the growth of a population
In this section we would like to return to the description of the dynamics of
a single population interacting with the external environment, a subject that
we have mentioned on several occasions in previous sections, however
without ever going into any further detail.
   A population can consist of bacteria, insects, people, or any other type of
entity able to reproduce itself. The growth model of a population describes
how the number x of the members of the latter evolve, i.e. increase or
decrease over time.
   Let us attempt to formulate a model that reproduces the evolution of a
population over time. We can make various types of simplifying assump-
tion: from those, for example, that are extremely schematic and non-real-
istic used as the basis of the model proposed by Fibonacci87 in the Liber
Abaci dated 1202 (a modern English translation is in Siegler, 2002), regard-
ing the problem of describing the growth of a population of rabbits in a
closed space, which gave rise to the well-known sequence of whole numbers
now called the Fibonacci sequence. To those on which Malthus’ model
(1798) is based, which establishes the growth of a population according
to a geometric law [or, expressed in a continuous form in equation (4.3),
according to an exponential] faced with the growth of wealth according to a
arithmetic law.88 We have repeatedly used Malthus’ law (4.3) in previous
sections every time we needed an example of a linear differential equation.

  87
      Leonardo Pisano, mathematician from Pisa (Tuscany) better known as Fibonacci, short
for ﬁllio Bonacci (or Bonaccii), which in middle-age Italian means Bonaccio’s son; he intro-
duced in Europe the Hindu-Arabic decimal number system in the XIII century and is consi-
dered the greatest European mathematician of the middle ages (see, Smith, 1958; Boyer, 1968).
  88
      In his renowned Essay on the Principle of Population, Thomas Robert Malthus attrib-
uted, albeit in a rather a prioristic way, the cause of social poverty to an imbalance between
                                                                          The Verhulst equation    191




Growth in the presence of limited resources: Verhulst
equation
Just before the mid-nineteenth century, the Belgian mathematician Pierre-
François Verhulst (1838, 1850) proposed a correction to Malthus’ growth
model to take into account the limited nature of environmental resources, by

population growth and the development of resources. Malthus’ theory was based on two
basic hypotheses: (1) there are different laws for population growth, that develops at a
constant rate according to a geometric progression which leads it to double every 25 years,
and for resources, which grow at a constant speed only, according to an arithmetic progres-
sion; (2) the tendency of the working classes to react to an improvement in wages, and
therefore of the level of well-being, by procreating. Malthus sustained the need for forms of
demographic control as a solution to the problem of poverty, indicating some so-called
preventive checks, such as celibacy or delaying marriage until an older age for fear of poverty,
as a way to avoid that other causes, called positive checks, i.e. the checks that repress an
increase which is already begun (Malthus indicated 11 of these, amongst which: war, famine,
infant mortality, etc.), bring humanity to levels of survival able to avoid a destiny of poverty
and hunger that the entire human race would face due to uncontrolled demographic devel-
opment. Unfortunately, those that were most willing to understand this line of reasoning
belonged to the middle and upper classes, while the poor are less disposed to demographic
control, therefore the preventive check ends up acting on the upper classes, while the positive
one acts on the lower ones. Malthus saw the precipitation of mankind towards hunger as
inevitable: ‘To prevent the recurrence of misery, is, alas! beyond the power of man’ (Chapter
5); ‘Famine seems to be the last, the most dreadful resource of nature. The power of
population is so superior to the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man, that
premature death must in some shape or other visit the human race. The vices of mankind are
active and able ministers of depopulation. They are the precursors in the great army of
destruction; and often ﬁnish the dreadful work themselves. But should they fail in this war
of extermination, sickly seasons, epidemics, pestilence, and plague, advance in terriﬁc array,
and sweep off their thousands and ten thousands. Should success be still incomplete, gigantic
inevitable famine stalks in the rear, and with one mighty blow levels the population with the
food of the world. Must it not then be acknowledged by an attentive examiner of the histories
of mankind, that in every age and in every state in which man has existed, or does now exist.
That the increase of population is necessarily limited by the means of subsistence. That
population does invariably increase when the means of subsistence increase. And that the
superior power of population it repressed, and the actual population kept equal to the means
of subsistence, by misery and vice?’ (Chapter 7). (Malthus, 1798). Malthus’ prediction that
population growth would outstrip agricultural production and lead to mass starvation
proved fallacious, as he didn’t take into account the consequences of technological innov-
ation, e.g. the introduction of mechanical aids, chemical fertilizers, hybridisation techniques
and so on that, over time, would change for the best the dramatically insufﬁcient resources’
growth law. The ﬁrst version of the Essay, conceived as a somewhat polemic response to the
optimistic vision of society proposed by William Godwin, Jean-Antoine de Caritat de Con-
dorcet, Adam Smith, and other economists, was published anonymously in 1798, in the form
of a very brief compendium (around 50,000 words), and enjoyed immediate success; a second
version followed in 1803, with the addition of a considerable amount of material, a real
treatise of demographics, no longer anonymous, that made Malthus extremely famous.
192   20 : Logistic growth

      introducing a constant: the carrying capacity. This, as we know (Chapter 12),
      is the maximum value that the number of individuals in a population can
      reach, compatible with the available environmental resources. In this and the
      next section we will be discussing some of the characteristics of Verhulst’s
      growth model.89
         Let us go back to Malthus’ exponential growth model (4.3), which we
      write as follows:

                                             n(t) ¼ n(0)ert                                  (20:1)

      in which n(t) is the variable that indicates the value of the population, a
      function of time, n(0) is the initial value of the population, and r is the
      constant growth rate of the population.
        Differentiating (20.1), we have:

                                              n_ (t) ¼ rn(t)                                 (20:2)

      which, as is common practice, can be put into discrete form:90

                                       n(t þ 1) ¼ n(t) þ rn(t)                              (20:20 )

         In the above case, n(t) indicates the population at the beginning of the t-th
      interval of amplitude Dt ¼ 1, a population that remains constant for the
      entire duration of the interval. A differential equation that describes a
      dynamical system in continuous time, such as (15.2), is called a ﬂow,
      while the version in discrete time, such as (20.2’) (ﬁnite difference equation)
      is known as a map.
         At this point, let us introduce Verhulst’s carrying capacity, a constant that
      we will indicate with k. When the number n of individuals in the population
      reaches the value k, growth itself has to become nil. However, this is not
      enough; k must, so to speak, display its inﬂuence even before n reaches the
      maximum permitted amount. It therefore has to show its presence by
      curbing the population’s speed of growth to an extent that is proportional
      to the size of n.

        89
             Verhulst’s model was resubmitted to the attention of scholars and examined in depth
      only relatively recently, in a famous work of the biologist Robert May (1976).
          90
             Very often, in economics, in demographics, and in the majority of other social sciences,
      it is common to put models into the form of ﬁnite difference equations, in contrast to physics,
      in which models are almost always formulated in continuous time. This is due to the fact that,
      as a norm, the model attempts to simulate historic series of data that are made up of
      observations (measurements) made at discrete time intervals.
                                                                          The Verhulst equation    193

   This can be obtained by summing an appropriately selected negative term
that is a function of the value of population n to the second member of the
equation (20.2), and to its discrete version (20.2’). In this way we introduce
a real feedback to the system: population growth is now controlled, not
only by a mechanism of liberal growth (namely unperturbed), à la Malthus,
but also by a regulation mechanism that puts itself in competition with the
liberal growth, the action of which depends on environmental circumstan-
ces, i.e. on the relation between the population at a given time and the
carrying capacity. The presence of this second term ends up destroying the
linearity of the law of growth (20.2).
   According to Verhulst’s assumption, one of the many possible ones,
Malthus’ model in discrete form (20.2’) can be adapted with the introduc-
tion of a negative corrective term, proportional to the product of the growth
rate r and the square of the value of the population n2, as follows:
                                                         
                                                      n(t)
                          n(t þ 1) ¼ n(t) þ rn(t) 1                                    (20:3)
                                                       k

  Equation (20.3) can be usefully rewritten in a more concise and schematic
form, that lends itself better to subsequent analyses:

                               x(t þ 1) ¼ lx(t)(1  x(t) )                              (20:4)

Map (20.4) is called a logistic map,91 let us take a brief look at it.
   We rewrite (20.4) in the form x(t þ 1) ¼ lx(t)  lx2 (t). The second mem-
ber has two addends that act in opposition to one another to generate the
value of the population at a later time: the ﬁrst, lx(t), acts, in a certain sense,
as an ‘engine’ that provokes the growth of the population according to a
linear law; the second, lx2 (t), being negative, acts, on the other hand, like a
term that provokes the diminution of the population. It is the effect of the
feedback, that in (20.3) and (20.4) was postulated in quadratic form, caused
by the interaction between the state of the system, in this case the population,
and the environment, in this case the available resources (Figure 20.1).
   We also observe that, if we interpret x(t) as a population, even if only in
an abstract sense, this can never be negative; this means that (20.4) makes
sense only when 0 # x(t) # 1; in fact, if x(t) > 1, at a subsequent time we
would have a negative x(t þ 1). The usefulness of the transformation of

  91
      Equation (20.4) can be obtained by replacing the variable in (20.3). In fact, if we assume
n(t) ¼ k(1 þ r)x(t)=r, we obtain: x(t þ 1) ¼ x(t)(1 þ r  (1 þ r)x(t) ); if we also assume
l ¼ 1 þ r, the equation obtained can be simpliﬁed into (20.4).
194   20 : Logistic growth



                                            ENVIRONMENT




                                 x(t)           +lx(t)                x(t+1)
                             Population    Growth mechanism        Population
                              at time t                            at time t+1

                                                         Interaction with
                                                         the environment

                                                  −lx2(t)
                                           Decrease mechanism:
                                          environmental feedback




      Figure 20.1 The logistic map as a representation of the interaction between a growth
      mechanism and a control mechanism exercised by environmental feedback.

      (20.3) into the form of (20.4) lies precisely in the fact that with it we
      normalize, so to speak, the variable x(t) between 0, the minimum value,
      and 1, the maximum value. This facilitates the analysis of the model, which
      can be conducted at a general level, without considering the particular value
      of the carrying capacity, but expressing, on the other hand, the population
      in percentage terms with respect to the permitted maximum number.



      The logistic function
      Let us return to Mathus’s model in continuous time (15.1). By introducing
      the term k following the same line of reasoning used for the discrete form,
      we obtain the following ﬁrst-order nonlinear differential equation with
      separable variables, a continuous correspondent of (20.3):
                                                             
                                                         n(t)
                                      n_ (t) ¼ rn(t) 1                                 (20:5)
                                                          k

        Equation (20.5) satisﬁes the conditions of the theorem of existence and
      uniqueness and therefore provides a single analytic solution, if the initial
      conditions are given. Integrating (20.5), we obtain:

                                                       k
                                          n(t) ¼                                        (20:6)
                                                   1 þ Cert
                                                                        The logistic function   195


                                       n                           n=k=1

                                           r=2


                                                                       r = 0.5

                                                     r=1

                                    C=1




                                           C=3
                            r=1
         r = 0.5

                                     r=2                                            t



    Figure 20.2 The logistic function (20.6) portrayed for several values of C and r.

in which the integration constant C depends on the initial value of the
population n(0) and is given by C ¼ (k  n(0) )=n(0). Figure 20.2 shows
several cases of the general integral (20.6) for three values of parameter r,
combined with two values of constant C (parameter k is just a scale factor
on the axis n(t); it does not signiﬁcantly affect the trend of the function and,
therefore, we can overlook it without losing any important elements).
   Equation (20.6) is known as the logistic function, or curve. As Figure
20.2 shows, the typical trend of the logistic curve is an S form: slow initial
growth, followed by an acceleration in growth, the intensity of which
depends on the value of parameter r, and then by a subsequent slowing
down when it is close to the maximum permitted value n(t) ¼ k, which thus
constitutes an asymptotic limit of function (20.6).
   It is interesting to observe how Verhulst, when he introduced the carry-
ing capacity and the logistic function, or law which derives from the
former in continuous form, conceived the idea on the basis of an analogy
with physics, in perfect physicalist style (see Chapter 1), taking inspiration
from the resistance that friction has on motion (Le Bras, 1999). The
analogy was based on two replacements: the speed of a body with the
value of the population, and the acceleration of the body with the rate of
growth of the population, i.e. with the increase per unit of time divided by
the value of the population: r ¼ n_ =n. Just as, in the presence of friction, the
acceleration of a body subjected to a force is equal to the constant value that
it would have in the absence of friction, diminished by a term proportional to
196   20 : Logistic growth

      the speed of the body, caused by the resistance to its progress opposed by the
      friction, in the same way, proposed Verhulst, the growth rate of a popula-
      tion, n_ =n, is given by a constant term a, diminished by a term proportional to
      the value of the population by a factor b, i.e.

                                                n_
                                                   ¼ a  bn
                                                n

      which is precisely the logistic function in continuous form (20.5), of which
      the logistic map (20.4) is the version in discrete time.
         In the 1920s, the American biologist and demographist Raymond Pearl,
      one of the ﬁrst scholars along with Alfred Lotka to use mathematical
      methods in biology, made extensive use of the law of logistic growth in a
      series of demographic surveys and showed that the law of logistic growth
      effectively described the evolution of numerous limited groups of appropri-
      ately deﬁned human populations92 (Pearl and Reed, 1920, Pearl, 1925).
      Pearl believed that this law could be used to calculate the future values of
      the entire world population, even going as far as predicting a number of
      individuals equal to 1.9 billion for 2000, which was a far cry from the
      values actually reached (Le Bras, 1999). The human population, therefore,
      if considered in its entirety, does not appear to follow Verhulst’s logistic law.
         According to Hervé Le Bras (1999), it is possible to construct basic
      demographic models that clearly lead to a type of logistic growth law, by
      considering individuals in a limited territory and making drastic, but fairly
      simple assumptions: that the individuals do not die in the time period
      considered, that they randomly choose where to live, and that, once estab-
      lished, they no longer migrate.
         The following is a very simple example of a model of this nature. We divide
      a square territory with side k into k2 unit side cells, and we presume that: (1)
      a certain number n of said cells is occupied by a single individual, (2) each
      individual has a probability a of generating another individual, (3) the latter
      individual randomly chooses one of the existing k2 cells and moves there, if it
      is empty, or perishes if he ﬁnds it occupied. The model assumes that, at each
      moment in time, the (instantaneous) speed of growth of the population is
      interpreted as a probability of growth and is proportional to three factors:
      (1) the probability a that a new individual is born, (2) the percentage of free
      cells, (3) the value of the population, which is equal to the number n of
      occupied cells. The percentage of free cells is equal to the difference between
      the total number k2 of cells and the number n of occupied cells, all divided by

        92
             For this reason, the logistic law is sometimes also referred to as Pearl’s law.
                                                                The logistic function   197

k2 . Using the compound probability theorem, the probability of growth,
indicated by H, can be expressed as follows:

                              H ¼ an(k2  n)=k2

The growth rate n_ =n of the population, which is expressed as the growth
rate of the occupied cells, thus becomes equal to the probability of growth
H divided by the total population n, i.e.:

                             n_ H     n
                               ¼ ¼a 1 2
                             n n      k

   The equation obtained has the same form as (20.5) and therefore repre-
sents a law of logistic growth, the law according to which the population
throughout the territory considered in the model grows.
   The logistic curve constitutes a relatively simple growth pattern that can
be applied to a number of different contexts: in any situation in which we
wish to model the nonlinear growth of a variable in the presence of a factor
that acts, in the same way as the carrying capacity, establishing itself as the
maximum value of the variable and limiting the speed of growth.
   In times more recent than to those in which Pearl made his analyses, the
logistic function has found application, amongst others, in models that
describe the evolution of territorial systems (Allen et al., 1978; Wilson,
1981; Allen, 1997a). However, it has been noted that, in applications of this
nature, the hypothesis of a constant limiting factor k is rather implausible,
because it is difﬁcult to exclude a priori effects due to the interaction
between the value x of the population and the limiting factor k. In fact, a
human population adapts itself to the environment and, in this way, moves
the limits that have been imposed on growth by using new means of
production, by improving productivity and, in general, through techno-
logical innovation. For reasons of this nature, therefore, the maximum
number of individuals that can live together in a unit of surface area is
very low in a rural area, providing that only agricultural activities are
practised therein, in comparison to an urban area, in which the availability
of food resources for each individual is much higher than what would be
supplied by the primary sector in the same urban surface area.
   Several variants of the model of logistic growth have been repeatedly
applied to the description of the processes of diffusion, in particular in social
sciences, such as for example, the diffusion of epidemics in a population or
the diffusion of a commercial product in a market. In general they are
processes in which there is an initial period of slow growth of the diffusion,
198   20 : Logistic growth

      followed by an increase in the rapidity of said diffusion and by a ﬁnal slowing
      down, when the diffusion is close to a saturation level (almost the entire
      population is ill, in the example of the epidemic, or almost everyone has
      purchased that particular product, in the case of the diffusion of a product).
         Different types of approach, in terms of assumptions and viewpoints, have
      been proposed, particularly to describe the diffusion of technological innov-
      ation in a territory (Fischer, 1989; Sonis, 1990b, 1995; Frenkel and Shefer,
      1997). In this context, the diffusion of innovation is deﬁned as a process,
      which, over time and in various ways, causes an innovation to be transferred
      within a group of individuals (businesses), in a given social system. It can be
      compared to a type of communication that transfers information and ideas.
         The use of the logistic model in its basic form to model the diffusion of
      innovation calls for several limitative assumptions that are at the basis of
      several criticisms (Davies, 1979). They contest, for example, that the inﬂu-
      ence of a new technology can occur only in the long term: the potential user
      adopts it, in fact, only when the return satisﬁes his expectations, i.e. only
      after the superiority of the new technology with respect to the old has been
      proven. This means that for a certain length of time there is a sort of
      technological pluralism, which does not guarantee that the replacement of
      the old with the new technology is merely a question of time, as is assumed
      in the basic logistic model. Furthermore, the latter assumes that the poten-
      tial users only have the option of adopting or not adopting the innovation,
      without considering intermediate stages such as its study, analysis and
      assessment, the acquisition of know-how, etc., and also assumes that the
      innovation doesn’t change during the diffusion process and that it is not
      affected by the diffusion of other innovations.
         Despite the criticisms of its intrinsic limitations, however, some variants of
      the logistic model have been used repeatedly, usually expressing the diffu-
      sion of the innovation in equations such as the following (Allen, 1997a):

                                                    N(t))
                              _ (t) ¼ (a þ bN(t))(N
                              N

      in which N(t) is the number of individuals (or businesses) that adopt the
      innovative technological element at time t, N  is the total number of indi-
      viduals that can adopt a given technological innovation and (a þ bN(t)) is
      the diffusion coefﬁcient of the given technological innovation.
        In the following section we will be looking at the version of Verhulst’s law
      in its discrete form. The evolution that it provides, as we will see, is
      considerably different to that of the version in its continuous form, and in
      certain conditions, becomes chaotic.
               A nonlinear discrete
 21            model: the logistic map



Introduction
In this section we want to continue our discussion of the growth model
presented in Chapter 20, the logistic law, illustrating the dynamics of the
version in discrete time (20.4). We are particularly interested in showing
how a simple nonlinear growth model such as (20.4), that determines the
logistic growth of a population, can in some cases generate chaos. In
Chapter 22 we will be illustrating various examples produced by means
of numerical simulations, as well as some applications of the logistic map in
regional sciences. Readers interested in a complete description of the prop-
erties of the dynamics of the logistics map can ﬁnd detailed and in-depth
discussions of the mathematical aspects, which in this text are only brieﬂy
mentioned, in two fundamental articles. These are works that have repro-
posed the logistic map to scholars in recent decades, more than a century
after Verhulst introduced it: the work of Robert May (1976), the ﬁrst, in
recent years to examine the properties of the map, and that of Mitchell
Feigenbaum (1978), whose content is more technical, in which speciﬁc
aspects are looked at in more depth and generalized.
   Let us reconsider the logistic map in the form of (20.4). For the sake of
simplicity we will rewrite it, without altering its substance, replacing the
dependence on time with an index k that ‘counts’ the successive iterations:

                             xkþ1 ¼ lxk (1  xk )                      (21:1)

In this way, the value of variable x at iteration (time) k þ 1 depends,
according to (21.1), on the value that the same variable x has at the previous
iteration k. Note that, as discussed in Chapter 20, the values of xk in (21.1)
fall between 0 and 1.
   Equation (21.1), like (20.4), is a quadratic map, whose sequence of xk
values, for a given value of l, provides the evolution of the population at
discrete time intervals. The phase space of the dynamical system (21.1) is
200   21 : The logistic map

      made up of only one variable, xk , and the set of the successive values of xk is
      the population’s orbit.
         As is immediately apparent in (20.4) and (21.1), if during the course of
      the evolution, the value xk ¼ 0 is reached, then all the subsequent values of
      x are still 0. On the other hand, we note that the other extreme of the
      permitted interval for the xk , i.e. xk ¼ 1, is also a particular value: if xk ¼ 1
      is reached, the subsequent value is xkþ1 ¼ 0, and from then on all subse-
      quent xk are equal to 0.
         The fact that the population x falls between 0 and 1 also imposes a
      limitation on the values of the growth parameter l, which, on one hand,
      must not be negative, so that the population never becomes negative, and
      on the other hand, must not exceed 4, as we will see very soon, so that the
      population doesn’t exceed 1, the maximum permitted value. More specif-
      ically, depending on the value of l, the following cases can arise:

      (a) When l < 0, the population becomes immediately negative, which,
          obviously, is nonsensical, thus negative values of l are not acceptable.
      (b) When l ¼ 0, the minimum acceptable value, the population becomes
          nil at the ﬁrst iteration and then remains so.
      (c) When 0 < l < 4, the population evolves, always maintaining a value in
          the range between 0 and 1. More precisely, as we will see at the end of
          this paragraph, an attractor exists which, depending on the value of l,
          acts in three different ways: (1) it drives the population towards one
          asymptotical ﬁnal value only, (2) it makes the population oscillate on a
          set of asymptotical values or (3) it drives the population to take only
          values within a certain interval, whose limits, lying between 0 and 1,
          depend on the value of l. One can show that, in the latter case, the
          attractor is chaotic and that the set of the values that the population can
          assume in that interval is dense, i.e. given any two values (states), the
          population, in its evolution, will sooner or later assume a value that
          falls between them. 0 < l < 4 is the most interesting case which we will
          be discussing in the next paragraph.
      (d) When l ¼ 4, we have another limit case, which is still acceptable,
          whose particularity lies in the fact that, for any initial state of the
          population between 0 and 1, the attractor is also the unit interval
          (0,1); in other words, the population evolving from any initial state
          can take any value between 0 and 1.93
        93
           If the population, during the course of its evolution, reaches the value xk ¼ 0:5, then at
      the next step the map (21.1) gives xkþ1 ¼ 4  0:5  0:5 ¼ 1. But if xkþ1 becomes 1, the map
      (21.1) means that the value of the population at the next step will be 0, and from then on, will
      always be 0.
                                  The iteration method and the ﬁxed points of a function   201

(e) When l > 4, the speed of growth of the population is too fast. This
    means that when xk reaches values included in a certain neighbourhood
    of 0.5, the amplitude of which depend on l, at the next iteration, xkþ1
    will exceed 1, the maximum permitted value. Let us clarify using an
    example, assuming that l ¼ 4:1. If, for example, during the course of its
    evolution, the population reaches the value xk ¼ 0:49, then at the next
    step, the value xkþ1 ¼ 4:1  0:49  0:51 ¼ 1:02459 will be obtained,
    which is outside the interval permitted for x. Therefore values of l
    higher than 4 are not acceptable.

  Before proceeding with the analysis of the dynamics of (21.1), let us
remind ourselves of the concept of ﬁxed point of a function: we will use it
immediately afterwards, applying it to (21.1).



The iteration method and the ﬁxed points
of a function
One of the simplest methods to identify the approximate roots of an
equation is that known as the iteration method. It involves writing the
equation for which a root is being sought in the following form, where an
unknown x has been isolated as the only term in the ﬁrst member:

                                  x ¼ f (x)                                    (21:2)

assigning a value x1 to the x value, then calculating f (x1 ), and then
assuming the following values of x2 ¼ f (x1 ), x3 ¼ f (x2 ), and so on,
according to the iterative map, which is just a simple discrete dynamical
system:

                                xnþ1 ¼ f (xn )                                 (21:20 )

   For example, using a simple pocket calculator, an approximate root for
the equation x ¼ cos x, that cannot be solved in exact terms, can be iden-
tiﬁed by proceeding as follows. Assume x1 ¼ 1 (radians), calculate its
cosine, then the cosine of the cosine, then the cosine of the cosine of the
cosine and so on. As the iterations progress, the values of xn tend to
stabilize, deﬁning a real number with increasing precision. The following
values are subsequently obtained:
202   21 : The logistic map

                                 x1 ¼ 1
                                 x2 ¼ cos x1 ﬃ 0:54030
                                 x3 ¼ cos x2 ﬃ 0:85755
                                 x4 ¼ cos x3 ﬃ 0:65429
                                 x5 ¼ cos x4 ﬃ 0:79348
                                 x6 ¼ cos x5 ﬃ 0:70137
                                 x6 ¼ cos x5 ﬃ 0:70137
                                 x7 ¼ cos x6 ﬃ 0:76396
                                ...
                                x20 ¼ cos x19 ﬃ 0:73894
                                x21 ¼ cos x20 ﬃ 0:73918
                                x22 ¼ cos x21 ﬃ 0:73902
                                x23 ¼ cos x22 ﬃ 0:73913

         As we can see, from the twenty-ﬁrst iteration onwards, the sequence
      provides values whose ﬁrst three decimal places no longer change. The
      limit that the sequence of numbers generated by iterating (21.2’) tend
      towards, if it exists and is ﬁnite as in the example of the cosine, is an
      approximation of the root X we were seeking:

                                      X ¼ lim cos xn                         (21:3)
                                          n!1


      The value X deﬁned by the limit (21.3), the root of equation (21.2), is called
      a ﬁxed point attractor of f (x).
           It can be shown that the sequence xnþ1 ¼ f (xn ) converges towards a
      number X, a ﬁxed point attractor, only if in a neighbourhood of X we
      have jf 0 (X)j < 1.
           The above method has an effective geometric interpretation. The graphs
      of the two members of (21.2) are traced separately: y ¼ x, the bisector of
      the ﬁrst quadrant, for the ﬁrst member, and y ¼ f (x), for the second member
      (Figure 21.1). The ﬁxed point attractors (like point A in Figure 21.1) can be
      identiﬁed graphically in some of the points of intersection of the function
      y ¼ f (x) with the bisecting line of the ﬁrst quadrant y ¼ x.
           In addition to the ﬁxed point attractors of the abscissa X, for which
      jf 0 (X)j < 1, points of a different nature can also be found between the
      points of intersection of the function y ¼ f (x) with the straight line y ¼ x.
      These are ﬁxed point repellers: those points of abscissa X, common to the
      f(x) and the straight line y ¼ x, in a neighbourhood of which we have
                                             The iteration method and the ﬁxed points of a function   203



       y                                                 y = f(x)
                                                                         y=x
                                                          B




              A


                                                                                   x

              X … x4        x3          x2          x1        x0    x0   ⬁

           A is a fixed point attractor of f (x):    The sequence diverges from B: B is
           its abscissa X is the limit of the        a fixed point repeller of f(x); it marks
           sequences of the xn.                      the boundary of A’s basin of
                                                     attraction.

                      Figure 21.1 The ﬁxed points of a function f(x).




jf 0 (X)j > 1 (like point B in Figure 21.1). From the ﬁxed point repellers, the
xnþ1 ¼ f (xn ) sequence, initiated by assuming an x1 value close to X, in-
creasingly distances itself as n increases. The X abscissa of a ﬁxed point
repeller, therefore, cannot be reached by seeking the limit of the sequence of
the xnþ1 ; it can be obtained by using particular devices, which we are not
going to discuss here, which enable us to go backwards in a numerical
sequence. In general, ﬁxed point repellers act like a border between the
basins of attraction of attractor points.
     Basically, ﬁxed point attractors are the points at which the function f(x)
meets the bisector y ¼ x with an inclination (the derivative’s value at that
point) less than that of the bisector itself, which is 1; ﬁxed point repellers, on
the other hand, are the points at which f(x) meets the bisector, with an
inclination higher than that of the bisector itself.
     The search for the ﬁxed point attractors or repellers of a function is only
one of the aspects of the eternal problem of algebra: the search for the roots
of any equation. With this technique, in practice, the search for the roots
leads to the analysis of a particular sequence generated by a function or, in
204   21 : The logistic map

      some cases to the examination of a graphic representation of the same
      function, while the analysis of the derivative of the function enables the
      nature of the ﬁxed points to be analysed.
        Let us close this short diversion into the ﬁxed points of a function94 and
      return to our discussion of the logistic map, now paying particular attention
      to its ﬁxed points, which we will be applying as mentioned previously.



      The dynamics of the logistic map
      As we mentioned at the beginning of this section, the successive values of
      the xk variable, i.e. the values of the population at successive intervals
      obtained by iterating the logistic map (21.1), deﬁne a set of points in a
      one-dimensional phase space, that we have called the orbit of the popula-
      tion. Iterating the map means following the progress of subsequent xk ,
      identifying, if such exist, the ﬁxed point attractors or repellers of the second
      member function of (21.1), which in the rest of the section we will often
      indicate simply as f (x) ¼ lx(1  x).
         A fundamental characteristic of the logistic map is that different values of
      the growth parameter, which fall between 0 and 4, not only determine
      different orbits, but can give rise either to different conﬁgurations of ﬁxed
      point attractors or to a chaotic evolution that does not have any ﬁxed point
      attractor. In the remainder of this section, we will be looking at the quali-
      tative aspects of the different situations that arise as the parameter l
      increases from 0 to 4.
         It is immediately apparent that there is a ﬁxed point that does not depend
      on the value of l: x ¼ 0. Let us indicate the abscissa of this (ﬁrst) ﬁxed point
      with X1 . It is an attractor or repeller, as we have seen, depending on whether
      the derivative of f(x):

                                    f 0 (x) ¼ l  2lx ¼ l(1  2x)                              (21:4)



        94
            In the text we have provided a very succinct and rather approximate version of
      the iteration method and of the theory of ﬁxed points, both at the theoretical and applicative
      level, limiting ourselves to aspects that are relevant to our subject area only. For example, the
      case in which we have jf 0 (X)j ¼ 1, i.e. the case in which the straight line y ¼ x is tangent to
      the function y ¼ f (x), would require further speciﬁc considerations that we do not present
      here. For a more complete and exhaustive discussion the reader should consult texts regard-
      ing dynamical systems and numerical calculus (for example, Tricomi, 1965; Collatz, 1966;
      Householder, 1974; Zeldovich and Myškis, 1976; Von Haeseler and Peitgen, 1988/1989;
      Devaney, 1992).
                                                     The dynamics of the logistic map   205

calculated when x ¼ 0, is, respectively, less than or more than 1. However,
(21.4) tells us that f 0 (x), calculated when x ¼ 0, is exactly equal to the
growth parameter l; thus we can simply conclude that X1 ¼ 0 is the ﬁxed
point attractor, if l < 1, or ﬁxed point repeller if l > 1.
   If l < 1, therefore, X1 ¼ 0 represents a state of stable equilibrium. In this
case model (21.1) represents a population that becomes increasingly less
numerous and tends asymptotically to extinguish itself, a situation towards
which the said population is inexorably led by too low a growth parameter.
On the other hand, if l < 1, it is evident that the limit of the sequence of the
xk generated by (21.1) can be none other than 0. In fact, the product
xk (1  xk ) is always less than 1 (remember that 0 < xk < 1) and, at each
iteration, it decreases further because it is multiplied by l.
   When l ¼ 1, the derivative (21.4) does not help us understand the nature
of the ﬁxed point, because we obtain f 0 (0) ¼ 1, which does not tell us
whether the iterations converge or not. Nevertheless, by iterating (21.1)
with l ¼ 1, it is immediately apparent that the sequence of the xk converges
towards 0 starting from any initial value that falls between 0 and 1. Thus
also when l ¼ 1, X1 ¼ 0 is a ﬁxed point attractor. As there are no other
roots of equation (20.4), we conclude that when l # 1, model (21.1)
always leads to the extinction of the population.
   If, on the other hand, l > 1 (21.4) always gives f 0 (0) > 1. This assures us
that X1 ¼ 0 is a ﬁxed point repeller, i.e. a point of unstable equilibrium.
When l > 1, the model represents the case of a population that, starting
from a low initial value, close to 0, tends to grow.
   However, now the growth is maintained only until when, for sufﬁciently
large xk , other elements become important that slow it down and invert it.
For x1 close to 0 and l > 1, in fact, the ﬁrst terms of the sequence of the xk
are increasing ones, because in xk (1  xk ) ¼ xk  x2k the positive term xk is
dominant with respect to the negative one x2k . The situation is different,
however, when, as the population grows, the value of the second order term
grows, or when the iteration starts from a high value of x1 that is therefore
not close to 0. In the latter two cases, the subsequent progress of the
population depends on the particular value of l. In fact whether and
where there is equilibrium between the growth mechanism, the positive
ﬁrst order term xk , and the decremental one, the negative second order term
x2k depend on the said value of l. The situations that are generated are
different and need to be examined further. Let us therefore illustrate the
different cases that arise as the value of l passes from 1 to 4; for the sake of
simplicity, the discussion will be mainly qualitative. Interested readers can
ﬁnd useful mathematical elements to support the descriptions below in the
bibliographical references cited at the end of this section.
206   21 : The logistic map

      Case 1: 1 < l # 3. As we have seen, point X1 ¼ 0 is now a repeller.
      However there is now another ﬁxed point that we can obtain by writing
      (21.1) in the form x ¼ f (x), obtaining a simple second degree equation:

                                             x ¼ lx(1  x)                                     (21:5)

         It has a second root X2 , that can be obtained using basic algebra, the
      value of which depends on l. When 1 < l # 3, it can be seen after several
      operations that (21.4), calculated in X2 , now gives f 0 (X2 ) < 1, therefore we
      can conclude that X2 represents a ﬁxed point attractor, regardless of its
      speciﬁc value.
         In Case 1, therefore, the logistic map (21.1) describes the evolution of a
      population which, as the iterations progress, tends asymptotically towards
      a value X2 . It is important to note that X2 does not depend on the initial
      value from where the evolution started, but only on the value of the growth
      parameter l. As the iterations progress, in a certain sense, the system loses
      its memory of the initial state; for any initial value of the population, the
      ﬁnal outcome (asymptotic) is always the same: X2 .
         As l increases from 1 to 3, two effects are observed: on one hand, the
      ﬁxed point X2 increases with continuity until the value X2 ¼ 2=3, which is
      reached when l ¼ 3; on the other hand, the rapidity with which the popu-
      lation tends towards the attractor X2 decreases, because, as l gets closer to
      3, the value that (21.4) generates for jf 0 (X2 )j increases and gets increasingly
      closer to the critical value 1. When l ¼ 3, we have X2 ¼ 2=3, but in this
      situation X2 loses its characteristic of attracting the value of the population
      xk , because (21.4) gives jf 0 (2=3)j ¼ 1. The value l ¼ 3 is therefore a critical
      value that we will call l1 : when l ¼ l1 , the sequence of the xk ceases to
      converge at an asymptotic value and we have the transition to a dynamics
      different to that of Case 1.95
         95
            To be more precise, for l ¼ 3 the sequence (21.1) tends towards the limit
      x1 ¼ 2=3 ¼ 0:66666 . . . , but this occurs very slowly right from the start of the iterations,
      and at a speed that continues to diminish as the iterations progress; for example, after 10000
      iterations the sequence of the xk has still not stabilized at the third decimal place:
      x9999 ¼ 0:669014; x10000 ¼ 0:664303.
         Note, incidentally, that the value l1 ¼ 3, after which more than one ﬁxed point exists, can
      ﬁnd a justiﬁcation on an algebraic basis. Consider for period 2, in place of (21.5), the second
      iterate of the logistic map, i.e. the following equation, where the composed function f(f(x)) is
      introduced:

                              x ¼ f (f (x)) ¼ l  lx(1  x)  (1  lx(1  x))

      and look for the conditions that the parameter l has to satisfy in order to let real roots of the
      fourth degree polynomial in x, so obtained, exist. It can be easily seen that the roots are only
      real for l $ 3 (see Strogatz, 1994).
                                                              The dynamics of the logistic map   207

Case 2: 3 < l < 3:56994 . . . When l enters this third interval, the ﬁxed
point X2 , whose value still depends on l, becomes a repeller (unstable
equilibrium), and two new attractor points are generated on opposite
sides with respect to X2 . The xk variable now tends to asymptotically
oscillate between two new values, one higher than X2 , the other lower,
that alternate periodically, iteration after iteration, one for even iterations
and one for odd ones. The two new states that are formed (ﬁxed point
attractors) represent, as a whole, a single attractor, so to say ‘split’ into two
values.
   After several operations, however, it is apparent that the splitting of the
attractor into two new attractor points is maintained only until l, which
increases, reaches a second critical value, given by:96
                                            pﬃﬃﬃ
                               l2 ¼ 1 þ      6 ﬃ 3:44949

   When l > l2 , each of the two ﬁxed point attractors becomes a repeller
and gives rise to (‘splits into’) two new ﬁxed point attractors, as occurred
for X2 when l has exceeded the critical value l1 ¼ 3. The population now
tends to oscillate between four stable states (naturally we are still talking
about asymptotic stability). The speciﬁc values of these four states depend
only on the growth parameter l and not on the initial value of the popula-
tion. As soon as we have l > l2 , we therefore have four ﬁxed point
attractors and four ﬁxed point repellers alternated with the ﬁxed point at-
tractors: the four repeller points mark the basins of attraction of the four
ﬁxed point attractors. For example, for l ¼ 3:5 and initial value x1 ¼ 0:2,
after 25 iterations, the population system oscillates between the following
four values: 0.5009 . . . , 0.8875 . . . , 0.3828 . . . and 0.8269 . . .
   When l exceeds l2 , therefore, the number of ﬁnal states between which
the population oscillates doubles, and consequently, the oscillation period
doubles. On further growth of l, we observe that the splitting of the ﬁnal
states occurs again, in the same way, in correspondence with a new critical
value l3 and then again, in correspondence with another critical value l4 .
To be more precise, what we are observing is that the splitting of the states

  96
     Here again, as for l1 ¼ 3 (see footnote 92), the critical value l2 can be computed
algebraically as the minimum value that the parameter l has to reach in order to let the
roots of the 16th degree polynomial equation that we get using the fourth iterate (the
composed map):

                                      x ¼ f (f (f (f (x))))

be real (hereinafter we will write irrational numbers either showing the ﬁrst ﬁgures followed
by three dots or preceded by the symbol ﬃ as shown in the text).
208   21 : The logistic map

      repeats in correspondence with an inﬁnite sequence of critical values ln of
      the growth parameter l. In this way we have oscillations ﬁrst between four
      states (22 ), then between eight states (23 ), then between sixteen states (24 ),
      etc., which means that the oscillation period of the population between the
      ﬁnal states (asymptotic), as l increases, ﬁrst quadruples, then is multiplied
      by eight, then by sixteen, and so on. For each ln < l < lnþ1 , therefore, the
      population evolves over time, tending to bring itself to a condition in which
      it oscillates between 2n values that follow each other cyclically, with a
      period represented by 2n values of xk .
          The successive doubling of the oscillation period takes place according to
      the same mechanism (a ﬁxed point attractor becomes a repeller, generating
      two ﬁxed point attractors, one smaller and one larger than the former,
      which in turn split, and so on), for values of ln , that continue to increase
      but that are increasingly closer to one another. Following several operations
      that are not shown here, the ﬁrst values of ln can be obtained as shown in
      Table 21.1.
          The limit of the sequence of the ln is an irrational number l1, an
      approximated value of which is l1 ﬃ 3:56994.
          When 3 < l < l1 , the conﬁguration of the attractor, despite the fact that
      it is split into increasingly numerous states, only depends on the value of l
      and not on the initial value of the population. In other words, also in Case 2,
      it is the value of the growth parameter l that has full control of the system’s
      evolution, regardless of the initial value of the population. What happens is
      basically something that we have already met on a number of occasions in


                 Table 21.1 Logistic map: splittings, periodicities and critical values ln of
                 the growth parameter

                 Splittings n       Periodicity 2n of cycles                    ln

                  1                               2                  l1 ¼ 3:000000
                  2                               4                  l2 ﬃ 3:449490
                  3                               8                  l3 ﬃ 3:544090
                  4                              16                  l4 ﬃ 3:564407
                  5                              32                  l5 ﬃ 3:568759
                  6                              64                  l6 ﬃ 3:569692
                  7                             128                  l7 ﬃ 3:569891
                  8                             256                  l8 ﬃ 3:569934
                  9                             512                  l9 ﬃ 3:569943
                 10                            1024                  l10 ﬃ 3:569945
                 ...                             ...                 ...
                  1                              1                   l1 ﬃ 3:569945672
                                                     The dynamics of the logistic map   209

this book: the evolution brings the system asymptotically towards a state,
whether such is complex or simple, and as the system gets closer to said
state it loses its memory of the initial state. It is obvious that the loss of
memory of the initial state is contrary to the sensitivity to the initial states
that we have mentioned in the previous sections as one of the conditions
required for evolution according to a chaotic dynamic. In Cases 1 and 2 we
are in a situation of stability in which the dynamics of the population
evolves, always tending, for a given value of l, towards a unique ﬁnal
conﬁguration, regardless of any perturbation (or variation) of the initial
state.
   As the number n of the states between which the oscillation occurs
increases, the period becomes increasingly longer, because the number of
iterations after which one of the xk of the sequence generated by (21.1)
repeats a value already taken in a previous iteration is increasingly higher. A
very long period, therefore, requires the evolution of the model (21.1) to be
followed for numerous iterations before being observed, which makes it
more difﬁcult than a short period to recognize, for which the values of the
xk in the sequence repeat after a short interval of time. The growing
difﬁculty in identifying a periodicity in the sequence of xk , as the parameter
l grows, means that, as l increases, the evolution of the population accord-
ing to the model of the logistic map becomes increasingly less predictable,
insofar as the periodicity of the values appears to be increasingly ‘widened’
into a sequence of values in which something similar to a limit or a
recurrence is increasingly difﬁcult to recognize.
   Recognizing the existence of recurrences, if any, in real systems, when
such are characterized by very long periodicities, even in cases in which
a model can be constructed according to a relatively simple deterministic
law, such as (21.1), can generally prove to be very difﬁcult. Let us assume,
for example, that we have a certain number of values xk of the logistic
map, and that we interpret them as a historic series of data observed in
a real system. If their number is sufﬁcient to identify a period, then we
can, with good approximation, deduce the value of the growth parameter
and conﬁrm that the logistic map reproduces its trend. If however the
period is not evident, not only can we not establish if an attractor is
present, we cannot even be sure that the data come from a deterministic
model, and are not, on the contrary, random. Transferred into a situation
in which the numbers are generated by a deterministic model (i.e. by a
‘law’), this is the most severe difﬁculty that is encountered when analysing
historic series of data, when we are not able to identify any recurrence (or
‘law’) with any certainty, a difﬁculty similar to the one we mentioned in
Chapter 19.
210   21 : The logistic map

         In Case 2, we are faced with a situation in which the recurrence exists,
      even if such is not easily recognizable. In Case 3, however, we will encounter
      a situation in which different initial states give rise to different evolutions
      and, in particular, initial states that are close to one another can generate,
      over time, states that are very distant from one another, by amplifying a
      small initial difference. For now we are in a particular situation: we do not
      have chaos, but we have an ordinary attractor made up of a number of states
      (isolated ﬁxed point attractors) that increases as l increases, where, when
      l < 3, there was a single asymptotic state. The population system, in this
      condition, creates new limit states, as l grows, but always remains in a
      condition in which it loses its memory of the initial state of the evolution.

      Case 3: l $ l1 ﬃ 3:56994. The situation of successive doubling of the
      number of states between which the population stably oscillates, and of
      the consequent successive doubling of the oscillation period as l grows,
      described in Case 2, remains until the critical value l1 ﬃ 3:56994 is
      reached. When l reaches and then exceeds l1 , any initial value x1 gives
      rise to aperiodic trajectories, regardless of the length of the sequence of the
      xk . However, there are still intervals of the values of l, even in this Case 3,
      for which the periodicity appears again; one might even show that the
      values of l for which the dynamics is non-periodic are dense, in the sense
      that there is a value of l which gives a periodic orbit arbitrarily close to each
      value of l which gives a non-periodic orbit. We will be discussing this
      characteristic in Chapter 22.
         The ﬁxed points identiﬁed in Cases 1 and 2, which constituted the
      attractor and, in their entirety, deﬁned a set of isolated points, now become,
      for a given value of l $ l1 , so numerous and so close to each other that
      they constitute an inﬁnite set of isolated points distributed in an interval
      whose amplitude increases as l increases, but that remains contained within
      the interval between 0 and 1 (see Chapter 22).97 The dissolving of the
      periodicity, as a consequence of its limitless increase in length, can be
      interpreted as if, for values of l $ l1 , the successive splits have become
      inﬁnite and have given rise to an inﬁnite set of ﬁxed point attractors and
      repellers. This means that where, when l < l1 , an orbit travelled a ﬁnite
      number of states, before passing through a given point again, now, when
      l $ l1 , the system’s orbit should pass through an inﬁnite number of points
      (states) before it passes again through a point (state) that it has already

         97
            In correspondence of the critical value l ¼ l1 , beyond which we have chaos, the
      successive states xk tend towards a strange attractor, whose structure is similar to that of a
      fractal known as the ‘Cantor set’ (Falconer, 1985, 1990; Schroeder, 1991).
                                                                   The dynamics of the logistic map     211

touched; in practice it will never pass through it again. In other words, when
l $ l1 , there is no periodicity in the sequence of the xk .
   When l $ l1 there is no stability at all, not even asymptotic stability.
The growth rate is so high that the evolution of the population no longer
recognizes any stable set of recurrent states, towards which the orbits that
originate from different initial values converge. In this condition, the value
of the population, at a given iteration, depends on the initial value from
which the map started to evolve. Different initial values with the same l
now lead to different values at the n-th iteration, where, in Cases 1 and 2,
the differences between orbits that started from different values tended to
disappear as the iterations progressed. In this sense, we can say that the
dynamics of the system now preserve the memory of the initial states.
   In other words, when l $ l1 , the value xk of the population, which
always falls between 0 and 1, appears to evolve in an unpredictable way, in
the sense that we discussed in Chapter 15, i.e. without enabling any ordin-
ary attractor to be identiﬁed. For values of l close to 4, the maximum
permitted value, xk can pass repeatedly from a value close to 0, i.e. almost
from extinction, to a value close to 1, i.e. to the maximum permitted limit,
and vice versa. As there is no periodicity in the sequence of the xk , each state
produced by the iteration is calculated by physically making the calcula-
tions, iterating the map cycle after cycle. We cannot now know a future
state without calculating all of the previous states, one by one. The deter-
ministic law (the model) is still the same, (21.1), but now the visibility that
we have of the future starting from a particular state is limited to the state
immediately afterwards. If we changed the state, even by a little, the next
iteration could give very different values from those that would have
followed in the present unperturbed state (see the example illustrated in
Table 15.2). In Case 3, the dynamics of the population system are sensitive
to initial conditions, in line with our discussions in previous sections regard-
ing chaotic evolution. In this sense, we therefore talk about the unpredict-
ability of the future.
   When l $ l1 , a situation occurs in which there is sensitivity to the initial
conditions, and in which the orbits of the state variable xk (the value of the
population) remain conﬁned to an interval, the extremes of which fall
between 0 and 1:98 this is a chaotic dynamics and the interval allowed for
the states is a chaotic attractor. The value of the growth parameter l1 may
  98
      For l ¼ 4, the interval of variability of xk is the entire closed interval [0, 1]. If l ¼ 4, in
fact, it can occur that subsequent iterations actually bring the xk to the value of 1, which is
necessarily followed only by 0s, i.e. the extinction of the population. For example, iterating
(21.1) from x1 ¼ 0:5 and with l ¼ 4, the sequence x1 ¼ 0:5, x2 ¼ 1, x3 ¼ 0, x4 ¼ 0, etc. is
obtained.
212   21 : The logistic map

      therefore be seen as the border beyond which unpredictability occurs: the
      edge of chaos.
         Before concluding this discussion on the dynamics of the logistic map, we
      would like to highlight another fundamental peculiarity of the same. As l
      increases beyond the value of 3, we said that we only encounter oscillatory
      dynamics between states in even numbers: the sequence of powers of 2.
      When l $ l1 , these states, all originating from an inﬁnite sequence of
      doubling of the oscillation period, represent an inﬁnite set. However,
      what happens is that from a particular threshold value of the growth
      parameter l ﬃ 3:6786, odd periods also appear; that is to say that the
      successive xk values of the population start to oscillate between an odd
      number of states, exiting from the set of the periodicities deﬁned by the
      powers of 2.
                                                     ﬃﬃﬃ long, then, as l grows, they
         Initially, the odd periods that appear arepvery
      decrease until when, for lperiod3 ¼ 1 þ 2 2 ﬃ 3:8284, the population os-
      cillation between three states only occurs (in this case, we say that we have a
      period-3 cycle).99 According to a well-known theorem of Tien-Yen Li and
      James Yorke (1975: ‘Period three implies chaos’), intermixed among the
      values of l for which the trajectories are aperiodic, there are also values of l
      that give rise to sequences of xk that oscillate (obviously we still mean ‘tend
      asymptotically to oscillate’) on any ﬁnite number of states. In other words,
      when l > l , we can have periodic evolutions with periods of any length
      (May, 1976). According to the study by Li and Yorke, one of the ﬁrst
      important works dedicated to chaos, prior to the same study by May that
      brought the logistic map to the attention of intellectuals again, the actual
      presence of oscillations between three states guarantees the onset of
      chaos.100

          99
             The exact expression of the lperiod-3 critical value which gives rise to a period-3 cycle is
      basically an algebraic problem related to the conditions for the existence of real roots of the
      8th degree polynomial equation that we get if we write the third iterate of the logistic map:
      x ¼ f (f (f (x))), as we already observed for l1 and l2 in notes 92 and 93, p. 000 (see also Saha
      and Strogatz, 1995; Bechhoeffer, 1966; Gordon, 1996).
         100
             A somewhat similar theorem had been proved 11 years earlier by the Ukrainian
      mathematician Oleksandr Mikolaiovich Sharkovsky in 1964 (see also, for example, Devaney,
      1989, 1992; Tuﬁllaro, Reilly and Abbott, 1992). Although the result did not attract a great
      deal of interest at the time of its publication, during the 1970s other surprising results were
      proved which turned out to be special cases of Sharkovsky’s theorem (in Western languages
      often mis-spelled as the Sarkovsky theorem). As Gleick observes, this ‘was a typical symptom
      of the communication gap between Soviet and Western science. Partly because of the lan-
      guage, partly because of restricted travel abroad on the Soviet side, sophisticated Western
      scientists have often repeated work that already existed in the Soviet Union; on the other
      hand, it also inspired considerable bewilderment, because much of the new science was not so
      new in Moscow. Soviet mathematicians and physicists had a strong tradition in chaos
                                                               The dynamics of the logistic map   213

   The phenomenon of the progressive doubling of the period when a
parameter is changed, which can be traced back to a model such as the
logistic map, has been observed in numerous real systems: physical ones
(Serra and Zanarini, 1986; Moon, 1992), economic ones (Barkley Rosser,
1991; Nijkamp and Reggiani, 1993; Puu, 2000) and spatial ones (Nijkamp
and Reggiani, 1992a, 1993, 1998), characterized by the presence of signiﬁ-
cant elements of nonlinearity.
   We conclude our discussion on the theoretical aspects of the logistic map
as one of the simplest examples, and at the same time, most emblematic of
the ‘ﬁrst route to chaos’101 here. In Chapter 22 we will be looking at several
numerical examples of the logistic map and some of its applications in
regional sciences. The interested reader can ﬁnd other discussions of a
more general nature in the fundamental articles by May (1976), the ﬁrst
scholar to study the dynamics of the logistic map, and by Feigenbaum
(1978, 1980), who conducted a very in-depth study on the general proper-
ties of the logistic map (some of the results of which will be illustrated in
Chapter 22), as well as in the wealth of literature that introduces or brings
together other articles on the subject of chaos. For example, amongst
the many we cite Schuster (1984); Beltrami (1987); Devaney (1989, 1992);
Eubank and Farmer (1989); Tabor (1989); Bellacicco (1990); Falconer
(1990); Pickover (1990, 1994); Rasband (1990); Serra and Zanarini
(1990); Schroeder (1991); Drazin (1992); Moon (1992); Tuﬁllaro, Reilly
and Abbott (1992); Çambel (1993); Ott (1993); Strogatz (1994); Vulpiani
(1994); Puu (2000); Riganti (2000).


research, dating back to the work of A.N. Kolmogorov in the ﬁfties. Furthermore, they had a
tradition of working together that had survived the divergence of mathematics and physics
elsewhere.’ (1987, p. 76).
  101
       The mechanisms that give rise to chaos in dynamical systems are called ‘routes to
chaos’. Three different routes to chaos are known: (1) that of successive bifurcations,
described in the text with reference to the logistic map, (2) that applied to the generation of
the turbulence of ﬂuids, of Ruelle and Takens (1971), and (3) that known as the Pomeau and
Manneville intermittency mechanism (1980). We will not be looking at the last two, which
are less elementary from a conceptual point of view, and furthermore speciﬁc to several
phenomena related to physics. Interested readers should refer to the sources indicated in this
footnote and those cited in the text.
               The logistic map: some
 22            results of numerical
               simulations and an
               application



The Feigenbaum tree
In this section we will be dealing with the evolution of the logistic map as a
result of the numerical calculation of the states and we will be looking at some
of its characteristics on the basis of the numbers supplied by the iterations.
   Figure 22.1 illustrates the contents of Chapter 21 regarding the splitting
of the ﬁxed points, of the subsequent doubling of the period that are at the
origins of chaos and the presence of asymptotic equilibrium on a set of
values travelled cyclically.
   The ordinate axis shows the value of the growth parameter l; the abscissa
shows the ﬁxed point attractors Xn , between which the population oscil-
lates (they are states of asymptotic equilibrium; the numbers shown are
approximated values).
   When l ¼ 2:9, l ¼ 3:1 and l ¼ 3:460, the abscissas of the ﬁxed point
attractors are indicated. The ﬁrst four values of ln that cause the ﬁxed
points to split, and l1 , beyond which we have chaos, (see Table 21.1 on p.
208) are shown in the ﬁgure by horizontal dashed lines. In the example,
several values of l that are slightly higher than l1 , l2 , l3 and l4 have been
chosen and the logistic map (21.1) has been made to evolve in correspond-
ence with these for 500 iterations, enabling the values of the attractor states
to be identiﬁed to the ﬁrst six decimal places (in reality one hundred or so
iterations are sufﬁcient to stabilize the evolution and identify the ﬁrst
decimal places of the states of equilibrium).
   When l ¼ 3:550 and l ¼ 3:566, on the other hand, the ﬁxed points are
only indicated by the number that indicates the order with which they
succeed each other periodically, with the numerical values of the corre-
sponding abscissas shown in the legend.
                                                                                                               The Feigenbaum tree   215

                                                                                            0.655172
         2.900


                                  l1 = 3


                                                                                 0.558014              0.764566
         3.100
         Growth parameter l




                                  l2 = 3.449490               0.413234    0.467486                         0.838952 0.861342
         3.460
                                  l3 = 3.544090                     1     3                                       2 4
                                               l4 = 3.564407 1 5                7 3                             2 6     48
         3.550
         3.566
                                                                              7 15                                  4 8 12 16
                                     Edge of chaos              5 13                                       2   10
                                                                                     3 11
                                                                                                                 6 14
                                         l⬁ = 3.56994        1 9


                                                                                                Fixed points attractors Xn

     For l = 3.550 the system oscillates, in order, between the following eight states:

     1                        0.354800          3       0.540475         5           0.370325          7       0.506030
     2                        0.812656          4       0.881684         6           0.827805          8       0.887370

     For l = 3.566 the system oscillates, in order, between the following sixteen states:

     1                        0.344955          5       0.378004          9          0.347779        13        0.370818
     2                        0.805777          6       0.838427         10          0.808872        14        0.831990
     3                        0.558081          7       0.483076         11          0.551297        15        0.498464
     4                        0.879470          8       0.890478         12          0.882116        16        0.891491

                                   Figure 22.1 The ﬁxed point attractors of the logistic map.


  The values of the states of equilibrium that the evolution of the logistic
map envisages for the population as a function of the growth parameter l
are shown in Figure 22.2. Figures 22.3 and 22.4 show enlarged details of
Figure 22.2.102

  102
      The images in Figures 22.2–22.4 have a granular appearance rather than a continuous
curve, because they are all the result of numerical calculations conducted on discrete sets of
values of l and x.
216   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

        The ordinate of each point of the graph represented in Figure 22.2
      indicates the ﬁnal value x of the population, once this has stabilized, after
      15,000 iterations, as a function of the l parameter shown on the abscissa.
      The successive splittings (i.e. the successive doublings of the period dis-
      cussed in the previous pages) generate the successive bifurcations of the
      graph, which becomes a ﬁgure with fractal properties for values of l higher
      than l1 ﬃ 3:56994, where chaos ensues.
        The graph is known as the Feigenbaum tree (Schroeder, 1991). Several
      regions can be clearly identiﬁed:

      1. A ﬁrst region, when 0 < l # 1, in which we have the ﬁnal extinction of
         the population.
      2. A second region, when 1 < l # 3, which corresponds to Case 1 in
         Chapter 21, in which the population evolves towards a ﬁnal stable
         state, given by the ﬁxed point which, in said Case 1 was called X2 . The
         value of X2 increases as l increases in this second region, describing a
         hyperbolic arc, as can be shown with a few calculations.
      3. A third region, when l > 3, in which we observe, as l increases, succes-
         sive and increasingly closer doublings of the number of ﬁxed point
         attractors, each of which travels, as l grows, a new hyperbolic arc,
         before splitting.

        The Feigenbaum tree enables us to make numerous fundamental obser-
      vations about the dynamics of the logistic map and about the onset of
           x=1




                                                                               w1

           x = 0.5
                                                                                   w2
      x




           x=0
       0             λ        1                                         3                         4
                                                                            1+√6        3.56994

      Figure 22.2 The Feigenbaum tree (diagram of the bifurcations) of the logistic map
      (0  x  1, 0  l  4).
                                                                         The Feigenbaum tree    217

chaos, so to speak visually, observations that escape analyses conducted
exclusively on analytical form (21.1).
  A ﬁrst observation is immediately apparent from Figure 22.2 and is the
meaning of the accumulation point l1 in the set of values of ln : in corres-
pondence of l1 ‘grey’ areas start to appear, where the states of equilibrium
are no longer identiﬁable individually, because the points have become so
dense that they ‘cover’ intervals of x.
  In addition to l1 , there is another limit value, indicated with d, that
identiﬁes the speed with which, as n grows, the ln become increasingly close
to each other (more ‘dense’) in their tending towards l1 , through the limit
of the ratio of successive differences between period-doubling bifurcation
parameters (Feigenbaum, 1978). More speciﬁcally, the following ﬁnite limit
exists, an approximate value of which has been calculated as follows:

                           ln  ln1
                  d ¼ lim            ﬃ 4:66920160910299067
                       n!1 lnþ1  ln


  A second observation concerns the fact that the splittings of the states,
recognizable in the subsequent bifurcations of the diagram, as well as
occurring increasingly densely in line with the growth of ln , give rise to
bifurcations, whose amplitude becomes increasingly smaller. In this regard,
there are various ways to quantify the amplitude of the bifurcations. For
example, we can observe that, at each successive 2n -th doubling of the
period, that we have in correspondence to ln , one of the bifurcations
encounters the straight line of equation x ¼ 1=2, which identiﬁes the inter-
mediate value of the population x between 0 and 1. Therefore, by using wn
to indicate the amplitude of the bifurcations measured with respect to the
intersection with said straight line (see Figure 22.2 for w1 and w2 , regarding
the ﬁrst two bifurcations), we have the following limit, indicated by a, of the
ratio between the amplitudes of two successive bifurcations:

                                       wn
                          a ¼ lim            ﬃ 2:5029078750
                               n!1 wnþ1


  The constants a (Feigenbaum bifurcation velocity constant) and d (Fei-
genbaum reduction parameter) are known as Feigenbaum numbers:103 they
play a fundamental role due to the generality of the characteristics of the
  103
      In the literature in English, they are occasionally called Feigenvalues; they have been
calculated many times by various authors (Feigenbaum, 1978; Tabor, 1989; Rasband, 1990;
Stephenson and Wang, 1990, 1991ab; Briggs, 1991). Only their approximate values are
known, as no formula has ever been found that determines the sequence of the (inﬁnite)
218   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

      dynamics of the logistic map, common to numerous other functions, in
      addition to (21.1) (see towards the end of this section).
         In the Feigenbaum tree of bifurcations, or at least in parts of it, a real scale
      invariance (technically known as self-similarity) can be identiﬁed, a funda-
      mental characteristic of fractals. We can observe it, for example, in the way
      in which the bifurcations of the branches repeat in increasingly large
      numbers on an increasingly smaller scale as l grows. In fact, by observing
      Figure 22.2, and then Figures 22.3 and 22.4, which contain enlarged details
      of Figure 22.2, it is evident how, when l > l1 ﬃ 3:56994, i.e. the area
      where chaos exists, inﬁnite zones reappear in which chaos disappears and in
      which the phenomenon of successive bifurcations, i.e. the splitting of the
      stable states that have reappeared after previous areas of chaos, re-presents




      Figure 22.3 The Feigenbaum tree of the logistic map; enlarged detail of Figure 22.2, deﬁned
      by the following intervals: 0:80326629  x  0:89634562; 3:4252167  l  3:6422535.


      decimal places. Clifford Pickover (1994) cites the values of a and d with 578 decimal places,
      calculated by Keith Briggs at the University of Melbourne, as the most accurate that have ever
      been obtained. At present, no theoretical framework that gives a meaning to these numbers
      has been identiﬁed. It is not known whether the Feigenbaum constant d is algebraic, and
      whether it can be expressed in terms of other mathematical constants (Borwein and Bailey,
      2004). Feigenbaum numbers have not been proved to be transcendental but are generally
      believed to be so.
        Updated expressions for these numbers, as well as for many of the constants cited in this
      chapter, are available on ‘The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences’ on the website of
      the AT&T research laboratories: www.research.att.com/~njas/sequences/index.html.
                                                                       The Feigenbaum tree    219




Figure 22.4 The Feigenbaum tree of the logistic map; enlarged detail of Figure 22.3, deﬁned
by the following intervals: 0:88132793  x  0:88510576; 3:5813515  l  3:5893727.



itself, on an increasingly smaller scale, as l grows. The sequence of the
bifurcations that ensues brings the condition back to one of chaos. The
analogies of structure that repeated changes in scale display, enable us to
refer to non-strict self-resemblance in the Feigenbaum tree and to consider
it fractal.
   Therefore, apart from the inevitable granularity of the ﬁgures (remember
that we are still dealing with numerical simulations), the chaotic area does
not appear as a uniform area, but appears streaked with inﬁnite vertical
veins: bands of real order, in which the points appear to be positioned on
regular curves. This phenomenon is called intermittency and is a typical
feature of a fractal structure. There are inﬁnite, successive waves of inter-
mittency; repeated enlargements of scale highlight this type of order that is
generated, so to speak, situated in the middle of the disorder, a phenomenon
typical of chaos.
   Alongside the splitting of the states that are displayed in the bifurcations
of the Feigenbaum tree, we also observe the presence of situations in which
the population oscillates on an odd number of states, as we mentioned at
the end of chapter 21 (for example, in Figure 16.1, we have the case of
oscillation on three states, when l ﬃ 3:8284). As we said in Chapter 21, the
triplication cycles are particularly important, because their onset, according
220   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

      to Li and Yorke (1975), guarantees the presence of periodicity of any order
      and, therefore, the existence of chaos.104
         Let us now return to what we discussed in Chapter 19 regarding the
      stability of the trajectories and the Lyapunov exponents. We can identify the
      presence of chaotic zones in the dynamics provided by the logistic map,
      according to the value of the growth parameter l, by using Lyapunov
      exponents. As we saw previously, if the Lyapunov exponent is negative,
      the trajectory is stable, whereas if it is positive, the trajectory is unstable and
      we are in a situation of chaos.
         Applying (18.11) from p. 175 to the logistic map, we observe that the
      Lyapunov exponent depends on the value of the growth parameter l, on the
      value of the state variable xn from which the iterations start, and on the
      number N of iterations:

                                                  1 XN
                                      L¼                ln jl(1  2xn )j                        (22:1)
                                                  N n¼1

         Figure 22.5 shows, at the bottom, the trend of (22.1) as a function of l in
      the latter’s most signiﬁcant range, that is from around l1 up to 4; the ﬁgure
      also shows, at the top, the part of the Feigenbaum tree of Figure 22.2, for
      the same values of l. The onset of chaos when the Lyapunov exponent L
      becomes positive for l > l1 ﬃ 3:56994 is apparent, as is the fact that the
      chaotic zone is streaked by numerous intervals of non-chaos, corresponding
      to the intervals in which the Lyapunov exponent is negative.105

        104
             More speciﬁcally, when 3:8284 . . . < l < 4, in addition to the bifurcations described,
      we also observe a cascade of ‘trifurcations’ in 3n cycles, in correspondence with particular
               0
      values ln whose description is similar to that made for the cycles of the bifurcations. If we
      take only these speciﬁc values of the growth parameter into account, we identify the following
      limits, real generalizations of Feigenbaum numbers:
                                                       0       0
                                         0            ln  ln1
                                       d ¼ lim          0      0 ﬃ 55:247
                                                        nþ1  ln
                                                  n!1 l

                                                           0
                                              0         wn
                                             a ¼ lim     0   ﬃ 9:27738
                                                   n!1 w
                                                         nþ1


      The numbers shown have been obtained, again by means of numerical simulations, with a
      precision lower than that of the constants a and d of the previously discussed cases (Li and
      Yorke, 1975).
        105
             Note that (22.1) exists only when xn 6¼ 0:5, a value in correspondence to which the
      logistic map, naturally, works normally, but for which (22.1) cannot be calculated, because it
      would give rise to ln(0) that does not exist in the ﬁeld of real numbers. The value of the state of
                                                                               The Feigenbaum tree   221


                                                    ~ 0.493616
                                       L(x1 = 0.30) =
                                                    ~ 0.492634
                                       L(x1 = 0.31) =

                    x




                    L




                               l1                l2 l⬁                 4

                                                                           l




Figure 22.5 Bottom of the ﬁgure: trend of the Lyapunov exponent L as a function of the
growth parameter l of the logistic map; top of the ﬁgure: the Feigenbaum tree for the same
values of l.
Source: Çambel (1993, p. 210).




stable equilibrium xn ¼ 0:5 corresponds to a situation of great stability. The system reaches it
very quickly, when l ¼ 2, starting from any initial value of the population; for example,
starting from x0 ¼ 0:1, from as early on as the seventh iteration xn ﬃ 0:500000 is stable to
the sixth decimal place. In general, the values of the Lyapunov exponent given by (22.1)
provide an indication of the speed of convergence of the logistic map towards the value of
the stable state, where it exists, a speed that increases the more negative the Lyapunov
exponent; when l ¼ 2 we have the maximum speed of convergence towards the ﬁnal value
of the population x ¼ 0:5.
222   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

         In the graph in Figure 22.5, the calculation of the curves was also con-
      ducted by points. This does not allow us to position the curve traced by the
      Lyapunov exponent in complete correspondence to the inﬁnites detailed by
      the Feigenbaum tree, which, incidentally, appear only in part in the ﬁgure,
      as the Feigenbaum tree itself is a fractal.
         The instability of the logistic map, and therefore the sensitivity of the
      latter to the initial conditions, reaches its peak when l ¼ 4, a value in
      correspondence to which also the Lyapunov exponent in the logistic map
      is at its maximum value. In fact, when l ¼ 4, as is apparent in Figure 22.5,
      the interval of variability of the population in a single iteration is the
      maximum permitted one, between 0 and 1, and therefore the unpredict-
      ability, and basically the level of chaos, are at their highest level.
         It can be shown (Schuster, 1984) that, when l ¼ 4, the Lyapunov expo-
      nent reaches its maximum value, and this can be calculated exactly as
      follows:

                                         L ¼ ln 2 ﬃ 0:693715

      a result which, incidentally, is also approximated by the numerical calcula-
      tion of (22.1) after a fairly high number of iterations.106

        106
             Just in this particular case of l ¼ 4, one can show that the attractor is chaotic (see for
      example Kraft, 1999), i.e. the dynamics is unstable and sensitive to initial conditions, but not
      strange, i.e. the attractor doesn’t display a fractal structure. As a matter of fact, if a chaotic
      dynamical system has an attractor, it is sometimes possible to make precise statements about
      the likelihood of a future state, as a probability measure exists that gives the long-run
      proportion of time spent by the system in the various regions of the attractor (chaotic
      unpredictability and randomness are not the same, but in some circumstances they look
      very much alike). This is the case of the logistic map with l ¼ 4 (and of other chaotic systems
      as well), which maps the interval [0,1] into [0,1]. Even if we know nothing about the initial
      state of the system’s evolution, we can still say something about the distribution of states in
      the future. More precisely, the future states of the population are distributed between 0 and 1
      following a beta probability distribution, according to which the probability density function
      in the domain 0 # x # 1 is:

                                                      xa1 (1  x)b1
                                         f (x) ¼ 1
                                                 R
                                                      xa1 (1  x)b1 dx
                                                 0


      with parameters a ¼ 0:5 and b ¼ 0:5. At l ¼ 4 the sequences are aperiodic and completely
      chaotic. The dynamics described by the recursive relation are ergodic on the unit interval
      between 0 and 1, i.e. the sequence xn will approach every possible point arbitrarily closely or,
      more formally, for every pair of numbers between 0 and 1, there is an xn between them. Due
      to the property of generating an inﬁnite chaotic sequence of numbers between 0 and 1, in the
      late 1940s John von Neumann suggested using the logistic map with l ¼ 4 as a random
                                                                          The Feigenbaum tree   223


            1
           xn




         0,31


         0,30

            0
                0   50    100    150   200      250     300   350   400   450   500
                                             Iterations

Figure 22.6 Evolutive trajectories of the logistic map (21.1), for two initial population
values close to one another. Continuous line: x1 ¼ 0:30; dashed line: x1 ¼ 0:31; in both
l ¼ 3:9.



  With regard to the effects of the sensitivity to the initial conditions on
the future evolution of the logistic map and the onset of chaos, Figure
22.6 shows a simple example of two orbits of the logistic map (21.1),
calculated for l ¼ 3:9, therefore in the interval of l values in which
we have chaos, starting from two initial values of the population that
are close to one another: x1 ¼ 0:30 and x1 ¼ 0:31. The subsequent
values of the graph in Figure 22.6 are shown at steps of 50 iterations
at a time. It is apparent from the ﬁgure how the two trajectories develop
fully independently of one another, even though they originate from close
points.
  The numerical (approximate) calculation of Lyapunov exponents for the
two values of x1 used in the examples illustrated in Figure 22.6, after
10,000 iterations and with l ¼ 3:9, gives respectively:

                                L(x1 ¼ 0:30) ﬃ 0:493616
                                L(x1 ¼ 0:31) ﬃ 0:492634

which not only conﬁrms the presence of chaos in the two orbits, but also
gives a quantitative measurement of the level that the chaos reaches, high-
lighting how the two differently shaped orbits are characterized by similar
degrees of instability.



number generator, but the proposal was unsuccessful, because of strong correlations between
the generated sequences of numbers (Andrecut, 1998).
224   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

         A point of fundamental importance, highlighted by Feigenbaum in his
      essential study (1978), is that the dynamics of the logistic map that we have
      illustrated are not speciﬁc to the logistic map alone (21.1), but can be
      extended to a wide category of one-dimensional maps. All the functions
      which, in the interval considered, are continuous and derivable, display a
      quadratic maximum,107 and are unimodal, i.e. this maximum is unique.
      The function is strictly (monotonically) increasing before the maximum
      value and strictly (monotonically) decreasing after it.
         The importance of this fact is that dynamics extremely similar to that
      described for the logistic map can exist for numerous other models that
      appear to be different on the surface, but are not different in their math-
      ematical essence. For example, instead of taking the arc of a parabola for
      f(x), as in (21.1), we could take, without substantially changing the dynam-
      ics described, an arc of a circumference, of an ellipse, of a sinusoid, and so
      on. As a consequence of this, different assumptions that, in the construction
      of a model, could generate functions other than (21.1) but that respect the
      cited conditions of being quadratic and unimodal, in practice, and without
      fundamental errors, could be replaced by a simple logistic map, the formu-
      lation and application of which is simple and easy.108



      An example of the application of the logistic map
      to spatial interaction models
      We would now like to brieﬂy describe an example in which the logistic map
      is applied as an element of a more general model of population dynamics.
      The example, by Peter Nijkamp and Aura Reggiani (1992a) that belongs
      to a class of models called ‘spatial interaction models’ is widely applied
      in the ﬁeld of urban and regional science (we brieﬂy mentioned this in
      Chapters 1–3).
         The term spatial interaction is generally intended to mean the set of
      relations within geographic areas that manifest themselves in the form of
      regularities in ﬂows between the areas considered. Models of spatial inter-
      action attempt to formally represent relations between the various compon-

        107
            These are functions which, developed in power series in a neighbourhood of the
      maximum value, display the second order term as the most important one; they are, in
      other words, functions that, when close to the maximum value, ‘behave’ in a ﬁrst approxi-
      mation, like a parabola.
        108
            Other extensions of the logistic map have also been studied; for example in multidi-
      mensional systems, such as Hénon’s two-dimensional map (1976) or in the ﬁeld of complex
      numbers, Mandelbrot’s set (1975).
                                                         Application to spatial interaction models   225

ents (production, services, housing, etc.) located in different zones of the
area in question. The aim of this, for example, is to model the movement
(the ﬂows) of people between the various zones in which the area in
question is divided, usually an urban area.
   The remotest forms of the concepts on which spatial interaction is based,
initially simple gravitational analogies, date back to the work of Henry
Charles Carey (1858).109 However, gravitational theory does not represent

  109
        Carey was the ﬁrst person to attempt to conceptually use Newton’s theory of
universal gravitation in social sciences, in line with the physicalist trends of that era. An
excerpt of his book Principles of Social Science is emblematic of the physicalist view: ‘The
wild man, wherever found, has always proved to be not only destitute of the reasoning
faculty, but destitute also of the instinct that in other animals takes the place of reason –
and therefore the most helpless of beings. Man tends of necessity to gravitate towards his
fellow-man. Of all animals he is the most gregarious, and the greater the number collected in
a given space the greater is the attractive force there exerted, as is seen to have been the case
with the great cities of the ancient world, Nineveh and Babylon, Athens and Rome, and as is
now seen in regard to Paris and London, Vienna and Naples, Philadelphia, New York, and
Boston. Gravitation is here, as everywhere else in the material world, in the direct ratio of the
mass, and in the inverse one of the distance. Such being the case, why is it that all the members
of the human family do not tend to come together on a single spot of earth? Because of the
existence of the same simple and universal law by means of which is maintained the beautiful
order of the system of which our planet forms a part. We are surrounded by bodies of various
sizes, and some of these are themselves provided with satellites, each having its local centre of
attraction, by means of which its parts are held together. Were it possible that that attractive
power could be annihilated, the rings of Saturn, the moons of our earth and of Jupiter, would
crumble to pieces and fall inward upon the bodies they now attend, a mass of ruins. So, too,
with the planets themselves. Small as are the asteroids, each has within itself a local centre of
attraction enabling it to preserve its form and substance, despite the superior attraction of the
larger bodies by which it is everywhere surrounded. So it is throughout our world. Look
where we may we see local centres of attraction towards which men gravitate, some exercis-
ing less inﬂuence, and others more. London and Paris may be regarded as the rival suns of our
system, each exercising a strong attractive force, and were it not for the existence of the
counter attraction of local centres like Vienna and Berlin, Florence and Naples, Madrid and
Lisbon, Brussels and Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Stockholm, and St. Petersburg, Europe would
present to view one great centralized system, the population of which was always tending
towards those two cities, there to make all their exchanges, and thence to receive their laws.
So, too, in this country. It is seen by all how strong is even now the tendency towards New
York, and that, too, in despite of the existence of local centres of attraction in the cities of
Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Pittsburg, Cincinnati, St. Louis, New Orleans,
Augusta, Savannah, and Charleston, and in the numerous capitals of the States of which the
Union is composed. Were we to obliterate these centres of attraction and place a centralized
government like that of England, France, or Russia, in the city of New York, not only would it
grow to the size of London, but soon would far exceed it, and the effect would be the same as
would be produced in the astronomical world by a similar course of operation’ (Carey, 1858,
p. 42–43). Ernst Georg Ravenstein (1885) was the ﬁrst person to apply the concepts of
Newtonian physics to the study of migrating ﬂows between British cities (‘the laws of
migration’). In the twentieth century, the idea of applying gravitational theory to spatial
226   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

      the only possible approach to spatial interaction. Alan Wilson (1970), for
      example, demonstrated that spatial interaction models can be obtained
      from a problem of mathematical optimization, maximizing a particular
      entropy function.
         Again dating back to the 1970s, a new important branch of spatial
      interaction models emerged, linked to discrete choice models (Hensher
      and Johnson, 1981; Pitﬁeld, 1984; Leonardi, 1987). The advantage of this
      new approach lies in the fact that its models are not limited to constructing
      a simple analytic descriptive structure, but offer a justiﬁcation of the pat-
      terns of interaction observed, referring to the processes of individual choice,
      thus relating the observed ﬂows to the behaviour of the individual actors
      and assuming that the former are the result of the latter.
         Models of spatial interaction, an extremely wide and varied category,
      have become the most important tools for the study of interrelations be-
      tween the distribution of activities and the distribution of ﬂows of move-
      ment in an urban or regional system, in particular following the ﬁrst and
      fundamental model by Ira Lowry (1964);110 they are still being developed
      according to new and varied lines of research and following different
      approaches (for a collection of new trends see, for example: Boyce,
      Nijkamp and Shefer, 1991; Fujita, Krugman and Venables, 2000; Reggiani,
      2000). There are numerous applications of spatial interaction models, from
      transport planning to the location of housing and businesses, to the analysis
      of the demand for services and more still (for a more detailed description,
      see for example Campisi, 1991; Rabino, 1991; Nijkamp and Reggiani,
      1992a; reviews of spatial interaction models and of the theories such are
      based upon can be found, for example, in Bertuglia et al., 1987; Fothering-
      ham and O’Kelly, 1989; Bertuglia, Leonardi and Wilson, 1990; Bertuglia,
      Clarke and Wilson, 1994; Sen and Smith, 1995).
         In the context of spatial interaction models, with particular reference to
      urban and regional sciences, the ﬂow from a zone of origin i to a zone of


      interaction, resumed by William Reilly (1931; see Chapter 1), was developed, in particular,
      following the ﬁrst congress of the Regional Science Association in 1954, and has resulted in a
      vast series of studies and models (for example, Isard, 1960; Wilson, 1970, 1974; for a review
      see Sen and Smith, 1995).
        110
             Lowry created his model for the Regional Planning Association of Pittsburgh, within
      the framework of a general attempt at planning for the reorganization of the urban areas of
      the United States, shaken by a disorganized industrial development. The originality of
      Lowry’s idea lay in using an economic theory (the theory of the urban economic base) as
      one of the elements to model spatial ﬂows, thus creating an economic-spatial type of urban
      theory, and in expressing it all in a mathematical form. It was the ﬁrst urban simulation model
      to become operative.
                                                        Application to spatial interaction models   227

destination j is commonly expressed in terms of a mobility rate Pij ; in the
case that we are going to explore, it is calculated according to a discrete
choice model, starting from a comparison between the costs and the beneﬁts
of a possible move from zone i to zone j that a single actor makes, to decide
whether to make the move or not. In this way, the elements of socio-
economic importance at the origin of the localization can be moved from
a macro level, based on a gravitational type of law, or on the maximization
of a spatial entropy, to a micro level, based on the maximization of an
individual utility (following the introduction of these models, however,
Giorgio Leonardi, 1985, demonstrated the asymptotic equivalence between
the theory of random utility and the maximization of the entropy).
   In this approach, the use of the multinomial logit model is very common.
This is due both to its relative simplicity from a computational point of view
and to the fact that it respects an important condition, often posed as a real
axiom of the theory of choice models, called ‘the independence of irrelevant
alternatives’, according to which the actor chooses between the alternatives
(the zones) available by comparing them in pairs only. More speciﬁcally, it is
assumed that the value of the ratio between the probabilities that two alter-
natives (two zones) have of being chosen depends exclusively on the utility
associated to each of the two and that is as independent from the utilities
associated to other zones as the total number of zones; as a consequence of
which, alternative choices (zones) may be introduced or eliminated without
having to recalculate the utilities of all of the other available alternatives.111
   A multinomial logit choice model is fundamentally based on the follow-
ing assumptions:

1. An actor acts rationally, choosing to move from zone i to zone j in the
   considered territory, only based on the calculation of a function uij ,
   called the utility function, that he aims to maximize.
2. The utility function is assumed to be the sum of a deterministic part,
   regarding the attributes of the zone, and a stochastic part, regarding how
   each individual actor perceives individual utility. This means that the
   choice of destination to which the actor attributes maximum utility can
   only be expressed in probabilistic terms, according to a given probability
   distribution.

  111
        The independence from irrelevant alternatives has often been judged as too restrictive
an assumption, in particular when the actor has to compare two very similar alternatives of
utility. This has led to the development of several variants of the choice model, such as the
dogit model (Gaudry and Dagenais, 1979), the multinomial probit model (Daganzo, 1979)
and the nested logit model (Ben-Akiva and Lerman, 1979), which we will not be discussing
here. Interested readers should consult the speciﬁc literature.
228   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

      3. All actors are identical and act independently.

         According to the multinomial logit choice model, it is assumed that the
      probability Pij of the move from zone i to zone j depends exponentially on a
      term cij , that represents the deterministic part of the utility function
      (basically, the costs of the move) and that it is normalized with respect to
      all the potential destination choices, in such a way that Pij falls between 0
      and 1. By introducing weights Wk attributed to the k zones in an area,
      which represent the attractiveness of the zone k as it is perceived by the
      actors, the probability Pij of moving from zone i to zone j (i.e. the attraction
      of zone j with respect to zone i) is expressed as:

                                                   Wj ebcij
                                            Pij ¼ P                             (22:2)
                                                    Wk ebcik
                                                      k


         The parameter b that appears in (22.2) is a term associated to the
      sensitivity of the user to the cost of transport: the higher the value of b
      the lower the average distance travelled by the user and the higher the
      overall accessibility of the system (Campisi, 1991).
         Nijkamp and Reggiani (1992a) demonstrated that, given certain condi-
      tions for the utility function, a multinomial logit choice model inserted into
      a spatial interaction model in discrete time can display chaotic behaviour
      similar to that which emerges in the logistic map.
         Assuming, for the sake of simplicity, that Wk ¼ 1 in all zones, and
      indicating the utility of the choice of zone j at time t with uj the formula
      (22.2) can be transformed into the probability that zone Pj attracts popu-
      lation, independently from the zone i of origin, in the following form
      (Leonardi, 1987; Nijkamp and Reggiani, 1991; Rabino, 1991):

                                                      euj
                                                Pj ¼ P u                        (22:3)
                                                       ek
                                                          k


        Now, because the magnitudes in play are functions of time, we can study
      the variation of Pj over time by calculating its derivative. Let us assume that
      the utility of the alternative j grows linearly over time; we assume, that is,
      that the derivative u_ j of the utility function of a zone j is constant and we
      indicate its value with aj . After several operations, differentiating (22.3), we
      obtain:
                                                      Application to spatial interaction models   229
                                                      X
                        P_ j ¼ aj Pj (1  Pj )  Pj          ak Pk                    (22:4)
                                                      k6¼j


   In discrete time, (22.4) becomes, assuming aj ﬃ uj,tþ1  uj,t :
                                                               X
                Pj,tþ1  Pj,t ¼ aj Pj,t (1  Pj,t )  Pj,t            ak Pk,t         (22:5)
                                                               k6¼j


i.e.
                                                              X
                Pj,tþ1 ¼ (aj þ 1)Pj,t  aj P2j,t  Pj,t               ak Pk,t        (22:50 )
                                                               k6¼j


Equations (22.4) and (22.5), (22.5’) describe the trend, in continuous time,
and in discrete time respectively, of the speed of change of the probability of
moving to zone j from any other zone k in the area in question.
   It is immediately apparent that the second members of (22.4) and (22.5)
are both the sum of two terms. The ﬁrst term has the standard form of the
logistic function in (22.4), or the logistic map in (22.5). The second,
negative term expresses the interaction between the probability of moving
to zone j and all the probabilities of moving to each of the other k zones, an
interaction that is represented in the form of the sum of the products
between Pj and each of the Pk , with ak that acts as weight coefﬁcient of Pk .
   In analogy to the prey–predator models discussed in Chapters 11 and 12,
Pk , which attracts individuals towards zone k and therefore tends to reduce
the number of individuals that move to zone j, can be interpreted as
representing the population of a predator species whose actions reduce
the population of the prey species Pj by means of parameter ak. The form
of this interaction is the same type as that which appears in the basic
Volterra–Lotka model (12.1) and in its variants used in urban planning
(13.1), (13.2) and (13.4). The model, regardless of whether it is formulated
in continuous time (22.4) or discrete time (22.5), can therefore be seen as if
it were expressing the competition between zones like the sort of competi-
tion between species. The population of each zone is the result of two terms:
growth according to a logistic law (continuous or discrete) and the compe-
tition between zone j and all the other zones to attract the actors.
   Simulations of territorial dynamics in the ﬁeld of urban and regional
sciences, using a model constructed as in version (22.5’) provide results
that obviously depend on the values of aj (one for each zone j). Nijkamp
and Reggiani (1992a) present the simulation of the dynamics envisaged by
the spatial interaction model (22.5’) for an area split into three zones and
230   22 : Numerical simulations and an application

      for different values of the aj parameters. The growth and/or diminution
      dynamics that are obtained show several aspects in common with the
      logistic type, which was predictable given the same form of the second
      member of (22.4) and (22.5). For small values of aj , the model displays
      the trend of the logistic function tending towards states of asymptotic
      stability. The most interesting aspect to observe is that for large values of
      aj , on the other hand, the simulations generate chaotic behaviour, similar to
      that displayed by the logistic map for high values of the growth parameter l.
               Chaos in systems: the
 23            main concepts


To conclude this part, we would like to brieﬂy review and summarize some
of the most important points discussed.
   As we have seen, in speciﬁc circumstances, i.e. for certain values of
parameters, the long-term prediction of the evolution of a nonlinear dy-
namic system can be achieved without error or ambiguity. In the case of the
logistic map, this is true for values of the growth parameter l that fall
between 0 and 3, in which we have one ﬁxed point attractor. This is the case
we have called Case 1. Under these conditions, the most simple, the system
inevitably evolves towards a previously known future, regardless of the
initial conditions, even towards the extinction of a population, which
occurs when l < 1.
   In other circumstances, the same nonlinear system, even if its formulation
is very simple, becomes unpredictable. In Chapter 21, regarding the logistic
map, we indicated these circumstances as Case 3, corresponding to
l  l1 ﬃ 3:56994. For a dynamical system in this condition, we refer to
deterministic chaos. Chaos, because the evolution is unpredictable and
subject to great variability even following small changes to the initial
conditions, although remaining contained in a limited region of the phase
space; deterministic because there is always a law (a mathematical model)
that dictates its evolution.
   In the chaotic situation of Case 3, the system appears to evolve erratically,
lacking any ﬁnal state towards which to aim, even asymptotically, accord-
ing to a dynamics in which the population never reassumes a value that it
has already touched, and this occurs despite the fact that the evolution of
the system is governed by the same law that in other circumstances envis-
ages a stable ﬁnal state.
   As is evident from Figures 22.2–22.4, the chaotic zone includes ‘traces’ of
order within it. There are streaks of the Feigenbaum tree in which the
possible ﬁnal states towards which the population tends during the course
of its evolution, i.e. the number of ﬁxed point attractors, are only a few,
two, four, eight, but never one alone. Predictability returns, and a multipli-
city of the possible states between which the system tends asymptotically to
232   23 : Chaos in systems: the main concepts

      oscillate remain, but these ﬁnal states exist, while in chaotic evolution they
      don’t. The appearance of traces of order in the Feigenbaum tree is also
      reﬂected by the fact that the Lyapunov exponent is negative for the values of
      l that give the areas of order, as shown in Figure 22.5.
         Lastly, there is one other aspect that we would like to underline, which
      will be the subject of Part 3 of this book. Beyond the zone of the unique
      attractor point (complete predictability) and that of chaos (unpredictabil-
      ity), there is also an intermediate zone: that which in the logistic map is
      deﬁned by the interval l1 < l < l1 (where we would like to remind readers
      once again, l1 ¼ 3 and l1 ﬃ 3:56994) and that we have called Case 2.
      Here we do not have chaotic unpredictability, nor however do we have a
      simple asymptotic evolution towards a unique state that attracts the system,
      from any point in the phase space (i.e. from any set of values of the state
      variables) it originates. In this intermediate zone, there is a ﬁnal (asymp-
      totic) condition, that the system tends towards, which is made up of
      different states. The important aspect is that the number of the states and
      the numerical value of each of them (i.e. the ‘identity’ of each of them)
      depends on the speciﬁc value given to the growth parameter (Figures 22.2–
      22.4). Small variations of l in the vicinity of each of the terms of an inﬁnite
      sequence of critical values ln can generate considerable rearrangements of
      the ﬁnal conﬁguration, such as the doubling of the number of states between
      which the population oscillates or the appearance of sets of odd numbers of
      states.
         The dynamics that the logistic map generates is such that the population
      system, evolving in an environment with limited resources, behaves as if, for
      each speciﬁc value of the growth parameter l that falls between l1 and l1 ,
      it autonomously ﬁnds, without any intervention from external forces, a
      conﬁguration made up of several stable states between which it periodically
      oscillates; different states, that uniquely depend on the value of l, as if these
      states represented the most convenient situation for the system, towards
      which the system in question inevitably tends. The population system
      autonomously ‘decides’, without the intervention of any external agent, if
      there are two, four, eight or more of these states, as a function of the growth
      parameter l. In other words, the system organises itself, autonomously
      building its own conﬁguration of stability.
         These changes in the conﬁgurations of the (asymptotic) states of ﬁnal
      equilibrium can be seen as real phase transitions that the system undergoes
      when the parameters vary a little around a threshold value ln . The expres-
      sion ‘phase transition’ has been borrowed from physics within the scope of
      which it indicates particular processes that occur in correspondence with
      conditions of instability, the passing through of which leads to a reorgan-
                                                                 The main concepts   233

ization of the elements of a system. It can regard, for example, the passages
of state of a material that occur in correspondence with small variations in
temperature in the vicinity of particular critical values: a crystalline solid
melts when the temperature goes beyond a speciﬁc melting temperature; a
liquid boils if the temperature exceeds a certain value, called the boiling
point; a ferromagnetic material ceases to be such if its temperature exceeds
a particular value, speciﬁc to that material, called Curie’s temperature, etc.
Similarly, the concept of phase transition can be transferred to the logistic
map, and to the dynamics of systems in general, when sudden changes in
the dynamics appear in correspondence to particular critical values of a
parameter.
   How should the above be interpreted in the case of the evolution of a
population according to the model of the logistic map? We can see the
process in this way: the system makes the population grow (cause) until it
reaches values that are too high with respect to the available resources
(effect); in this situation, the population tends to decrease (the effect men-
tioned before now becomes the cause of a new population value, that is the
new effect); the smallest value that the population assumes now becomes
the origin of new growth (the new effect has become a new cause) and so
on. In this way, for a given l comprised between l1 and l1 , the population
ends up oscillating between several states. If, therefore, we interpret each
state as the cause of the following one, we have a new nonlinear relation-
ship between cause and effect, which may cause the second of two consecu-
tive states to be greater or less than the ﬁrst one, instead of the linear growth
relationship, according to which one cause always corresponds to one single
effect, as, for example, in exponential growth à la Malthus (Zanarini,
1996). We do not now have unpredictability, which would be absence of
ﬁnal conﬁgurations, but a ﬁnal conﬁguration that changes as a function of
the parameter, redeﬁning the ﬁnal state of the system at each transition. This
is not unpredictability, but ‘surprise’. In the wealth of ‘surprises’ a new
aspect that characterizes the dynamics of nonlinear systems emerges:
complexity.
   The question we can ask ourselves is the following: if chaos and com-
plexity are already present in a simple deterministic system that basically
appears to be fairly simple, such as the logistic map, what can we expect
from systems that are much more detailed and complicated? With regard to
systems governed by more complex laws, the presence of threshold values
for parameters, passing through which phase transitions between simple
evolution, complex evolution and chaotic evolution can be observed, is
in general less evident a priori. The behaviour of a system made up of
numerous nonlinear equations, containing various parameters, is generally
234   23 : Chaos in systems: the main concepts

      unpredictable a priori, because it is extremely difﬁcult, or even impossible,
      to identify the effect of the various parameters in a multifaceted system,
      whether such are considered individually, or are considered in their entirety.
      The only way to discover the dynamics that the model envisages is a poster-
      iori, i.e. putting the model in question ‘into action’.
         We can therefore conclude that the eventual presence of chaos in the
      evolutive dynamics of mathematical models constructed in the form of
      dynamical systems is a further element that deprives the models of the
      value of methods for predicting the future in a strict sense. Not only,
      therefore, does the fact that we have to necessarily introduce simplifying
      hypotheses to such models, such as for example linearization, or choose
      which aspects should be considered and which to ignore because retained
      marginal (see Chapter 2), limit their signiﬁcance and validity, but those same
      chaotic characteristics of the dynamics, at times generated by the models,
      make the prediction of the future a nonsensical idea.112 No model can be
      assumed to be a ‘real’ and ‘complete’ representation of reality, able to
      ‘predict’ future developments, both because a model, intrinsically, is a
      partial representation of several aspects of reality, and because the dynamics
      that the model in question generate are at times unstable, chaotic and
      substantially inapplicable to the prediction of the future states of a system.
      In the majority of cases, models, as we have said on many occasions, are
      only tools of analysis, even though fundamental tools. And this is true not
      only for natural sciences but also, all the more so, for social sciences, where
      the identiﬁcation of recurrences (or ‘laws’) is usually more difﬁcult.
         We can instead observe how the use of models actually enables us to
      highlight and to account for both the presence, if any, of determinism in the
      observed data, and therefore chaos and not randomness (see chapter 19),
      and any formation of complex structures in the evolutive dynamics of real
      systems, structures that are not a priori predictable, but that are in any event
      stable conﬁgurations of equilibrium. The model that manages to adequately

        112
             The idea that the future does not submit to rational prediction may seem to be an
      obvious, if not trivial conclusion. However, it should be considered that it is in total antithesis
      to the beliefs of classical eighteenth and nineteenth century science, permeated with a rigid
      determinism, regarding the possibility of complete knowledge of the future, at least in theory.
      The romantic spirit of the late nineteenth century opposed said conviction, which we will
      better deﬁne in Chapter 26, and claimed man the freedom to escape the laws of physics,
      interpreted in an imperative and not descriptive sense, and as such felt to be unacceptably
      restrictive to man’s free spirit. An expression of this contraposition, transferred to the level of
      a dispute between rationality (the mathematical model) and the freedom of man’s actions (the
      unpredictable future), appears in the quote shown at the beginning of this part, taken from
      Dostoevsky, an author who was well aware of these issues, as his education had been
      predominantly scientiﬁc.
                                                                            The main concepts    235

account for an apparent disorder in the data measured in the real system, to
which it refers, therefore represents an effective deterministic law of the real
system.113 It is evident that no model can ever provide a complete and exact
description (by ‘exact’ we mean ‘with an arbitrarily high precision’) for any
real system, whether in natural or social science, and this is precisely
because a mathematical model, in itself, has to make simpliﬁcations and
inevitable adjustments (we are still taking about matching a mathematical
formula to an observed phenomenon). Nevertheless, an effectively con-
structed mathematical model can be an extremely useful tool both for
giving order to a set of apparently disordered data, by identifying a mech-
anism that in some way links one to the other, and for ‘throwing light’ on
the possible situations that the mechanism identiﬁed can generate in the
future evolution of the real system.
   It is precisely the onset of complex structures in models made up of
nonlinear dynamical systems, which are thus called complex, that will be
the topic for discussion in Part 3.

  113
       Dynamical systems can also be conceived in which the parameters (the coefﬁcients of
the differential equations) are not given with the precision that characterizes the models of
classical mechanics. They are usually models that refer to systems that entail random
uncertainties and ﬂuctuations, generally linked to the intrinsic uncertainty of measurements
or stochastic processes. Non-deterministic models of this type are called stochastic (Bellomo,
1982).
This page intentionally left blank
 PART            Complexity
  3


The next planet was inhabited by a tippler.
This was a very short visit, but it plunged the little prince into deep dejection. ‘What
are you doing there?’ he said to the tippler, whom he found settled down in silence
before a collection of empty bottles and also a collection of full bottles.
  ‘I am drinking,’ replied the tippler, with a lugubrious air.
  ‘Why are you drinking?’ demanded the little prince.
  ‘So that I may forget,’ replied the tippler.
  ‘Forget what?’ inquired the little prince, who already was sorry for him.
  ‘Forget that I am ashamed,’ the tippler confessed, hanging his head.
  ‘Ashamed of what?’ insisted the little prince, who wanted to help him.
  ‘Ashamed of drinking!’ The tippler brought his speech to an end, and shut himself
up in an impregnable silence.
  And the little prince went away, puzzled. ‘The grown-ups are certainly very, very
odd,’ he said to himself, as he continued on his journey.
                                         Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, The Little Prince
This page intentionally left blank
               Introduction
 24

In Part 1, we presented various examples of very schematic models that
provided fairly abstract and simpliﬁed descriptions of several types of
phenomenology. These descriptions ranged from the simplest approxima-
tion, the linear case, to less drastic assumptions, that enabled us to perceive
more sophisticated behaviour. In Part 2, we discussed several aspects of the
dynamics of unstable systems, which, in certain circumstances, can give rise
to chaotic behaviour. In particular, we examined one of the simplest non-
linear models, the logistic map, which evolves, depending on the growth
parameter, towards a ﬁnal stable state, or towards a series of ﬁnal states that
repeat periodically, or that demonstrate chaotic instability.
   In Part 3, we will be discussing a particular aspect of the behaviour of
nonlinear dynamical systems that is displayed in circumstances in which
there is neither stable equilibrium, nor chaos. This is the case of systems that
are so-called far from equilibrium (Nicolis and Prigogine, 1987), whose
behaviour is even more surprising than that of chaotic systems; these are
complex systems. Rather than providing a collection of examples and
situations that display complexity, something that has already been illus-
trated in numerous general texts dedicated to this subject (for example:
Nicolis and Prigogine, 1987; Waldrop, 1992; Casti, 1994; J. Cohen and
Stewart, 1994; Gell-Mann, 1994; Coveney and Highﬁeld, 1995; Bak, 1996;
Gandolﬁ, 1999; Batten, 2000a; Bertuglia and Staricco, 2000; Dioguardi,
2000), we propose to focus on complexity from an abstract angle, and to
develop several reﬂections on the meaning and the interpretation of com-
plexity, as far as possible, from a general perspective.
   On the basis of the above, in Chapter 25, we will start by having another
look at reductionism and the concept of the linearity of real systems and of
models, which is a fundamental part of the latter, that we have already
encountered in the ﬁrst two parts of the book.
               Inadequacy of
 25            reductionism



Models as portrayals of reality
To describe, interpret and predict phenomena of the environment (or of the
world, the universe or whatever we wish to call it) in which we are
immersed, we generally use models, where the meaning if the term
‘model’, in a very general context, is a mental representation that, in a
certain sense, replaces the environment (the world, the universe). In other
words, since we have no means of going beyond the restricted window that
our senses provide of reality, the latter is too complicated and substantially
inaccessible to complete knowledge. All that we can do is to limit ourselves
to constructing a representation of reality based on information gained
from experience. In this vision, therefore, our knowledge is always relative
to a perspective and is conditioned by a point of view, a product of the
human mind, and not something inherent to the order of things. Science,
therefore, does not study the physical world per se, but rather our way of
depicting some regularities selected from our experience, that can be ob-
served in certain conditions and from a particular perspective.
   The models that we form of the world are not authentic copies of the
latter, as we have already shown in Chapter 14; in any event, their corres-
pondence with a ‘real world’, that can only be known by means of
representations, can never be veriﬁed. The best we can do is to assess our
model-representations of the world on a pragmatic level, judging whether
they guide our understanding in a useful way towards the objective of an
effective description of the observed phenomenology, i.e. towards a descrip-
tion that enables us to act in a way that we consider satisfactory (Bruner,
1994).
   As we saw in the ﬁrst two parts of the book, models are often formulated
in the form of differential equations (in which case, as we know, they are
called dynamical systems), linear ones being a particularly simple form of
the same (see Chapter 4). A fundamental characteristic of a linear dynam-
ical system is that if changes are made to the initial values of the variables
                                                              Reductionism and linearity   241

(or input parameters), the changes in the values of the variables over the
course of the dynamics that these originate from, follow exponential laws,
and are therefore easily calculated and predictable (see Chapters 4, 11, 14
and 18). In general we could interpret a linear dynamical system as a black
box in which small variations in the output variables are caused by small
variations in the input variables, and similarly, large variations in the output
variables are caused by large variations in the input variables. In a nonlinear
dynamical system, on the other hand, small changes to the system’s input
can cause (and usually do cause) a large effect on its output, as occurs, for
example, with chaotic systems.



Reductionism and linearity
Despite the fact that linear models are, in reality, an exception in the
panorama of models that we can construct to describe reality, they have
received particular attention, above all in the past, for a variety of reasons.
One reason is that the mathematical education of scientists, particularly of
those that study natural sciences, has been focused on linear mathematics
for at least three centuries (basically from when the signiﬁcant development
of analysis, undoubtedly the most effective mathematical tool for natural
sciences, began). On one hand, the reason for this was that linear math-
ematical techniques are simpler than those of nonlinear ones, as we
have seen in Part 1, and on the other hand (perhaps above all), because
linear mathematics is undoubtedly easier to grasp immediately than
nonlinear mathematics. A second reason for this leaning towards linear
mathematics is that there are several cases in which linear models provide
effective descriptions of certain phenomena; the brilliance of the latter is
such that it overshadows the other cases, the majority, in which linear
models are not applicable and lack adequate descriptive techniques.
   The techniques of linear mathematics are effective in all cases in which the
dynamics of a system can be described simply as the sum of the dynamics of
the subsystems (or single components) that comprise it. This method, reduc-
tionism, is strictly linked to the linearity of the dynamics; it is, so to speak, the
other face, as we saw in Chapter 4. If reductionism is effective, in fact, this
means that we can break down the systems, study the micro dynamics of the
parts and obtain the macro dynamics of the system as the sum of the micro
dynamics. We thus assume that the microscopic behaviour of a subsystem of
small dimensions is directly proportional to the macroscopic behaviour of
the system of large dimensions, by virtue of which the relation between
dynamics at the microscopic level and that at the macroscopic level is
242   25 : Inadequacy of reductionism

      equal to the relation between the two dimensions (or between the two
      scales). These hypotheses are identical to the assumption of a linear relation
      between cause at the micro level and effect at the macro level.114
         Angelo Vulpiani (1994) proposed an interesting relationship between the
      propensity to linearize the descriptions of phenomena and a precise physical
      fact. We live on a planet that is a relatively cold body, therefore many of the
      natural systems that we observe are close to a condition of stable equilib-
      rium, which often allows us to consider them ‘almost’ linear, ignoring any
      existing nonlinearities. It is precisely the fact that the majority of these
      systems are ‘almost’ linear and display, therefore, almost regular behaviour,
      that has enabled us to recognize the existence of laws of nature that do not
      change over time and that can be described in mathematical terms. We
      could possibly even go so far as saying that the same mathematics that has
      developed over the course of mankind’s evolution as one of the ways in
      which the human mind works, has assumed its current form, precisely
      because the experience of each one of us is such that it is relatively simple
      to acknowledge the ‘almost’ linearity, when such is present in physical
      phenomena and to describe it effectively, while nonlinearity, despite the
      fact that its effects are evident, rarely, or rather almost never, provides us
      with a useful description for forecasting.
         Nonlinearity generates unpredictable effects, while linearity does not,
      therefore a linear tool, even if substantially inadequate to describe natural
      and social phenomena, with the exception of a very limited number of
      cases, erroneously appears to be more useful and more correct than a
      nonlinear one, because the latter does not allow us to make predictions,
      whereas the former does. Basically we like, and we need, to make predic-
      tions. This has often ended up forcing the hand of intellectuals, pushing
      them to search for linear descriptions of phenomena, even though the latter
      were effective in only a small number of cases.115

         114
             For example, linear hypothesis is the basis of Fourier’s well-known theorem, according
      to which in certain conditions, the evolution of a magnitude can be expressed as the sum of (in
      principle) inﬁnite sinusoids, each of which evolves independently from the others, as if they
      do not interact with each other. By virtue of this theorem, if a system can be transformed into
      a series of input components, it can be studied, focusing only on each component and the ﬁnal
      overall behaviour is the sum of the partial behaviours of the components. This technique is
      known as spectral analysis and it is widely applied in various ﬁelds, such as, for example, the
      analysis of signals.
         115
             It is a bit like the story of the drunk who, one night, is looking under a street lamp for
      his house keys that he has dropped on the ground. A passer-by asks him where he lost his keys
      and he replies ‘over there’, indicating a place a bit further away in the dark. The passer-by
      asks perplexed: ‘Well why are you looking for them here, if you lost them over there?’ And the
      drunk: ‘Because there’s light here and I can see, it’s dark over there and I can’t see anything!’
                                                                 The role of mathematics in models      243

   Linearity reigns where descriptions in these terms are easily formulated
and work well. Beyond this, in the domain of nonlinearity, it appears, at
least on ﬁrst sight, as if the behaviour of the systems cannot be described by
comprehensible rules. Thus, for example, the mechanisms that control the
dynamics of the terrestrial atmosphere are well-known, but the dynamics
that originate from it are very different to linear ones (see Chapter 16 on the
Lorenz equations), which makes it almost impossible to make weather
forecasts beyond a few days, unless on purely statistical grounds (such as
it is hot in the summer and cold in the winter, . . . ). This is due to the fact
that, even though the laws that control atmospheric movements and
thermodynamics are known, as they are nonlinear, we have situations of
instability, in which small factors, such as small local ﬂuctuations (or even
the inevitable measurement approximations), can be enormously ampliﬁed
over time. The system’s evolution, therefore, although piloted by known
mechanisms, appears unpredictable, as if it were subjected to the effect of a
free inscrutable will acting arbitrarily.



A reﬂection on the role of mathematics in models
Mathematics, at least in one of its many facets, can be deﬁned as the art of
creating models, extremely abstract and simpliﬁed models, models, so to
speak, in black and white, that describe the deepest essence, the skeleton (or,
rather, what seems to us to be such) of a real situation. Of the many ways
possible, this art has evolved by choosing a path that adapts to the inter-
action between man and the outside world or rather with the image that he
‘distils’ from the outside world. Mathematics applied to the description of
phenomena is basically an effective set of tools and techniques that, to a
certain extent, help keep the real situation under control. But it is also, and
above all, the mental approach that is at the root of these tools and
techniques. We construct a model that ‘corresponds’ to a choice of the
aspects of the nature or the society that we are interested in and we express
it using mathematical formalism (a formal system). Then, and this is one of
the most interesting aspects, we construct a theory of the particular math-
ematics used in the model (for example, linear or nonlinear ordinary dif-
ferential equations, partial differential equations, cellular automata, tensor
calculus, fractal geometry, etc.), or we use one created independently of the
speciﬁc situation. The use of mathematical theory therefore allows us to

Linearity is like this: it provides nice easy solutions that are often off-target with respect to the
problems they are attempting to solve, and therefore substantially wrong.
244   25 : Inadequacy of reductionism

      operate on the model in question and to deduce its outcome. These results,
      referred to the real situation through a process of decoding, give concrete
      and above all effective information that can often not be obtained from
      observations alone.
         In general, there is a dynamics typical for the model–reality relationship
      that evolves through a series of phases (Figure 25.1).
         We codify the elements of the real system, which we believe to be the most
      important, in a formal system, making the necessary assumptions. Then we
      manipulate the formal system in various ways, seeking the consequences of
      the assumptions made; this operation is called ‘implication’. The aim of the
      implications is to simulate the changes observed in the real system. We
      actually aim to establish relations between the changes observed, at the
      origin of which we assume there is a form of causality. If we ﬁnd implica-
      tions that correspond to the events observed, then the formal system is
      adequate and we use it, decoding it, to represent the events that in this
      way we can relate to one another. If the causality that links (or that we
      assume links) the phenomena can be successfully ‘explained’ by the set of
      encoding, decoding and implication processes, then we have built a model.
      Each time that we attempt to give a meaning to the world, we are attempt-
      ing to construct a relation of this type.
         This ability to describe reality provided by mathematics, that we apply
      when we construct and use a model, becomes increasingly surprising as we
      gradually consider more sophisticated examples. It often occurs that calcu-
      lations made on a sheet of paper anticipate observations, in the sense that
      apparently incredible theoretical results are conﬁrmed after experimental
      analysis. Given due consideration, the effectiveness of a tool as abstract as
      mathematics to describe reality appears surprising.116 This is particularly

                                             Encode
                      Causality                                       Implication




                                   REAL                  FORMAL
                                  SYSTEM                 SYSTEM




                                             Decode

                 Figure 25.1 Relation between a real and a formal system (or model).

         116
             The American, Hungarian-born, physicist Eugene Paul Wigner, Nobel prize for Physics
      in 1963, in a renowned conference held at New York University in May 1959, entitled The
      Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Science, the text of which was
                                                                   The role of mathematics in models       245

true in several of the natural sciences, but, at least in part, it is also true in
social sciences; the latter also, as a matter of fact, increasingly make use of
mathematical tools.
   Social systems are usually characterized by very large ﬂuctuations and by
a high degree of nonlinearity. In general, it is very difﬁcult to identify the
presence of regularity in them. Social systems, therefore, do not lean to-
wards treatment in mathematical terms similar to that which can be per-
formed on a part of natural systems. The most signiﬁcant intervention of


published the following year, questioned why an abstract discipline such as mathematics
worked so well when applied to the description of physical phenomenology. At the conference,
he stated: ‘The enormous usefulness of mathematics in the natural sciences is something
bordering on the mysterious and [ . . . ] there is no rational explanation for it. [ . . . ] It is true,
of course, that physics chooses certain mathematical concepts for the formulation of the laws
of nature, and surely only a fraction of all mathematical concepts is used in physics. It is true
also that the concepts which were chosen were not selected arbitrarily from a listing of
mathematical terms but were developed, in many if not most cases, independently by the
physicist and recognized then as having been conceived before by the mathematician. It is not
true, however, as is so often stated, that this had to happen because mathematics uses the
simplest possible concepts and these were bound to occur in any formalism. As we saw before,
the concepts of mathematics are not chosen for their conceptual simplicity – even sequences of
pairs of numbers are far from being the simplest concepts – but for their amenability to clever
manipulations and to striking, brilliant arguments. [ . . . ] It is important to point out that the
mathematical formulation of the physicist’s often crude experience leads in an uncanny
number of cases to an amazingly accurate description of a large class of phenomena. This
shows that the mathematical language has more to commend it than being the only language
which we can speak; it shows that it is, in a very real sense, the correct language. [ . . . ] A much
more difﬁcult and confusing situation would arise if we could, some day, establish a theory of
the phenomena of consciousness, or of biology, which would be as coherent and convincing as
our present theories of the inanimate world. Mendel’s laws of inheritance and the subsequent
work on genes may well form the beginning of such a theory as far as biology is concerned.
Furthermore, it is quite possible that an abstract argument can be found which shows that
there is a conﬂict between such a theory and the accepted principles of physics. The argument
could be of such abstract nature that it might not be possible to resolve the conﬂict, in favour of
one or of the other theory, by an experiment. Such a situation would put a heavy strain on our
faith in our theories and on our belief in the reality of the concepts which we form. It would
give us a deep sense of frustration in our search for what I called ‘the ultimate truth.’ The
reason that such a situation is conceivable is that, fundamentally, we do not know why our
theories work so well. Hence, their accuracy may not prove their truth and consistency.
Indeed, it is this writer’s belief that something rather akin to the situation which was described
above exists if the present laws of heredity and of physics are confronted. [ . . . ] The miracle
of the appropriateness of the language of mathematics for the formulation of the laws of
physics is a wonderful gift which we neither understand nor deserve. We should be grateful for
it and hope that it will remain valid in future research and that it will extend, for better or for
worse, to our pleasure, even though perhaps also to our bafﬂement, to wide branches of
learning’ (p. 7). The theme of the effectiveness of mathematics in describing nature has been
discussed by numerous authors: for example, Changeux and Connes (1989), Barrow
(1992ab), Israel (1996, 1999), Boncinelli and Bottazzini (2000), Ekeland (2000). We will
return to this subject in Chapter 31.
246   25 : Inadequacy of reductionism

      mathematical techniques in social sciences, according to contemporary
      scientiﬁc vision, does not refer to the formulation of laws, as scholars
      have repeatedly tried to do since the birth of social sciences (see Chapters
      1 and 9). The laws and technical aspects of these disciplines are in reality
      formulated and discussed often without the use of mathematical formalism;
      for example, the law of equilibrium between supply and demand in eco-
      nomics or, extending the scope somewhat, Mendel’s laws in biology, or the
      phonetic laws in glottology are all laws characterized by a very precise
      content from a conceptual point of view, whose enunciations and applica-
      tions use very little, if any, mathematical technique. Today, mathematics
      applied to social sciences is particularly useful above all when we are faced
      with certain aspects common to numerous scientiﬁc disciplines, such as, for
      example, transversal concepts regarding the evolution of systems, the onset
      of chaos and the phenomenology of complexity. Mathematics in this case
      acts as a tool to make connections, to construct analogies and to recognize
      and discuss common elements in different ambits.



      A reﬂection on mathematics as a tool for modelling
      Sometimes, if the model is too complicated, calculations are difﬁcult or
      impossible; other times, particularly if the relations within the model are all
      linear, calculations are simple. Think for example of the birth and the devel-
      opment of geometry. Even though we live on an Earth that is not ﬂat, if not in
      ﬁrst approximation on small surfaces, Euclidean geometry, probably
      founded for reasons strictly linked to land surveying, developed and was
      successful. Flat Euclidean geometry works very well for practical purposes,
      so much so that for almost two thousand years it was considered to be the
      ‘true’ geometry, a unique and unquestionable description of one of the
      aspects of physical reality. Only in the past two hundred years or so has its
      interpretation been reviewed and it has become a particular case, we could
      say a linear case within a wider framework, in which the spaces are curved. At
      the same time, it has lost its meaning of a ‘true’ description of physical reality,
      and has assumed that of a simple hypothetical-deductive system based on
      postulates, and not on observations. Nevertheless, this has not diminished its
      importance in terms of its practical applicability. It was, and still is, a tool that
      can be effectively used in almost all ambits in which lengths are comparable
      with the scales typical of the senses that man is born with and in which the
      curvature of the space considered can be presumed to be negligible.
         If we lived in a physical space in which the two, three or more dimen-
      sional curvatures were more evident, for example on an Earth with a much
                                                              Mathematics as a tool for modelling    247

smaller radius, or in a very intense gravitational ﬁeld, we might have
developed a geometry different to Euclidean linear geometry right from
the start. In the same way, if we lived on a very hot planet, where the
ﬂuctuations due to the movement of particles (molecules, ions, . . . ) were
much higher, we might not have developed linear mathematics in such a
marked way. On one hand, in fact, the nonlinearity of natural phenomena is
too difﬁcult to describe with the type of (linear) mathematical tool that we
have developed, and on the other hand, in a context where the abstractions
originating from the limited presence of regularities are too difﬁcult, if not
impossible, perhaps we would not even have created a tool like mathemat-
ics to make abstractions. Mathematics, as we have constructed it, would
probably have been useless and perhaps would have died at birth. However,
perhaps, on that very hot planet, with excessive ﬂuctuations caused by high
temperatures, life would not have even existed, as too large a ﬂuctuation
would not have enabled the molecular aggregates that are the basis of
biochemistry to form, and therefore we would not exist (Vulpiani, 1994).
   This last point inevitably leads us back to the beliefs of the anthropic
principle in natural science (particularly in cosmology). According to one of
the forms in which this principle can be enunciated, physical reality is
precisely what we observe, from among the inﬁnite universes possible,
because it couldn’t be any other way: if it wasn’t so, we living beings
wouldn’t have formed and we wouldn’t be here to observe it.117 Applied

  117
       The anthropic principle represents a new formulation of the relation between mankind
and the universe as such is intended in a scientiﬁc vision. It was introduced in cosmology,
between the 1950s and 1970s, thanks to the work of a diverse group of scientists from various
schools, and right from its appearance, it has been the subject of heated debate in both
scientiﬁc and philosophical circles. The anthropic principle takes its roots from the observa-
tion of the physicist Paul Dirac, in the 1930s, of a strange and surprising mathematical
relation between certain physical magnitudes, whose sense was unclear: the square root of
the estimated number of particles present in the universe is equal to the ratio between the
electrical force and the gravitational force that act between two protons, a ratio that is
expressed by means of the values of the basic constants of physics. The problem regarded
in particular the fact that, while the ratio between electrical and gravitational forces is a
universal constant that does not change over time, the number of particles, on the contrary,
changes during the course of the evolution of the universe. Dirac concluded that the ratio
between electrical and gravitational forces as well must not be constant in cosmological time
and that some of the laws of physics should be reviewed. Later, in the 1950s, Brandon Carter
and Robert Dicke proposed a new interpretation, according to which, in reality, the values of
the basic constants are not constant at all in the scale of time of the evolution of the universe,
and therefore the relation observed by Dirac, in reality, is not always true, but is only true in
this moment in time in the history of the universe, with the current value of the numbers of
particles in the universe and therefore of several atomic elements, amongst which carbon,
which represent the constituents of living organisms. Dirac, like anyone else, therefore,
couldn’t help but observe the cited relation, precisely because it is associated to evolutive
248   25 : Inadequacy of reductionism

      to the principle of the meaning of mathematics, the anthropic principle
      would respond that mathematics is what it is, i.e. linear, and is not another,
      precisely because, if this wasn’t so, we wouldn’t be who we are and we
      wouldn’t be here talking about mathematics.
         Social systems are characterized by the almost total lack of linearity,
      which has constituted and constitutes a huge obstacle to the application
      of effective mathematical laws which, as we have said on many occasions,
      reﬂect an original linear approach, inapplicable to these systems even in ﬁrst
      approximation. In brief, in the case of the social sciences, there is no
      correspondent to the problem of the pendulum and the two-body problem
      in physics; the simplest cases are already many-body problems. The effect of
      nonlinearity on social processes is related to many different phenomena. By
      way of example, consider the effects of scientiﬁc-technological innovation
      on economic development (Bertuglia, Fischer and Preto, 1995; Bertuglia,
      Lombardo and Nijkamp, 1997; Batten et al., 2000). By deﬁnition, the
      concept of innovation implies something new and when this appears for
      the ﬁrst time, it appears unexpected, as if it were a random phenomenon;
      this also applies to the emergence of new ideas, opinions and fashions, and
      to the appearance of new products and production processes.


      processes that lead to the existence of forms of life capable of verifying it. This led to the
      formulation of the anthropic principles in its weak form, according to which, if conditions in
      the universe, at this moment in time and in this place are ideal to host life, this is explained by
      the fact that, if this was not the case, there wouldn’t be any form of (intelligent) life in it to
      question these coincidences; if those relations didn’t exist and the basic constants did not have
      those particular values, then life would not exist and we would not exist, in this moment in
      time and in this place, to ask those questions (Barrow and Tipler, 1986). Note that the
      anthropic principle is not related to the metaphysical notion that sees nature constituted as
      it is, in order that man, a creature which, having a soul, bears in him the divine imprint and is
      thus superior to nature, can subjugate it. It rather uses the effect to explain the cause: the
      justiﬁcation of that relation and of the value of the basic constants of physics is found
      precisely in the fact that we are here to question ourselves about their meaning. There are
      various ‘strong’ forms of the anthropic principle, which do not only consider our space-time
      collocation in the universe, as the weak form does, but sustain the point of view according to
      which the universe in its entirety is what we observe from among all of the inﬁnite possible
      universes, because it is precisely this universe that has given origin to conscious life; i.e. the
      universe must possess those properties that allow conscious life to develop at some stage in its
      history (Barrow and Tipler, 1986). So man would not be a sort of secondary, random product
      of the evolution of the universe, but the outcome of a cosmic evolution that tends towards this
      end. The anthropic principle, particularly in its strong forms, expresses an anthropocentric
      viewpoint that is not accepted by everyone. For example Jack Cohen and Ian Stewart (1994)
      write: ‘Some people go beyond this to argue the ‘‘strong anthropic principle’’ that Planck’s
      constant has the value it does with the purpose of making intelligent beings possible. We’d
      rather not go that far: it sounds much like the remark that nature made noses so that you can
      put spectacles on them’ (p. 49–50; see also Penrose, 1989, and Regge, 1999).
                                             The search for regularities in social science   249

   The mathematical modelling of social systems in general terms encoun-
ters great difﬁculties in taking into account the changes (technological
innovations, new scientiﬁc ideas, new social characters, etc.) that are absent
from linear mathematics and substantially untreatable in exact terms also in
nonlinear mathematics. One of the reasons for these difﬁculties is linked to
the fact that modelling innovation means accounting for it in the model
before it appears, which deprives it of its novel and random content.
Frequently, in stochastic models, programs called random number gener-
ators are used for this purpose (and others as well), which in some way
simulate a random phenomenon described by a uniform probability distri-
bution. However, another fundamental cause of difﬁculty lies precisely in
the concept of randomness itself, or more speciﬁcally in the concept of the
sequence of random numbers. While from an intuitive perspective it is a
relatively clear concept, in theoretical terms it starts to present difﬁculties,
but when it has to be translated into an algorithm, as an element of a
stochastic model of a computer program, it becomes totally approximate
and substantially unsatisfactory at a formal level (Dendrinos, 2000).



The search for regularities in social science phenomena
The history of the sciences (more correctly, we should say ‘of science’, in all
its different forms) is very often depicted as a long struggle with the
apparent disorder of phenomena in continuous change, in which, however,
some regularities do transpire. On occasion, in particular in certain ﬁelds,
such as those of the so-called ‘hard’ sciences, this has enabled us to formu-
late laws, genuine mathematical abstractions, based on the assumption, if
not proven wrong by subsequent observations, that what has occurred in
the past will also do so in the future.
   On other occasions, however, the regularities that we thought we had
caught a glimpse of were not sufﬁcient. This has often happened in eco-
nomics, in psychology, and in almost all of the social sciences. The latter, in
fact, have to face several kinds of difﬁculty that are less evident in natural
sciences. In social sciences, we rarely, if ever, observe situations that repeat
themselves without changing; in practice there are no identical subjects, and
furthermore, objective practical difﬁculties make it very hard, if not impos-
sible, to conduct laboratory experiments. A new economic policy, for
example, cannot be experimented in practice to observe its consequences,
because it cannot be implemented eliminating the simultaneous actions
made by other actors, thus isolating the effects of the policy under experi-
mentation, without considering, moreover, the risks connected with
250   25 : Inadequacy of reductionism

      experimentation itself. A new economic policy can be analysed from a
      theoretical perspective, can be examined using mathematical simulation
      tools, different scenarios of its consequences can be studied, but experimen-
      tation on a population is extremely hard to carry out.
         When the evolution of a system is uncertain, the main question regards
      the time-scale on which we can extend any presumption of certainty.
      Natural and social sciences are both affected by uncertainty, but one of
      the most important differences between the two ﬁelds regards the time-scale
      of the phenomena treated in which it manifests itself.
         Therefore, the mechanism of the Enlightenment wanted to interpret the
      reality of the world like the working of a huge clock, the movements of
      whose parts are linked together, and are known with absolute precision, in
      the past as in the future. It cannot be denied that this interpretation of the
      world has, on occasion, been very successful, such as in astronomy, for
      example, where Newton’s deterministic schema, applied to the calculation
      of the backwards movement of the planets, has enabled the observation of
      the positions of the planets in the past, even as far back as the invention of
      writing has reported, to be calculated with the highest levels of precision.
         Newton’s law of universal gravitation is a typical expression of the
      deterministic approach, as were the laws of Kepler some time previously,
      even though the latter had a purely empirical meaning, were not formulated
      in a real theoretical schema and were still partially inﬂuenced by Aristotle
      (Koyré, 1961). The theoretical framework was created by Newton, with the
      law of universal gravitation, only 80 years after Kepler, in 1609, had made
      the laws from which it originated known. Inventing and using the tools of
      differential calculus, Newton started to give physics that hypothetical-
      deductive form that still today distinguishes it from the other sciences.
      Newton’s law of universal gravitation, however, is only effective in ﬁrst
      approximation, in which there is an abstract universe made up of two
      bodies subject only to a reciprocal interaction at a distance, to describe
      which, Newton invented ad hoc the concept of the force of gravity. This
      concept allowed him, in fact, to construct a differential equation as a model
      of the dynamics of the two bodies which portrayed the idea of a force of
      gravity as a cause of the movement (the fall) of one body towards another
      with constant acceleration.118

        118
             We are obviously referring to the second principle of dynamics: F ¼ ma, in which
      acceleration a is the second derivative of space with respect to time and F is the force of
      attraction that acts between the two bodies of mass m and M. Newton assumes (law of
      universal gravitation) that F is: (1) inversely proportional to the square of the distance r
      between the two bodies, and (2) proportional to the product of the masses, in the following
      form:
                                                     The search for regularities in social science   251

   In this simple case, the model is extremely effective. For two bodies the
dynamics are abundantly clear, easy to calculate for any time interval,
starting from known initial conditions, regardless of whether we are dealing
with an apple that falls from a tree or the Moon that rotates around the
Earth. The two-body model, based on the gravitational law, makes some
approximations, as it only takes the main terms in play into account, a
system of two bodies and not more than two, such as the Sun–Mars, or the
Earth–Moon systems, but not the Sun, Mars, the Earth, and the Moon all
together. In a universe of two single bodies, the law of dynamics imagined as
we naturally see it, i.e. linear, is effective for the purposes of calculating the
evolution of the system: Newton’s law is linear.
   However, there are numerous bodies in the universe, and only in ﬁrst
approximation can we choose two and consider the others very small and
very distant, for the purpose of creating the right conditions for conducting
experiments to verify the law of the dynamics, that describes abstract cases
and that has been conceived on the basis of approximated experimental
evidence. But if the bodies, beyond the pair considered, are numerous and
their presence cannot be ignored, then in practice, we no longer observe
regularity in the dynamics, the linear model is no longer effective and
evolution over time becomes very difﬁcult to predict.
   In a universe with many bodies, the linear law is no longer effective to
describe the global dynamics. Even if we break down the set of the inter-
actions into single terms (single pairs of bodies), according to the reduc-
tionist approach, what we obtain does not enable us to effectively describe
the global dynamics of the system. In the long term, the prediction even
becomes impossible. As we said in Chapter 16, according to numerical
simulations (not according to the solution of the equations of the many-
body model) carried out by Jacques Laskar (1989), the solar system itself,
for periods of time in the order of hundreds of millions of years, appears
unstable and its evolution substantially unpredictable.
   The situation that is almost always encountered in social sciences is even
more complicated than that described for a gravitational many-body sys-
tem. In this context, the reductionist approach is almost never useful, i.e.
isolating very small systems that are easy to describe, disregarding, at least
in ﬁrst approximation, the inﬂuence of external elements, as occurs, on the

                                                mM
                                         F¼G
                                                r2

where G is the constant of universal gravitation. Solving the differential equation as written
above (the ﬁrst differential equation in history), Newton demonstrated Kepler’s laws, which,
in this way were deduced by the assumed hypotheses (1) and (2).
252   25 : Inadequacy of reductionism

      other hand, for the movement of the two bodies in reciprocal gravitational
      interaction, when interactions of a lesser intensity with other bodies are
      ignored. But beyond that, even if this makes sense, in social sciences,
      isolating speciﬁc relatively simple situations would result in (still) not
      having an accurate and effective analytical mathematical tool for descrip-
      tion and prediction, like Newton’s schema for astronomy.
         For example, let us consider that which is commonly called the ‘law of
      the equilibrium between supply and demand’. It makes sense only when the
      operators on the supply side are numerous and similar to one another, and
      the same goes for the operators on the demand side. When we isolate a
      single salesman or a single buyer (the analogy of the two-body problem
      with respect to the many-body one), we can no longer talk about equilib-
      rium between a variable supply and a variable demand, and the law loses its
      signiﬁcance. The question we have to ask ourselves, however, is whether in
      a real market with numerous actors it makes sense to isolate a single seller–
      buyer pair.
         To consider one single pair, as in the case of the regime of bilateral
      monopoly, considerably changes the entire economic dynamics. Can the
      behaviour of the two members of the seller–buyer pair, in other words, be
      considered without taking the presence of other potential sellers and/or
      other potential buyers into account? Is it correct to consider the interaction
      between the two as a basic interaction to be introduced into a more general
      system, as Newton does with gravity? The answer is obviously no: in a
      market formed by a single seller and a single buyer, the negotiation mech-
      anisms are profoundly different from those in a market in which numerous
      actors interact with one another. In a regime of bilateral monopoly, each of
      the two actors knows that he can directly inﬂuence the other, and that he, in
      turn, has to suffer the effect of the decisions of the other party; everything
      depends on the strategy of the two parties, on their negotiating skills and,
      naturally, on their strength.
         Just like a many-body system with respect to a two-body one, the system
      made up of numerous actors is intrinsically different from the simple sum of
      many isolated pairs. In social sciences we therefore ﬁnd ourselves in a
      situation in which mathematics, which for the most part is linear and is
      therefore effective to describe the regularities of natural nonlinear systems
      only as far as it is acceptable to break these down into simpler, isolated
      systems, presents even more problems when it is used as a tool to construct
      models capable of describing the dynamics observed.
               Some aspects of the
 26            classical vision of science



Determinism
Before actually going into the merits of complexity, we would like to deﬁne
a framework, albeit partial, of the scientiﬁc thought in the eras, prior to
modern times, in which the concept of complexity was developed.
   Let us return to astronomy. In the long history of attempts that man has
made to formulate predictions for the future, a crucial moment, as we
know, was Newton’s discovery that the motion of the planets could be
described by a particular type of equation, differential equations, that he
himself invented, which, therefore, became the main tool, if not the only
one, that enabled scientists to look into the future. From astronomy and, in
particular, from the successes achieved in celestial mechanics based on
Newton’s brilliant intuitions (1687), classical science, and more speciﬁcally
mathematical physics that originated from celestial mechanics, started their
extraordinary development.
   Mathematical science was the ﬁrst of the sciences to achieve considerable
success in the study and formulation of rigid deterministic laws of nature
expressed in mathematical language. Subjecting the universe to ‘rigid’ laws
means proposing a deterministic model of the universe. The laws of physics
are precisely this: sets of relations that characterize natural states – those
observed – and distinguish them from those not observed (Ekeland, 1995).
The evolution of a system, from this point of view, is the passage of the
system through successive states that actually occur and therefore are
natural, excluding states that do not occur.
   The model that the laws depict, as we have observed on a number of
occasions, does not necessarily have to be linear; it can be so sometimes, but
in any event, only in ﬁrst approximation. From the Enlightenment era up
until at least the beginning of the twentieth century, science often, or rather
almost always, has confused that fact that direct links between cause and
effect could be identiﬁed and expressed by laws, i.e. determinism, with the
linearity of the laws themselves, i.e. the assumption that the link between
254   26 : The classical vision of science

      causes and effects is a relation of proportionality. Attributing the properties
      of linearity to determinism leads to the assumption that a deterministic,
      thus linear, model must necessarily contain all of the information needed for
      an exact and complete prediction of the future, as occurs in linear models.
         The confusion of these two concepts, determinism and linearity, was
      precisely one of the root causes of the philosophical and epistemological
      error committed by Pierre-Simon Laplace in his concept of the world.
      According to Laplacian determinism, if the equations of motion are
      known, nothing new can occur that is not already contained in the initial
      conditions (Robert, 2001). The famous assertion that Laplace makes in his
      Essai philosophique sur les probabilités (1814), an extremely widespread
      book among all the cultured persons of the nineteenth century: ‘We ought
      then to regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its anterior
      state and as the cause of the one which is to follow. Given for one instant an
      Intelligence which could comprehend all the forces by which nature is
      animated and the respective situation of the beings who compose it, an
      Intelligence sufﬁciently vast to submit these data to analysis, it would em-
      brace in the same formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the
      universe and those of the lightest atom; for it, nothing would be uncertain
      and the future, as the past, would be present to its eyes. The human mind
      offers, in the perfection which it has been able to give to astronomy, a feeble
      idea of this Intelligence. Its discoveries in mechanics and geometry, added to
      that of universal gravity, have enabled it to comprehend in the same analyt-
      ical expressions the past and future states of the system of the world.
      Applying the same method to some other objects of its knowledge, it has
      succeeded in referring to general laws observed phenomena and in foreseeing
      those which given circumstances ought to produce. All these efforts in the
      search for truth tend to lead it back continually to the vast intelligence which
      we have just mentioned, but from which it will always remain inﬁnitely
      removed. This tendency, peculiar to the human race, is that which renders
      it superior to animals; and their progress in this respect distinguishes nations
      and ages and constitutes their true glory’ (Laplace, 1814/1967, p. 243).119

        119
              In the introduction to her Italian edition of the Opere di Pierre Simon Laplace, Orietta
      Pesenti Cambursano observes how Laplace accepts determinism ‘not so much because it leads
      to the ability to grasp the data ( . . . ) in all of its truth, but more because it is the only guarantee
      that science has to predict ( . . . ). If science wants to be true science, it has to present the events
      it refers to in a sequence based on the cause–effect relation ( . . . ) otherwise it risks the erosion
      of any system of human knowledge’ (Pesenti Cambursano, 1967, p. 12, our translation).
      Although Laplace is seen in the history of science as the standard bearer of determinism, we
      know that he also played a fundamental role in a variety of ﬁelds, such as the development of
      probability calculus. In his cited works, he also states, speciﬁes, comments upon and extends
                                                                                    Determinism     255

Laplace believed that the laws of nature were deterministic, nature doesn’t
choose and doesn’t make mistakes; the main purpose of science is precisely to
identify, through calculus and analysis, the ‘necessary’ sequence of the events
that occur in nature (Boyer, 1968).
   What Laplace didn’t take into account was that the nonlinearities of
system dynamics make their evolution unstable and that, by virtue of this,
‘small’ uncertainties that are intrinsic to any measurement of any magni-
tude and that inevitably create a sort of area of uncertainty in the deter-
mination of the values of the state variables at a certain time, in general
amplify over time. In nonlinear systems, therefore, practically in the totality
of real systems, because the area of uncertainty ampliﬁes over time, future
predictions are less accurate the further into time we seek to look.
   In Laplace’s deterministic vision, there is a further element of error: the
superior Intelligence that Laplace speaks of is intended to mean the ability
to know the data, i.e. to measure it, superior to that of man, who is forced to
circumvent the fact that it is impossible to have full knowledge of the
present by using probability calculus (see note 119). If, says Laplace, an
Intelligence that is much better than us at collecting the initial data could
have full knowledge of the present, as it possesses a powerful and effective
tool for the prediction of the evolutive dynamics that we also possess, i.e.
the deterministic laws that, presumed to be linear, do not display any
problems of instability, then the Intelligence would be able to clearly see
into the future and into the past, without uncertainties or approximations.
In theory, still according to Laplace, all we need to do is to eliminate the
area of uncertainty and the linear dynamics would manage to predict the
future without approximations. In other words, we have an excellent
calculation tool, but our knowledge of the data is too limited and approxi-
mate to make a complete and exact prediction of the future; the best we can
do to reduce (but not to eliminate) the uncertainty is to use a probability
distribution.
   In addition to the fact that the dynamics of real systems are not linear,
this conception does not take into account the fundamental fact that


the law of large numbers formulated by Jakob Bernoulli in 1713. According to Laplace,
however, the calculation of probability was not part of the understanding of natural events,
unless it regarded measurement errors, the result of the imperfection of our senses (in his Essai
philosophique, he goes as far as writing that probability theory is nothing more that common
sense expressed in numbers); the concept of randomness, therefore, in this context, is not in
antithesis with the deterministic vision. Given Laplace’s vast range of interests and the depth
of his reﬂections, Pesenti Cambursano (1967) again warns against erroneously attributing a
dogmatic approach to Laplace with regard to the deterministic theory that, in reality, was
alien to him.
256   26 : The classical vision of science

      measurement approximations are intrinsically non-eliminable and that this
      does not only relate to the ability to take good measurements, but to other
      practical and conceptual matters that causes an area of uncertainty in any
      measurement to always be present. On one hand, for example, there is the
      inevitable observer–observed interaction, which due to the effect of the
      measurement itself, causes an alteration of the state of the observed system
      with respect to before the measurement.120 On the other hand, there is the
      fact that a deterministic mathematical law requires data in a numerical
      form, but an ‘inﬁnitely’ precise number means a number with inﬁnite
      decimal places, i.e. a real number, that would require inﬁnite time not
      only to measure, but also simply to be formulated. Necessarily, at a certain
      point, even an Intelligence much better than us at making measurements
      would obtain a result of the measurements and would have to truncate the
      sequence of the decimal places, thus approximating the real number with a
      rational number and introducing a sort of area of uncertainty in the data,
      which, therefore, would necessarily increase due to the effects of nonlinear
      dynamics (we will return to this point in Chapter 31).
         Given the above, one would question the sense and the real validity that
      can be attributed to a set of ‘exact’ deterministic laws, that are claimed to be
      able to predict the future without uncertainties, as long as in possession of
      complete data without approximations. These laws, in reality, would have a
      purely theoretical signiﬁcance because they could never be realized, prac-
      tically, in the impossible conditions of complete knowledge of the data that
      they require to ‘work best’. All that both we and the Intelligence can do is to
      attempt to provide deterministic laws based on ‘approximately exact’ data,
      that provide ‘approximately exact’ predictions. Laplace’s Intelligence
      would be much better than us at reducing the area of uncertainty of the
      initial data, but it could never eliminate it; as the deterministic laws that it
      also possesses, are generally nonlinear, also the predictions that it can
      formulate are destined to see the area of uncertainty grow over time, just
      like our predictions.
         In other words, applying mathematical laws, that, as mathematics, are
      abstract (however formally perfect in their conception they might be) to the
      description of real dynamics leads to two orders of difﬁculty which not even
      the Intelligence capable of a complete knowledge is able to remove: (1) the


        120
             This concept was completely unknown in Laplace’s time. It was deﬁned precisely and
      accepted reluctantly only with quantum physics in the 1920s and 1930s (Heisenberg’s
      uncertainty principle and the principle of superposition of states). However, the concept is
      not limited to quantum physics and can be extended and applied in different forms to many (if
      not all) natural and social sciences.
                                                                 The principle of sufﬁcient reason   257

area of uncertainty is intrinsically uneliminable in a measurement made in
ﬁnite time and (2) the area of uncertainty ampliﬁes over time.



The principle of sufﬁcient reason
In his renowned afﬁrmation, Laplace sought to contradict the ﬁnalism in
the formulation of laws, which does not assign a law in a direct manner, but
identiﬁes it ‘indirectly’, assigning an ‘end’ that, through such a law, can be
realized in a physical world. Determinism, on the other hand, is based on
Leibniz’s principle of sufﬁcient reason, namely on the search for causes:
‘The other is the principle of sufﬁcient reason, by virtue of which we
consider that no fact could be found to be genuine or existent, and no
assertion true, without there being a sufﬁcient reason why it is thus and not
otherwise – even though we usually cannot know what these reasons
are’121. It assigns a cause to every event and sees a meaning of the event
itself in that.
   Leibniz’s principle of sufﬁcient reason was one of the basic assumptions
of the philosophy of Western civilization from the Enlightenment era to
very recent times. It expresses one of the fundamental requirements of
scientiﬁc thought of the classical era: if the real phenomenon can be ex-
pressed by a set of concepts, the relations between the data must ﬁnd an
adequate correspondence in the ‘logical’ relations of said representative
concepts. Because in daily experience the links between phenomena appear
to be much more evident when there is proportionality between the causes
(at least the apparent ones) and their effects, than the numerous cases in
which said proportionality does not exist, then it ends up seeming ‘logical’
to assume as a general rule that small causes always determine small effects
and that large causes are always at the origin of large effects. In this context,
a small effect can only have been provoked by a small cause, and a large
effect can only have been provoked by a large cause. Furthermore, in the
system of concepts, the conditions of external determinism have to be
  121
        ‘Et celui de la raison sufﬁsante, en vertu duquel nous considérons qu’aucun fait ne
saurait se trouver vrai, ou existant, aucune énonciation véritable, sans qu’il y ait une raison
sufﬁsante pourquoi il en soit ainsi et non pas autrement. Quoique ces raisons le plus souvent ne
puissent point nous être connues’ Leibniz’s original quote, in French, from La Monadologie,
1714, paragraph 32; English translation by George MacDonald Ross, 1999, available on the
website http://www.philosophy.leeds.ac.uk/GMR/hmp/texts/modern/leibniz/leibindex.html,
History Of Modern Philosophy, University of Leeds. Leibniz wrote La Monadologie in Vienna,
for Prince Eugenio di Savoia; it was ﬁrst published in Latin in Acta eruditorum in 1721 with the
title Principia philosophiæ seu theses in gratiam principis Eugenii conscriptæ. The original in
French was published in 1840 by Erdmann, in his edition of Œuvres philosophiques.
258   26 : The classical vision of science

      mirrored; therefore in any physical–mathematical theory that translates a
      set of phenomena into a system of differential equations, the arbitrary
      integration constants have to be unequivocally determined by the initial
      conditions, which are assumed to represent the causes that determine the
      phenomena (Enriques and de Santillana, 1936).
         The principle of sufﬁcient reason also sustains that natural processes
      usually correspond to certain maximum or minimum conditions (Leibniz
      even sees a ﬁnalistic aspect of nature in this), a concept that has been
      considered as an indication of which direction to take in the search for
      laws which, according to the vision of the classical era, ‘guide’ the develop-
      ment of phenomena, such as, for example, the renowned principle of least
      action.122 This approach was very effective in leading to many discoveries
      that uphold a large part of physical mathematics, both classical and more
      recent.
         Starting from the principle of least action, linked ﬁrst to the ﬁgure of
      Pierre de Fermat, and then later to Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis and
      William Rowan Hamilton, the concept of geodetics was created, as a line of
      minimum length travelled by light in a three-dimensional space, and we
      obtain one of the central elements of Albert Einstein’s theory of general
      relativity, where the concept of geodetics is extended to a curved four-
      dimensional space-time, becoming one of the fundamental elements in the
      description of nature provided by contemporary physics (Einstein, 1922;
      Landau and Lifshitz, 1970).
         It should be noted (Atlan, 1994) that, in a certain sense, determinism
      counters the idea that phenomena are fully subjected to the domain of
      randomness, and it is precisely because of this that sometimes it has to be
      included in the foundation of a scientiﬁc-like cognitive process that refers to
      reason. The simple fact of undertaking a ‘scientiﬁc’ search for causes, or for
      mere reasons or even only for natural laws, in fact, implies that we assume
      the existence of deterministic causes at the origin of recurrences, even if
      such are not yet known. If a deterministic approach didn’t exist, then there
      would no longer be any reason behind scientiﬁc research. As Henri Atlan
      (1994) sustains, from this point of view, the notion of randomness, in
      reality, immediately appeared to be complementary to absolute determin-
      ism (see p. 254, note 119). Randomness regards above all our knowledge: it

        122
             The principle of least action, one of the cornerstones of science’s classical deterministic
      vision, was reviewed and discussed in-depth by the mathematician Ivar Ekeland (2000) in the
      light of contemporary philosophical–scientiﬁc developments. Ekeland, although an optimist
      with regard to the potential offered by science to improve human conditions, is sceptical of a
      uniﬁed vision of the world that the principle of minimum action appeared to propose to
      scientists of the classical era.
                                                              The classical vision in social sciences   259

is an epistemological notion that we apply, using probability calculus, to
circumvent the difﬁculties of recognizing deterministic recurrences and
laws, thus attempting to reduce our ignorance of causes explicitly propor-
tional to the phenomenon; or, we add, to get around the lack of causes
proportional to the observed phenomena, as occurs with chaotic situations
in which we usually refer to the butterﬂy effect (Rasetti, 1986).



The classical vision in social sciences
The same rigidly deterministic approach in mechanics, as already discussed
in Chapter 1, is also reﬂected in socio-economic sciences, founded in the
mid-eighteenth century, when it was attempted to apply the methods of
physical mathematics that had demonstrated themselves to be so effective in
the description of certain classes of physical phenomena, to politics. In
Enlightenment culture, in fact, politics is seen as a sort of art that the
‘enlightened’ sovereign has to exercise for the good of his subjects, to
perform which he must use the new tools made available by science. This
is how political arithmetics came about (Crépel, 1999), namely the science,
according to Denis Diderot in the Encyclopédie, the purpose of whose
operations is research useful to the art of governing the peoples (Dioguardi,
1995).
   In particular, this complete faith both in the existence of laws in econom-
ics similar to the physical relations that control the material universe
(which, incidentally, justiﬁes the introduction of the concept of economic
science after the mid-eighteenth century) and in the fact that they are
‘correct’, insofar as they are the work of God, characterizes the school of
thought of the physiocrats in economics. Once the laws had been discov-
ered, the appropriate human behaviour simply entailed following them.
What the state has to do is to allow each of us to follow our ‘natural’
tendencies instilled by God123 (Lekachman, 1959).

   123
       Physiocracy rapidly became fashionable throughout Europe in the second half of the
eighteenth century. To illustrate the contents of the above text, below are several excerpts
from the book entitled The Physiocrats written by Henry Higgs in 1897, which includes a
conversation between Catherine of Russia and Paul-Pierre Mercier de la Rivière, one of the
main disciplines of Quesnay, the founder and the most illustrious ﬁgure of the school of
physiocracy.
   ‘The next eminent Physiocrat to require mention is Mercier de la Rivière (1720–1794), a
magistrate who ﬁlled for some time the post of Governor of Martinique, and wrote an
important treatise, already referred to, L’Ordre naturel et essentiel des sociétés politiques,
1767, which Adam Smith has described as ‘‘the most distinct and best connected account of
the doctrine’’ of the sect.’ (p. 38) [ . . . ] ‘The question addressed to the Physiocrats was, ‘‘If
260   26 : The classical vision of science

        Adam Smith’s work was characterized by a similar approach. The latter
      had borrowed, in part, his ideas from the physicocrats, with whom he had
      had direct and personal contact, in particular with Quesnay (Lekachman,
      1959). Smith and the other classical economists wanted to interpret the
      market as being supported by rigid natural laws that act in a deterministic
      way, put into motion by the action of something similar to real forces, in a
      similar way to that of the mechanistic schema initiated by Newton around a
      century earlier and which was being fully developed in the physics circles of
      the era.124 The ﬁrst economists, in Smith’s era, in fact, focused on the
      concept of individual egoism as a driving force in history (Dobb, 1973).
      This led to the general concept of an economic system put into motion by

      your system says ‘Hands off!’ to the state, and begs it to ‘let things alone,’ what do you
      consider the functions of the state to be?’’. Mercier de la Rivière attempts to create a
      philosophy of the state. Newton and others had discovered great laws governing the harmo-
      nious order of the physical world. There were surely similar laws governing the moral order
      of the social world, and the motto of the book is a sentence from Malebranche’s Traité
      de Morale: ‘‘L’Ordre est la Loi inviolable des esprits; et rien n’est réglé, s’il n’y est conforme.’’ ’
      (p. 39) [ . . . ] ‘Mention has already been made of the advances of Catherine of Russia to
      Mercier de la Rivière, but these seem to have been little more than a womanly whim for the
      fashion of the moment, and to have had little practical result. When the philosopher arrived at
      her Court at Moscow she had an interview with him, which Thiebault reports as follows:
      – Sir – said the Czarina – could you tell me the best way to govern a State well?
      – There is only one, Madame- answered the pupil of Quesnay- it is to be just, i.e. maintain
         order, and enforce the laws.
      – But on what basis should the laws of an empire repose?
      – On one alone, Madame, the nature of things and of men.
      – Exactly, but when one wishes to give laws to a people, what rules indicate most surely the
         laws which suit it best?
      – To give or make laws, Madame, is a task which God has left to no one. Ah! what is man, to
         think himself capable of dictating laws to beings whom he knows not, or knows so
         imperfectly? And by what right would he impose laws upon beings whom God has not
         placed in his hands?
      – To what, then, do you reduce the science of government?
      – To study well, to recognise and manifest, the laws which God has so evidently engraven in
         the very organisation of man, when He gave him existence. To seek to go beyond this would
         be a great misfortune and a destructive undertaking.
      – Monsieur, I am very pleased to have heard you. I wish you good-day.
      She sent him home richly rewarded, and wrote to Voltaire: ‘He supposed that we walked on
      all fours, and very politely took the trouble to come to set us up on our hind legs.’ (p. 48–49)
        124
             It should be noted that there are several substantial differences between Smith’s vision
      and that of the physiocrats regarding the meaning attributed to natural laws. Smith consid-
      ered them expressed in terms of real market forces, essentially the competition, that act like
      the forces of physics and tend to establish determined ‘natural values’ of equilibrium. The
      physiocrats, on the other hand, conceived the existence of a ‘natural order’ of divine origin,
      thus transcendent, that expressed itself in terms of regular and repetitive models of measur-
      able ﬂows or exchanges.
                                                         Characteristics of systems   261

forces (or impulses), whose movement is controlled by speciﬁc economic
laws, the discovery and deﬁnition of which became the fundamental ob-
jective of classical economics – the idea of the potentially creative force of
individual egoism: in reality this is the essence of Adam Smith’s metaphys-
ical construction of the invisible hand (Dobb, 1973).



Characteristics of systems described by classical science
The theories that draw their origins from the classical school, both in
natural and in social sciences, are characterized by several fundamental
aspects that in modern language can be indicated by the terms equilibrium,
linear causality and negative feedback.

Equilibrium. In Part 1 (Chapter 5) we looked at several examples of
physical systems that evolve tending towards a stable state of periodic
motion or asymptotic equilibrium. We also examined an example of a
dynamical system described by a relatively simple mathematical law such
as the logistic map, identifying an initial area of asymptotically stable
equilibrium in its evolution. This was the fundamental vision of classical
and neoclassical economics: markets and economies tend towards states of
equilibrium. It was assumed that markets functioned like mechanisms
aimed at the formation of states of equilibrium (market clearing), in such
a way that, when environmental factors change the level of demand, for
example, this automatically triggers changes in prices which restore
the equilibrium between supply and demand, i.e. the previous one or a
new equilibrium, unless some type of monopolistic power interferes, im-
peding said readjustment. In this schema of equilibrium, formulated by
Adam Smith, we can identify an analogy with Newton’s theory, in which
the systems automatically correct deviations from the trajectories of equi-
librium determined by basic laws. We thus have a vision of society as being
made up of systems whose natural state is equilibrium, in which, therefore,
any deviation is damped by negative feedback mechanisms (which we will
look at later), such as Smith’s ‘invisible hand’. When the changes are too
great, in order to recover its initial equilibrium, the system tends towards a
new state of equilibrium.
   An analogy can be seen between Smith’s concept of the invisible hand
that restores equilibrium to the markets and Charles Darwin’s theory of
evolution (1859). Darwin saw the evolution of life as a process of natural
selection; competition for resources and for survival act like an invisible
hand that determines a dynamic equilibrium. This classical vision of
262   26 : The classical vision of science

      equilibrium does not change even with the neodarwinists, who relate said
      selection to random changes at the genetic level. According to the neodar-
      winists, the species that survives natural selection are still seen as systems
      that chance has changed in such a way that they are more adapted to
      environmental changes than the species that do not survive.

      Linear causality. In the classical vision, the assumption that systems tend
      towards equilibrium was supported by another assumption: that there is a
      direct link between the cause that acts on the system, originating from an
      environment external to the system, and the change in the system’s struc-
      ture. This led to the idea that, given the same causes, at least in principle,
      systems always react in the same way. From here, it is then a short step to
      arrive at the idea that we can identify real laws in the observed recurrences
      that guide (not that describe) the evolution of systems, and that therefore
      we can effectively act on some element external to the system with the
      intention of provoking the appropriate causes with the certainty of achiev-
      ing the expected result. We assume, that is, that we can pilot the system’s
      evolution by means of the causes of known consequences, that are always
      the same type and, above all, that are proportional to the intensity of the
      cause (Bohm, 1957).
         Just as in a linear physical system, a change in the force applied to a body
      provokes calculable consequences, usually proportionately related to the
      cause that produced them (see, for example, Chapter 5), in the same way, in
      classical economics, if the levels of demand in a market change, this is seen
      as the direct cause of a speciﬁc variation of prices.
         The assumption according to which we believe we are able to pilot a
      system’s evolution, once we know the laws on which it is founded (the laws
      seen as cause, not as description of recurrences in phenomena), is the same
      assumption that is found at the basis of a widespread vision of the nature of
      management, the idea that managers can successfully control the evolution
      of the organizations that they oversee, by taking ‘sensible’ decisions based
      solely, or mainly, on their knowledge of future changes in the environment.
      This management concept, similar to the classical vision, marked by linear-
      ity, is known as strategic management (Robbins and Coulter, 1998). Along-
      side it, there is another concept known as ecological management, which
      sustains that a decision determines only a particular initial array of compe-
      tencies within an organization, but then inertia and ignorance tend to hold
      the array still in its initial state; when environmental changes occur, only
      organizations, which by chance have the appropriate array of competen-
      cies, survive. This Darwinian vision, however, did not have much success
      against the strategic vision, according to which it was believed that the most
                                                                      Characteristics of systems   263

powerful coalition within an organization chooses a future state for the
organization and then works in such a way as to ensure that said choice is
realized. In any event, the underlying idea is still that the most important
links between long term causes and effects can be identiﬁed.
   The idea, basically a prejudice, of direct proportionality between cause
and effect, has often led to the assumption of the existence of causes linearly
related to the effects observed in practice, if not even directly proportional
to the latter. There is no doubt that this way of seeing things has often been
successful; we can even go as far as saying that, at least partially, it is at the
origin of Enlightenment science and therefore of tout court science as well.
The search for ‘physical’ causes where it was thought that only superior,
and thus, inscrutable free will acted, was one of the fundamental elements
that characterized the origins of science, initially as an activity that aimed to
control nature, in a cultural environment dominated by ideas that were
ascribable to magic, mysticism or various forms of metaphysics. In this way,
seeing into the future ceased to be the task of the oracles and became the
ﬁeld of investigation of system dynamics, as it is called in modern language.
   Nevertheless, there are lots of situations where the principle of a linear
relationship between cause and effect, ascribable to Leibniz’s principle of
sufﬁcient reason, cannot be applied to. These are situations in which
macroscopic effects originate from simple ﬂuctuations, perhaps very
small, of a magnitude that is close to a critical value, so much so that said
effects appear to have no effective causes. Habit or prejudice pushes us to
search for linear causes and, when we don’t ﬁnd them, to continue to look
for them in the wrong direction (as in the story of the drunk illustrated in
note 113 on p. 242).125

Negative feedback. Both Newton’s and Darwin’s visions are based on the
existence of control mechanisms that act like negative feedback cycles, i.e.
mechanisms that, when the system moves away from equilibrium, either
due to the effect of an external force or due to normal ﬂuctuations inherent
to its dynamics, dampen the effects of these, bringing the system back
towards its initial equilibrium. The latter regards a system’s stability that
we discussed in Part 2: in particular, negative feedback means asymptotic
stability (Chapter 18). Systems in which negative feedback mechanisms are


   125
       Often, in certain environments external to contemporary scientiﬁc culture, the difﬁcult
or lack of identiﬁcation of causes proportional to observed effects leads to the resumption of
concepts that are more pertinent to metaphysics than physics (the latter considered only in the
etymological sense); this lack of identiﬁcation, on occasion, is even assumed to be a demon-
stration of the presence of superior and inscrutable wills (Cohen and Stewart, 1994).
264   26 : The classical vision of science

      either exclusively or prevalently present are easier to treat in mathematical
      terms, because their linear approximation is simpler.
         And this is not all. These types of system are also more easily identiﬁable
      in the environment; in a certain sense, by guaranteeing the system’s stability,
      albeit asymptotically, the negative feedback deﬁnes it, because the system’s
      characteristics remain (asymptotically) unchanged, even if it is subjected to
      environmental stimuli that, acting on it, push it towards a change in its
      conﬁguration. Identifying a stable system is simpler than identifying a
      system which changes its conﬁguration continually and unpredictably;
      this explains classical science’s particular interest in systems of this type.
         The idea of negative feedback was extensively developed after the second
      world war, within the ﬁeld of cybernetics (Ashby, 1957). Cybernetics, in
      reality, can be considered a science that anticipated complexity in the
      investigation of dynamical systems, precisely because it was the ﬁrst to
      make use of concepts such as isolated or closed systems that regulate
      themselves by means of internal feedback cycles. As we will see in the
      following paragraphs, complexity has overtaken cybernetics because it
      makes use of new concepts such as, in particular, self-organization and
      emergence (see Chapter 27); in other words, because it considers systems
      that evolve towards new states that do not have negative feedback cycles.
         In a system controlled by a form of linear causality and maintained in
      equilibrium by control mechanisms such as negative feedback cycles, there
      is no room for surprise, i.e. for an unexpected change in the internal
      structures of the system, or for a paradox, i.e. the emergence of structures
      that are different to what we were expecting if we returned towards equi-
      librium; in a system of this nature, opposing forces are settled in a harmo-
      nious equilibrium.
         The way in which the world was seen, according to the vision of classical
      science, that we discussed before, is based on the idea of a net distinction
      between a real situation that objectively exists and a subjective observer
      who constructs a representation (model) of that objective real situation,
      observing it without perturbing it. The successful scientist, according to this
      vision, is he who constructs a body of knowledge, i.e. a set of propositions,
      on how nature and society function. In the same way, we could say that the
      successful manager is he who is able to construct accurate representations
      of his own organization and of its environment, and who takes the best
      decisions on the basis of predictions that he makes regarding how that
      environment will change.
         One of the most important outcomes of what was discussed in Part 2
      regarding the instability of dynamical systems, and, in general, the new
      vision introduced by the concepts of chaos and complexity, is precisely the
                                                           Characteristics of systems   265

substantial review, if not the complete abandonment, of the principle of
sufﬁcient reason, one of the fundamental principles of classical science. In
Chapter 27 we will be illustrating some of the aspects of the framework of
the sciences that is obtained from the new ideas that overcome the rigid
deﬁnition of classical science; we will look into the theme of complexity in
its own right, presenting one of the most typical elements that characterize
it with respect to the vision that was upheld in the past: the self-organization
of systems.
               From determinism to
 27            complexity: self-
               organization, a new
               understanding of system
               dynamics



Introduction
According to Newtonian theory, as we know, space is assumed to be an
absolute entity and time a magnitude independent of the former and re-
versible. All of the processes described within the Newtonian framework
are reversible. In other words, there is no way of distinguishing between the
motion of a body subjected to the action of a force and that of the same
body subjected to a force opposite to the previous one, but with time that
goes backwards; both appear to be natural. As we know, this schema is
completely based on the concept of space provided by Euclidean geometry;
it was accepted, used and developed for over a century, after Newton
created it, and became one of the distinguishing elements of Kantian phil-
osophy.
   In the nineteenth century, the theory of thermodynamics was developed
by Rudolf Clausius, Lord Kelvin and, later, Ludwig Boltzmann, in which,
unlike the Newtonian schema, time plays a fundamental role because the
natural processes it considers are irreversible. In the vision adopted in this
new theory, over the course of time, the systems lose the energy that they
possess in a ‘noble’ form, i.e. mechanical energy, that may change from
kinetic to potential and vice versa. The noble energy degrades into heat,
namely a form of energy that is no longer able to fully return to its
mechanical energy form. This is the second principle of thermodynamics.
This is what makes the evolution of systems irreversible; the transformation
of mechanical energy into heat occurs in ways other than those of the reverse
transformation; in addition to this, explains Boltzmann, simultaneous to
                                                                               Introduction   267

the degradation of the energy from mechanical to heat, the systems them-
selves become increasingly disordered. In this new framework, the process
in the opposite direction, i.e. what we would obtain going backwards in
time, seems unnatural as it involves the complete transformation of heat
into mechanical energy and the simultaneous increase in order of the
system, without generating other effects on other systems connected to
the former.
   A ball that bounces according to the Newtonian scheme bounces elastic-
ally and always reaches the same maximum height; the process is the same
even seen backwards in time. In the thermodynamic schema, on the other
hand, the maximum height of the bounces decreases over time due to the
gradual transformation of the total mechanical energy of the ball into heat
(more precisely, in an increase of the internal energy of the ball system),
during the subsequent inelastic bounces. This process, seen backwards in
time, would appear, on the other hand, like the motion of a ball that,
bounce after bounce, cools and gets increasingly higher, drawing mechan-
ical energy exclusively from its ‘heat content’ (i.e. from the internal energy),
which progressively diminishes. A process such as this, alien to anyone’s
experience, would appear to be completely unnatural.124 Recalling what we
discussed in Part 1, the ﬁrst case, the ball that bounces elastically, is similar
to that of the pendulum that oscillates without friction, described by equa-
tion (5.2), while the second, the ball that bounces to progressively lower
heights, is similar to that of the damped oscillation of the pendulum,
described by equation (5.4).
   In the ﬁrst 20 years of the twentieth century, Einstein developed the ideas
of the theory of relativity, once again changing the role of time and dem-
onstrating that both space and time (not just space) are relative to the
observer who describes them, that they are inseparably linked between
them in a single entity called space-time, the geometry of which is not
Euclidean, but is curved due to the presence of masses, and it is precisely
this that causes the motion of a mass towards another, something that in the
Newtonian schema, was called gravitation.
   A few years later, in its new quantum paradigm, physics demonstrated
that matter and radiation are both entities that enjoy both the character-
istics of corpuscular particles, and those of waves, and that they display the
properties of either particles or waves depending on how the observer

  124
       Precisely the fact that no process has ever been observed in which work is performed
drawing energy from a single source of heat, becomes, in thermodynamics theory, a general
afﬁrmation of impossibility and is one of the various equivalent formulations that can be
given to the second principle of thermodynamics.
268   27 : From determinism to complexity

      interacts with them. In this new framework, there is a sort of compensation
      between the maximum precisions with which the position and speed of one
      of these elementary particle–waves can be measured, insofar as it is the act
      of observing that perturbs the state.
         This is how several absolutely revolutionary ideas entered scientiﬁc
      thought. First of all, the idea that there is a fundamental and intrinsic
      indetermination in the measurement of the state of a particle–wave, elim-
      inates the concept of material point dear to Newtonian mathematical
      physics. As a consequence of this, the idea that it is possible to measure
      both the position and the speed of a body simultaneously and with arbitrary
      precision is refuted. Secondly, it imposes the idea that an observer cannot be
      detached from the real situation he is describing. The act of measuring in
      itself perturbs the state of what is being measured, which leads to the
      abandonment of the idea that we can obtain a totally objective description
      of a reality detached from the observer and in itself objective. Lastly, a
      further and fundamental revolution is given by the new role that chance and
      probability now assume, no longer the expression of our ignorance of the
      details of the phenomena, but intrinsic and unavoidable elements that
      characterize what we perceive as the system’s evolution.
         These new revolutionary concepts of contemporary science are abso-
      lutely fundamental to the cosmic scale, particularly for the theory of rela-
      tivity, or to the atomic and subatomic scales, particularly for quantum
      physics, but appear less relevant to daily experience, characterized by the
      scales of human senses. This is the reason why they attracted the attention
      of scientists only in the last century.
         In a totally separate context we can look at how quantum physics (as well
      as the theory of relativity) imposed a reconsideration of the concept of
      causality, which, however, does not regard the linear aspect of causality;
      the foundation of quantum physics, in fact, is always linear-deterministic, as
      the motion is described by a second order linear equation, the Schrödinger
      equation, which is simply a distant descendant of Newton’s equation. The
      methods of the theory of relativity and those of quantum physics, at present,
      appear to be speciﬁc to their respective sectors and are difﬁcult to extend to
      other disciplines, despite the fact that several interesting attempts have been
      made to apply these methods to social sciences (Dendrinos, 1991a).



      The new conceptions of complexity
      In a later period, when the above-cited theories had already been exten-
      sively developed, modern scientiﬁc thought gave rise to a further new and
                                                    The new conceptions of complexity   269

revolutionary set of concepts, usually indicated by the expression (the
science of) complexity. Complexity, which has been developed in the past
few decades, unlike the theory of relativity and quantum physics, appears to
be relevant to an enormous range of phenomena on all scales, including
those that are more familiar to us.
   The fundamental characteristic of complexity is the fact that, in the study
of the evolution of dynamical systems that complexity deals with, the
nature of the system in question is usually irrelevant. In the vision proposed
by complexity, we can identify forms and evolutive characteristics common
to all, or almost all, systems that are made up of numerous elements,
between which there are reciprocal, nonlinear interactions and positive
feedback mechanisms. These systems, precisely for this reason, are gener-
ally called complex systems.
   It is precisely the transversality of the aspects that are displayed in
complex systems, and that characterize the nature of such, that make the
phenomenology of complexity relevant to all scales, and not just the cosmic
or subatomic ones, as occurred, at least initially, with the theory of relativity
and with quantum physics, even those that are more directly linked to our
senses. This is true for a wide range of scientiﬁc ﬁelds, even if distant from
one another. For example, complexity attempts to account for collective
phenomena such as the turbulence in ﬂuids, atmospheric dynamics and the
evolution of weather, the evolution of life, the formation of organized
structures in all types of society, or the phase changes that occur, both in
matter and in society, where by ‘phase changes’ we mean, in social sciences,
economic, social, political or cultural revolutions or, in general, the appear-
ance of new forms of social aggregation.
   The question of how systems organize themselves in response to an action
of the external environment is as old as science itself, but the study of how
systems can spontaneously self-organize is relatively recent. The forms,
both in the strict sense and in a broader sense of characteristics that we
identify in the world around us, are only a subset of all of those theoretically
possible. Why then do we not observe a larger variety of forms? Traditional
science has attempted to account for the forms observed, using a reduction-
ist approach, i.e. seeking laws applicable to the single components of the
system, such as gravitation, chemical links, etc. The science of complexity,
by contrast, takes mainly systemic properties into account and shows how a
spontaneous process of self-organization can take place when a dynamical
system ﬁnds itself in a state that is distant from equilibrium, without any
external force acting on the system.
   Classical Darwinian theory conceived the evolution of life as the
competitive selection between the various living forms, which are in
270   27 : From determinism to complexity

      competition with one another for the limited resources that exist in the
      environment; neodarwinian theory proposes that the fundamental cause of
      biological differences is random mutations at the genetic level. In the new
      perspective that the science of complexity proposes, in contrast, life is seen
      as evolving by means of continuous tension between competition and
      cooperation. Competition alone is not sufﬁcient to successfully guide com-
      plex systems: greater success is enjoyed, in this vision, when there are forms
      of cooperation between the different elements (individuals) (Axelrod, 1984,
      1997; Holland, 1996, 1999; Allen, 1997b; Staricco and Vaio, 2000).
         Complexity contradicts the elements that characterize the classical vision
      illustrated in Chapter 26, that formed the basis for Newtonian theory on
      physics, Darwinian theory on biology and classical economic theory. It
      shows that systems are creative only when, in the phase space in which
      we represent their dynamics (see Chapter 8), we ﬁnd a particular zone, far
      from equilibrium, which, using a famous expression that has nowadays
      become commonplace (Langton, 1990), is known as the ‘the edge of
      chaos’127 (Lewin, 1992; Waldrop, 1992; Kauffman, 1995). Furthermore,
      complexity also shows that causality is not linear, but rather that it acts in
      such a way that the links between causes and effects in the long term
      dissolve and, in principle, cannot be identiﬁed. Lastly it shows that positive
      feedback cycles are essential to the evolution of systems and that, therefore,
      they need to be considered in the control of the same. Positive feedback
      cycles, by amplifying the effects of the perturbations (‘the new elements’),
      act in such a way that the paradoxes cannot be resolved in a harmonious
      and static equilibrium, regardless of whether such is asymptotic or other-
      wise, but are maintained, creating the tension that guides the system’s
      evolution, which leads to the appearance of new forms that are totally
      unrelated to the stable equilibrium in which the unperturbed system ﬁnds
      itself.
         Ilya Progogine, 1977 Nobel Prize winner for chemistry, and other scien-
      tists from his school (Prigogine and Stengers, 1984; Nicolis and Prigogine,
      1987) showed how some chemical systems display particular characteristics
      when they are far from equilibrium, a condition in which they are called
      dissipative systems. Dissipative systems import energy and/or information
      from the environment, which, dissipated in the system in question, cause its
      readjustment into a state characterized by new structures that do not exist

        127
             On occasion, other authors use different expressions such as, for example, ‘edge of
      disintegration’. We will be using the expression cited in the text which we consider to be the
      most appropriate, as well as the most widespread, following the success of a number of books
      on the theme of complexity that make wide use of it, such as Kauffman (1995).
                                                                Self-organization   271

in the state of equilibrium. In a dissipative system, the symmetry and the
uniformity of the state of equilibrium are lost in favour of a new structure
that is created at the expense of the energy absorbed and/or of the infor-
mation that has reached the outside of the system and that are dissipated in
its interior. The dissipative activity acts just like part of the process of
creation of a new structure in the system, which is thus called dissipative.
Unlike dissipative structures, on the other hand, stable equilibrium in a
system is reached by the same by freeing energy, not absorbing it: stable
equilibrium is so precisely because it occurs in a condition of minimum
energy.
   Dissipative structures emerge though a process of self-organization that
takes place spontaneously in correspondence to certain critical values of the
parameters that control the system. In this process the elements of the
system organize themselves spontaneously to produce a new schema,
according to a real bottom-up process, that is to say a process in which
the general framework emerges as a consequence of the formation of
details.



Self-organization
The mechanism at the origin of self-organization can be explained as
follows. Random changes, disequilibrium or something else, drive the
system to explore new positions in the phase space close to that occupied,
without being subjected to an external force. The changes act by therefore
pushing the system on a different trajectory towards an attractor that
represents the new self-organized state. In other words, what happens is
that various types of ﬂuctuation allow the system to exit the basin of
attraction of an attractor and enter the basin of attraction of another
attractor. As time passes, the system can evolve towards a stable organiza-
tion, i.e. towards an attractor and remain there, or it can jump between the
basins of attraction of various different attractors. The study of the prop-
erties of self-organization of a system is therefore equivalent to the exam-
ination of the attractors that its dynamics presents.
   The concept of self-organization is fundamentally different to that of
selection. For a system in evolution, the attractors are the only available
stable states. By self-organizing, the system passes from one attractor to
another, spontaneously crossing the border between one basin of attraction
and another, and therefore only due to the effect of ﬂuctuations in a
condition of disequilibrium in which the system ﬁnds itself, without the
intervention of any external force. Self-organization only considers the
272   27 : From determinism to complexity

      spontaneous movement of the system from one attractor to another at-
      tractor, movement that is not caused by any thrust coming from outside the
      system. The dynamic schema that characterizes self-organization, therefore,
      persists regardless of changes in external forces.
         Selection, on the other hand, is a choice between different stable states,
      therefore of equilibrium, that are in competition with one another; this
      choice takes place with reference to criteria that are external to the system.
      Selection is a movement in the phase space in a particular direction that
      maximizes a ﬁtness function of the system, deﬁned in a certain way, which
      expresses the degree of the system’s ﬁt with the external environment. This
      movement takes place due to the effect of the action of the environment on
      the system, like a force that pushes the system towards a new equilibrium.
         With self-organization, a new order of the system ‘emerges’, an order of
      the non-equilibrium, a non-static order, different to the condition of asymp-
      totic stability, in which the entire evolutive dynamics tends to dissolve into a
      stable equilibrium. The essence of self-organization is the appearance of a
      new system structure without any external pressure, apart from a simple
      ﬂow of some form of energy (and/or information). In other words, the
      constraints that lead to the organization of a new structure are internal to
      the system in question, result from interactions between the components
      and are usually independent of the speciﬁc physical nature of the compon-
      ents. This, in particular, is what makes the study of complexity of funda-
      mental importance to science: the phenomenology that is displayed is
      independent not only of the particular system, but also of the nature of
      the system. The fact that a system exists as such, therefore, with an internal
      network of interactions, is the origin of certain of its characteristics that we
      indicate with the term ‘complexity’.
         As we said in Chapter 1, the general term ‘system’ is intended to mean a
      set of parts in reciprocal interaction, that act in such as way as to render said
      set identiﬁable with respect to the external environment from which it is
      separated by recognizable borders. We can identify various types of sys-
      tems, from those in which the interactions are ﬁxed, in such a way as the
      components are rigidly connected to one another, as occurs, for example, in
      an engine, to those in which the interacting parts are almost totally free,
      such as the molecules of a gas, each of which interacts in a very weak
      manner with the other molecules. In this context, the most interesting
      systems are those that display both ﬁxed and changing interactions, such
      as, for example, a cell or a human society characterized by efﬁcient means
      of communication and transport.
         The system displays certain properties that are called ‘emergent’ because
      they are not intrinsically identiﬁable in any of its parts taken individually,
                                                                  Self-organization   273

but only appear when observing the system in its entirety. With self-organ-
ization, new structures sensitive to the values of the control parameters
‘emerge’: a new order in which the schema produced by the elements of the
system cannot be explained in terms of the individual action of said elem-
ents, i.e. it cannot be traced back to the behaviour of the single elements of
the system. Something new appears, typical of systems in a condition of
non-equilibrium: synergy between the elements.
   The analytic vision is unable to account for this, as it interprets the
system, in its entirety, simply as the sum of the single parts it is composed
of; on the contrary, we need to consider each particular component of the
system as if it were integrated in a network of relations that link it to all of
the others.
   The analytic vision is no doubt effective for many purposes, but it is often
insufﬁcient because it does not take into account certain characteristics of
the system that do not belong to the single components but that pertain to
the whole of the components and their interactions. The analytic vision
needs to be supported, not replaced by a synthetic one, in which the system
is no longer the simple sum of the interacting parts, but acquires new
characteristics due to the fact that it is a whole.
   This is what makes us distinguish between a wood and a set of trees, a
house from a pile of bricks, an engine from a set of metal parts, an organized
society from a group of individuals that do not communicate with one
another, a living organism from a broth of protein, etc. This holistic per-
spective is needed to provide a more general and complete level of descrip-
tion that is inaccessible if based on the simple examination of the
components one by one, in which the system acquires new emergent prop-
erties. How could we think of the ecosystem of a wood based on the trees
alone, the concept of a house based on the bricks, the functioning of an
engine based on the separate parts, social organization founded on com-
munication based on a set of isolated individuals that do not communicate
with one another, or life based on just proteins?
   The new schema that emerges from self-organization is an unstable
structure that can easily be dissolved, if the critical values of the system’s
control parameters are changed. A structure of this nature is called dissipa-
tive. While the structure of a system in equilibrium cannot be easily
destroyed, or rather it can be maintained without any effort, a dissipative
structure, on the contrary, requires an effort to maintain it, but relatively
little effort to change it.
   When we introduce nonlinearities into a system in the form of positive
feedback cycles, the result that we obtain is that of keeping the system far
from equilibrium, in a state of instability; in other words, it is put into a
274   27 : From determinism to complexity

      condition of amplifying the small changes and it is prevented from adapting
      itself to the surrounding environment.
         It is precisely the ampliﬁcation of these small changes that causes the
      change in the system’s structure in its entirety. The stability, acting in the
      sense of maintaining the system as it is, damps, suffocates the changes and
      renders them local; action in conditions far from equilibrium, on the other
      hand, destabilises the system and makes it receptive to change.
         The idea that systems can self-organize, derived from the holistic vision
      that must be applied to the same, represents a new revolutionary perspec-
      tive in the study of the evolution of systems themselves. Nevertheless, even
      though it represents one of the main cores, the said idea does not exhaust
      the theme of complexity, which presents other distinguishing features,
      which we will discuss in the next chapter.
                   What is complexity?
 28

Adaptive complex systems
Over the past 30 years, there has been considerable progress in studies and
research in a number of separate areas that are, however, united by the
expression ‘complexity science’. Said research work has led to the develop-
ment of useful techniques and has generated signiﬁcant and explicative
metaphors. However, to date, the work conducted in this ﬁeld has not
been founded on a coherent ‘complexity theory’ even though it is a com-
monly used expression (even we will be using it in the following sections),
nor has it been formalized into a system of axioms and theorems that can be
generally applied across the various disciplines. Our further investigation of
the subject of complexity will not be based on an abstract view of the latter;
we will be looking more at how it manifests itself.128


  128
       There is a very long list of books and periodicals that have been and are published on
the various branches of complexity science; interest readers will ﬁnd numerous references in
the bibliography of this book. Equally, the list of research institutes that have directed part or
even all of their activities to this area would be extremely long. We would like to provide the
reader with the names of a few research centres, chosen on the basis of the fact that they
provide specialist information on the subject of complexity in the form of working papers or
journals monitored by an editorial committee, that are accessible on the Internet without the
payment of a subscription fee.
  Santa Fe Institute (SFI): is a private non-proﬁt organization, based in Santa Fe, New
Mexico, USA, founded in 1984, expressly and exclusively dedicated to research on complex
systems; it can be considered the most important research centre on complexity in the
world, and incorporates a very large number of researchers active in a diverse number of
ﬁelds (mainly mathematics, physics, biology and economics), belonging to various institutes
and universities, most of which are American; it regularly publishes books, journals and
working papers on the subject of complexity; the institute’s bulletin is available on http//
www.santafe.edu
  Monash University, Victoria, Australia publishes an on-line refereed journal, formerly
published by Charles Sturt University Bathurst, Australia, dedicated to the various branches
of complexity science, called Complexity International, available on http//www.complexity.
org.au.
276   28 : What is complexity?

         There is a category of systems that display self-organization and dynamic
      behaviour that is qualitatively different to both that of simple stability and
      chaos. At present, said systems cannot be characterized in mathematical
      terms in a general sense; we will restrict ourselves to saying that their
      foundation cannot be a linear dynamic, as the latter is too restrictive, as
      we have seen in the ﬁrst two parts of the book. Systems of this kind are
      called adaptive complex systems, and are characterized by the fact that their
      nonlinear dynamics can give rise to self-organizing and self-reproducing
      structures, which are capable of interactions that imitate the behaviour of
      living beings.
         From a complexity perspective, adaptive complex systems can be deﬁned
      as follows: ‘An adaptive complex system is an open system, made up of
      numerous elements that interact with one another in a nonlinear way and
      that constitute a single, organized and dynamic entity, able to evolve and
      adapt to the environment’ (Gandolﬁ, 1999, p. 19, our translation). The
      behaviour of adaptive complex systems displays one of the main aspects of
      complexity: the response of a system to changes in the environment, i.e. its
      adaptation to such and to the stimuli that are generated by such. Human
      beings ﬁnd adaptive complex systems particularly interesting because each
      of us, just as all other forms of life, can be considered to be an adaptive
      complex system, both in terms of the body, from a biological perspective,
      and also, in particular, with regard to our conscious thought processes
      (Albin, 1998).
         As regards the behaviour of adaptive complex systems, several general
      characteristics can be identiﬁed that we have brieﬂy described below. An
      adaptive complex system:

      1. Is made up of a large number of elements (agents) that interact recipro-
         cally, which cannot be modelled into a linear schema; the elements are
         connected together in such a way that the action of each element can
         provoke more than one response in each of the other elements.
      2. Interacts with other adaptive complex systems, which, as a whole,
         constitute the environment in which it is immersed and to whose stimuli
         it reacts.
      3. Acquires information on the systems that make up its environment and
         on the consequences of its own interaction with said systems; in other

        The New England Complex System Institute (NECSI), based in Boston, Massachusetts,
      USA; (www.necsi.org). it is a consortium of scholars from industry and university, whose
      research is directed, in particular, to the study of complexity in management activities; it
      publishes various journals, including the on-line referred world wide web-based journal
      Interjournal, available on http://www.interjournal.org.
                                                       Basic aspects of complexity   277

   words, it is sensitive to the information that it receives from the envir-
   onment (environmental feedback).
4. Identiﬁes regularities in the ﬂow of information that it acquires, and
   based on such, develops a model (or a schema) that attempts to ‘explain’
   the regularities identiﬁed.
5. It acts in relation to the systems that make up its environment, on the
   basis of the model that it has developed, observes the responses its
   actions provoke, as well as the consequences of said responses and uses
   this information to correct and improve the model in question; in other
   words, it uses the environmental feedback to learn and to adapt.



Basic aspects of complexity
We can identify several different types of complexity, but the fundamental
underlying mechanism is always the instability of the system, the main
effects of which, in certain particular circumstances, are the appearance of
bifurcations (in the sense attributed to the term by René Thom, 1975) in the
system’s orbits, during its evolution. The system can therefore evolve to-
wards numerous different states, i.e. towards different attractors, each of
which is characterized by its own basin of attraction. In general, during the
evolution of a system, complexity takes the form of a particular intermedi-
ate state between stable equilibrium and chaos, a situation in which the
system displays a different behaviour, both from stable equilibrium tenden-
cies, therefore unchangeable in the future, and from chaotic tendencies.
   The evolution of a dynamical system generally depends on a set of control
parameters. For low values of the same, we have a tendency towards stable
equilibrium, whereas for high values we have the generation of chaos, in
which, as discussed in Chapters 18 and 19, the dynamic trajectories are
characterized by positive Lyapunov exponents. In an intermediate area of
the control parameter values, the system displays the tendency to create new
conﬁgurations, which are different both to those established by asymptotic
equilibrium and those established by chaos, and to assume new functional
properties that didn’t exist for lower values of the parameters. The system
displays emergent properties: there in that intermediate area between order
and chaos, the area at the edge of chaos, the area of the sudden appearance
(emergence) of unexpected properties, we say that a dynamical system
displays a very particular type of behaviour that we call complexity (Figure
28.1).
   When the system ﬁnds itself at a point in the phase space in which its
properties change unexpectedly, this is commonly known as a critical point,
278   28 : What is complexity?

                          Stability,           Edge of chaos:
                                                                        Chaos
                           order                complexity



                                             Control parameters

                                  Figure 28.1 Stability, complexity, chaos.


      in correspondence to which a phase change can occur that can push the
      system into a chaotic state or block it in a state of stable equilibrium.
         We discussed and examined the dynamics of a mechanism of this nature
      in Chapters 21 and 22, in which the logistic map was presented as a sort of
      paradigm of a dynamics which, depending on the value of the growth
      parameter, changes from a tendency towards stable equilibrium to chaos,
      via an intermediate stage of complexity, characterized by the presence of a
      sequence of bifurcations.
         A system’s complexity manifests itself as the collapse of a state, following
      internal instability or an action external to the system, and with the
      adjustment of the system to a new state; the dynamics of a complex
      system, therefore, appear to be characterized by trajectories that are
      sensitive to perturbations of intrinsic or external origins (in real systems,
      in practice, inevitable). Obviously, this brings up the problem of the pre-
      dictability of the system’s evolution. The vision that was adopted for a
      considerable period of time, from the era of Leibniz’s principle of sufﬁcient
      reason to a few decades ago, is that the origin of the phenomenology that
      we attribute to complexity is not inherent to the dynamical system, but
      rather constitutes an undesired consequence of the presence of poorly
      identiﬁed causes or variables that act in a deterministic way. This is in line
      with the analytic–reductionist approach that had characterized almost all
      sciences.
         As various scholars have pointed out (for example, Davies, 1989), in the
      past, reductionism represented a real conceptual obstacle that, by ignoring
      the system’s ability to spontaneously create new forms of internal organ-
      ization, precluded the development of a complexity theory. In the current,
      post-reductionist era of physics, we no longer look at the single molecules to
      explain large-scale self-organization, or even the action of a particular
      molecule on its neighbour. Our attention is now focused on global matters,
      such as the boundary conditions, the constraints, the distances from
      equilibrium and so on. It is undoubtedly still true that the properties of
      the molecules, considered individually, and of their interactions, are ingre-
      dients required to obtain a full explanation. Alone, however they are simply
      not sufﬁcient.
                                                         Basic aspects of complexity   279

  What brings together the various ﬁelds of science that adopt the vision
proposed by complexity, regards, in particular, several methodological
aspects. Firstly, new formal techniques are used, such as formal logic,
cellular automata, topological models, etc. These are techniques that gen-
erally attempt to ‘capture’ some of the system’s most abstract properties, in
areas in which the application of standard techniques is insufﬁcient to
produce effective descriptions. Secondly, we are dealing with systems in
which the behaviour we are interested in emerges in contingent situations,
that is to say, unpredictable and subject to change following even small
variations in the control parameters. Thirdly, modelling techniques are used
that are not able to formulate quantitative predictions on the system’s
future evolution, but that can describe several statistical properties and
can attempt to predict the evolution in qualitative terms.
  In complex systems we can identify several basic common characteristics:

1. The feedback networks are active and give rise to effects when they act
   close to a critical conﬁguration of the system, in which the latter is close
   to a phase change, in a situation that is called the ‘edge of chaos’.
2. The creative process that takes place at the edge of chaos is intrinsically
   destructive, because it causes the disappearance of states of equilibrium,
   and it is fundamentally a paradox, because the new states of the system
   (conﬁgurations) that are created are unexpected and unpredictable.
3. Neither the creative process, that takes place at the edge of chaos, nor its
   results, can be predicted or planned because the long-term outcome
   cannot be known; the links between the actions and their outcomes in
   the long term dissolve and none of the outcomes is under control any
   longer. The fact that a system ﬁnds itself at the edge of chaos doesn’t
   mean that it is at the mercy of randomness or anarchy: the new conﬁg-
   urations that emerge at the edge of chaos are the expression of an
   implicit order that originates from inside the system itself. At the edge
   of chaos, cooperation does not take place in accordance with a pre-
   established pattern; there is no one element (agent) that is stronger than
   the others that imposes its will. We are rather dealing with a bottom-up
   type process, in which the elements of the system (the agents) face the
   situation spontaneously, and organize themselves. This self-organization
   gives rise to new emergent strategies and the interaction itself creates
   schemas that no agent, on its own, can predict.

  ‘Emergent property’ therefore means that a new property of the system
appears that was impossible to predict as the overall result of the individual
interactions, considered one by one, between elements. In other words, the
280   28 : What is complexity?

      appearance of emergent properties means that it is impossible to reduce the
      general schema of the system’s evolution to the sum of the behaviours of the
      individual agents (see, for example, Holland, 1996, 1999).



      An observation on complexity in social systems
      The concepts illustrated, originally formulated for natural sciences, can
      easily be applied to social systems as well, i.e. to various kinds of organized
      societies. This is possible if we consider that each society is made up of a
      network of individual actors, which interact both with one another, in
      accordance with the rules of the internal organization of the society, and
      with the actors of other societies that constitute the environment.
         The new vision proposed by complexity becomes particularly important
      in practical terms if applied to the description of the dynamics of societies
      and of human communities, ranging from the larger ones, such as popula-
      tions and urban systems (starting from the ﬁrst pioneering works by Jay
      Forrester, 1969, 1971), to those of smaller dimensions, such as the various
      forms of local organizations (Byrne, 1998; Herrmann, 1998; Christensen,
      1999).
         In particular, the area of study that regards the management of com-
      panies, business management, has received a lot of attention from scholars,
      both before and above all after the subject of complexity became more
      prominent (Levy, 1994; Alvesson, 1995; Weick, 1995; Overman, 1996;
      Stacey, 1996; Thiel, 1998). Traditional management activities have gener-
      ally conceived linear interactions between the business enterprise and an
      objective external world, identifying the manager as the person that has to
      foresee, assess and decide. In the light of new concepts, however, an organ-
      ization can be seen as a complex system which, in order to survive and
      develop, is continuously in search of new ways to interpret the events of the
      external world and which, as a consequence of the feedback it receives from
      the environment regarding its actions, self-organizes itself, displaying emer-
      gent properties, so as to render its interaction with the environment in
      which it ﬁnds itself as favourable as possible. As Gianfranco Dioguardi
      writes (2000): ‘We are ( . . . ) in the presence of component elements, of
      interactions and feedbacks, of phenomena of self-organisation, in a situ-
      ation of eternal evolution that is constantly displayed in the history of
      businesses and that emerges from an exchange of both knowledge and of
      concrete economic facts between the internal and external environments,
      due to its turbulent nature and therefore difﬁcult to analyse and plan’ (p. 82,
      our translation).
                                           Some attempts at deﬁning a complex system   281

   One of the main preoccupations of management science is therefore the
understanding of how people interpret reality and how said interpretation
can deﬁne a context for action. From this perspective, complexity theory
presents itself as a reference framework that helps us follow the evolution
of organizations and the complex interactions between actors. Conceiving
organizations (business, social or other) as adaptive complex systems en-
ables the manager to improve his decision-making and supports the search
for new solutions. In nonlinear systems, long-term forecasting is intrinsic-
ally impossible; as we have said on many occasions, even signiﬁcant changes
can intervene unexpectedly. This means that ﬂexibility and adaptability are
characteristics that are essential to the survival of the organization, just as
they are to biological life.
   In a complex world, management strategy must therefore be a set of
processes aimed at understanding the behaviour of the external environment
and controlling the actors that act within the organizations, identifying the
dynamics of the organization-system and attempting to provide resources
and incentives for future moves (Levy, 1994). Complexity science and
management science, in this way, have an area in common, namely the
study of phenomena of emergence, an aspect that is not adequately perceived
in traditional management and that, here as in other ﬁelds, originates from
the consideration that the system is more than merely the sum of its parts.



Some attempts at deﬁning a complex system
Chaos theory, just like the thermodynamics of systems far from equilib-
rium, has been extensively studied by physicists, chemists, and mathemat-
icians. Even complexity theory, which has been around for only 30 years,
has been extended to various disciplines such as physics, biology, sociology,
economics, etc. Complexity theory sustains that in our daily lives we are
surrounded by systems that possess nonlinear feedback mechanisms that
can display chaotic behaviour or adaptive behaviour. Systems are assumed
to evolve in an open phase space, without a general pre-established schema,
but by means of a spontaneous system of organization.
   To understand the dynamics of systems, we have to overcome the reduc-
tionist, Cartesian-based vision adopted by the classical science of the seven-
teenth century, as we have repeated on several occasions in this book;
complexity emerges only if the systems are described from a holistic per-
spective. Complexity is generated by the failure of the attempt of the
Newtonian paradigm to be a general schema through which to understand
the world.
282   28 : What is complexity?

         If we simplify things somewhat and, for the sake of clarity, ignore the
      need for rigour, we can say that a complex system, stimulated in some way,
      does not appear to be inert, as if it were impervious to the abandonment of
      the condition of stable equilibrium, nor does it display the tendency to react
      in a random way, without any coordination between its parts, i.e. as if
      it were lacking a mechanism that controlled it in a deterministic way.
      A complex system, on the other hand, appears to react to a stimulus in a
      coordinated way, as if it were animated by a will that enables it to ﬁnd new
      answers, i.e. new conﬁgurations, when faced with new stimuli; said new
      conﬁgurations, however, are unpredictable to us, which masks the deter-
      minism that the system’s dynamics is subjected to. We have placed particu-
      lar emphasis on the verb to appear; complexity is not just an intrinsic
      property of a system, it also, and particularly, depends on who is observing
      it. We will be returning to this fundamental point on several occasions in
      this section.
         It is clear that this new approach to describing a system’s dynamics turns
      several fundamental assumptions on which conventional concepts are
      based, upside down. Firstly, complexity theory assumes that evolutive
      systems are not those that tend towards equilibrium, but rather those that
      ﬁnd themselves far from equilibrium, close to disintegration, at the edge of
      chaos. It is also assumed that in this state, the causality is such that the links
      between cause and effect are lost in the complexity of the system’s evolu-
      tion, and, therefore, the future cannot be predicted.
         This is not only due to the possibility of chaotic evolution, that in itself is
      an antithesis to the rigid predictions of determinism, but also to the fact that
      between the evolution towards a state of equilibrium and towards a state of
      chaos, there is an intermediate situation, in which systems do not evolve
      towards chaos, but towards new forms of internal self-organization. It is
      precisely the ampliﬁcation of the perturbations caused by positive feedback
      that end up being vital to the system’s evolution, while on the other hand,
      negative feedback traps systems in conditions of static equilibrium, with no
      chance of evolving. Lastly, it is assumed that complex systems evolve in
      reciprocal interaction with the environment, thus contributing to constitut-
      ing the universe in which the same act.
         We have still not deﬁned complexity, but we have limited ourselves to
      saying what the characteristics of dynamical complex systems are, and how
      complexity manifests itself in them. Continuing on these lines, we can also
      say what complexity is not. Complexity is not complication. A complex
      system is different and is more than a complicated system. A compli-
      cated system is predictable if we have thorough knowledge of all of its
      components and of all of the relations that unite said components. On the
                                           Some attempts at deﬁning a complex system   283

other hand, a complex system is not predictable, if even our level of
knowledge is the same as that of a complicated system, i.e. if we have
thorough knowledge of all of its components and of all of the relations
that link them, because it is a system that is able to independently adapt
itself, i.e. to self-organize. Complexity is not a stable equilibrium and is not
chaos; it is a third condition in which the system is creative, as if it were
displaying intelligent behaviour in adapting to environmental stimuli. A
complex system appears to possess the ability to evolve independently, to
adapt itself and to improve. Complexity, according to Stuart Kauffman
(1994), is a situation of transition, poised between the rigid order of
determinism and the anarchy of chaos.
   Complexity nests in a shady area of our comprehension of systems. In
general, it appears that we associate complexity to anything that we ﬁnd
difﬁcult to understand (Flood and Carson, 1986). The complexity that we
identify in systems must not be confused with our ignorance of the systems
in question; the two concepts, complexity and ignorance, are substantially
different. On one hand, the very complexity of a system may be a cause of
ignorance; for example when the resources available for the comprehension
of the dynamics displayed by a system of some nature are too limited
against the variety of phenomenologies that the system displays, and do
not enable us to create an effective model. On the other hand, ignorance,
the cause behind errors or imperfections in the understanding of the phe-
nomenologies or in their interpretation, can lead to the construction of
models in which the typical mechanisms of complexity are included in
order to attempt to describe phenomena that a better knowledge would
enable us to describe in other terms. The ignorance of the mechanisms at the
origin of a system’s dynamics can, for example, lead us into not seeing
simple cause–effect relationships or, even, on the contrary, in seeing them
when there is no correlation between the components to suggest their
existence. Ignorance, therefore, can be the cause of an erroneous interpret-
ation regarding the complexity of a phenomenon that can be explained
without having to refer to nonlinear feedback, self-organization or
emergence.
   It should be said that a system’s complexity depends on the models that
we construct of the systems in question. This means that the complexity of a
system varies considerably depending on the model adopted and that it is
always possible to increase a system’s complexity by taking more and
different aspects into account, and going into further detail. According to
Bruce Edmonds (1999), complexity is that property of system models that
makes it difﬁcult to formulate a general behaviour for the system, even
when we possess almost complete information on the basic (atomic)
284   28 : What is complexity?

      components of the system in question and on their relationships. In this
      statement, complexity is related to the increased difﬁculty of formalizing
      ‘everything’ with respect to formalizing the basic components, from the
      perspective of a representative model. More than an abstract deﬁnition,
      Edmonds proposed an operative characteristic of the concept of complexity,
      which is susceptible to different interpretations depending on the context, in
      particular as regards the exact meaning of the expression ‘makes it difﬁcult
      to formulate a general behaviour’. This perspective, in reality, is only
      applicable to cases in which we possess complete information on the
      individual basic components of the ‘whole’ system, but it helps to clearly
      separate the concepts of complexity and ignorance; ignorance is when the
      behaviour of a system appears to be unpredictable due to our imperfect
      knowledge of its basic mechanisms; on the other hand, complexity is when
      the unpredictability of the system is due to our imperfect understanding of
      how the individual system components behave in relation to one another
      within a whole.
         And that’s not all: complexity relative to a model’s structure, according to
      Edmonds, also depends on the purpose for which the model has been
      conceived, as the details that are taken into consideration and the assump-
      tions made depend on this. The level of detail at which the model is
      conceived depends on the use that the model has been constructed for, but
      the same level of detail, and therefore the system’s complexity, also depend
      on how the model is represented, i.e. what language (meaning formal
      system, i.e. a set of symbols and rules that link said symbols to one another)
      is adopted to construct it. Remember that we intend the term model to
      mean, in this context, any representation that we make of the surrounding
      reality, not only and not necessarily a dynamical system. The model that we
      construct in the formal system that we choose to use to ‘capture’ the
      properties of the system, is only a partial representation of the system. We
      could say, therefore, that complexity appears to be similar to that property
      of a real system that manifests itself in the fact that no formal system is
      adequate to describe (to ‘capture’) all the properties of the real system and
      all of the aspects of its dynamics.
         The dynamics of a complex system elude a complete representation that
      efﬁciently describes all of its aspects; some formal systems highlight certain
      elements, other formal systems capture others. Being a complex system
      transcends, in other words, our skills of formal description that we have
      developed for systems that do not display properties such as self-organiza-
      tion, emergence, etc. Complexity means, from this point of view, that we
      can ﬁnd different irreducible (incommensurable, so to say) ways to interact
      with the systems, in the sense that we can create different effective models of
                                                        Complexity and the observer   285

a complex system, but the different formal systems needed to describe each
particular aspect of it are not compatible with one another.



The complexity of a system and the observer
We possess numerous forms of language: verbal language, the language of
art, mathematical formalism, etc. Each of these is capable, better than the
others, of representing the models that we make in a particular environ-
ment. But that’s not all; in addition to the above, language itself is an
element that stimulates the variety and the organization of models. Possess-
ing an effective language, in fact, means also possessing a precious tool for
investigation, to ‘dig’ into the idea that we are constructing of reality, i.e.
basically, to enhance and to provide detail to the model.
   In this regard, we note the distinction that John Casti (1986) made
between design complexity, namely the complexity of a system as it is
perceived by the observer, and control complexity, namely the complexity
of the observer as perceived by the observed system. In other words, as we
stated at the beginning of this chapter, according to Casti, a system’s
complexity is a concept that is related to the complexity of the person
observing it: the observer himself is a complex system, and this inﬂuences
the level of complexity that he perceives in the system he observes.
   This vision supersedes the concept of complexity as an intrinsic charac-
teristic of a particular system. Complexity now becomes, in addition to the
above, a characteristic of the interaction between two systems, both of
which are complex. According to Flood and Carson (1986), complexity is
associated both to us ‘people’, and to the systems as they are perceived by us
‘people’. This point, which can be applied to an observer–observed pair,
becomes particularly important in terms of social systems, which are much
more difﬁcult to describe than systems in natural science, so much so that to
date there is no mathematical formulation of social laws that can claim to
be rigorous and reliable at an equal level to, for example, numerous formu-
lations concerning physics, despite the countless attempts to treat social
systems using methodologies at least similar to those used in physics
(Cohen, 1993).
   Complexity, therefore, also depends on who is observing the system and
on how this person observes it, which complicates matters because it makes
it difﬁcult to unequivocally deﬁne complexity as a magnitude that can be
measured objectively.
   Complexity is a concept that we would like to be comparative; we would
like to be able to state that a system is more complex or less complex than
286   28 : What is complexity?

      another system, on the basis of quantitative measurements of complexity
      that enable us to establish a value according to a suitably deﬁned scale. But
      this is not possible, at least for the moment, precisely because complexity is
      a concept that is extremely difﬁcult to deﬁne precisely, although, intuitively,
      it is not difﬁcult to imagine. Dozens of different deﬁnitions and different
      ways to measure complexity have been proposed (Blum 1989; Lloyd, 1989;
      Zurek, 1989; Gell-Mann, 1994; Horgan, 1995; see also Edmonds, 1999;
      Bertuglia and Staricco, 2000; Dioguardi, 2000), which refer to concepts
      such as entropy, information, causality, etc. More often than not, however,
      these deﬁnitions are not sufﬁciently generalized, but are only applicable to a
      limited context, or are not very rigorous, or even vague or approximate,
      particularly regarding the possibility of quantifying complexity deﬁned as a
      measurable magnitude. Moreover, some of these deﬁnitions characterize
      something that we intuitively see as simple as complex or, on the contrary,
      that deny the character of complexity to phenomenologies that we see as
      ‘clearly’ complex.
         The problem of deﬁning complexity, as we have seen, is linked to which
      aspect (or aspects) of a system the observer considers (predominantly or
      exclusively) and, if he can, measures; it depends on the observer and on the
      level of complexity that characterizes the latter, and also, as a consequence,
      on the language used to construct the (complex) model of the system. This
      does not in any way mean that complexity is a subjective concept: linked to
      the observer means linked to the interaction between the observer and the
      observed, not simply dependent on the opinion of the observer. In this
      regard, there is the risk that, as there is no rigorous deﬁnition of complexity,
      and as there is neither a method to measure it nor a unit of measurement for
      it, complexity does not generate a complete and coherent scientiﬁc theory,
      but ends up being a sort of philosophical dimension and nothing more. It is
      a risk that we must be more than aware of; complexity is not only an
      epistemological matter, in the same way that neither the theory of universal
      gravitation nor the law of natural selection are.



      The complexity of a system and the relations
      between its parts
      There is one key objective element that is common to all complexity
      theories. If we refer to the Latin etymology (and further back to the
      Greek) of the term, complexus means intertwined: to have complexity,
      there have to be several component parts connected in such a way that it
      is difﬁcult to isolate them; connected in such a way, that is, that an inter-
                                Complexity of a system and the relations between its parts   287

pretation of the phenomenology that they present in an analytic perspective
is not sufﬁcient for a correct description, but a holistic vision needs to be
adopted. Intuitively, therefore, a system appears to be more complex, the
more parts we manage to distinguish and the more numerous the connec-
tions between these parts, that we manage to identify. However, both the
number of the parts and the number of connections between these depend
on the observer and on the way in which the observer looks at and describes
the system he is observing.
   ‘More parts’ means that the model that represents the phenomenology is
more extended, which therefore requires, if the model is written in the form
of a program for a computer, more time for its study and a longer processing
time. As the components of a complex system cannot be separated from one
another without destroying the character of the system itself, the analytical
method, i.e. breaking the model down into independent elements, cannot be
used to simplify the model. This implies that complex entities are difﬁcult to
model, that the models are difﬁcult to use for forecasting and control and
that, to put it simply, the so-called complex problems cited above are
difﬁcult to treat. This demonstrates why the word ‘complex’ is often asso-
ciated with the word ‘difﬁcult’.
   Complexity can be characterized by means of the two dimensions of
differentiation and connection. Differentiation means variety, heterogen-
eity, it means that the different parts of the system behave in different ways.
Connection, on the other hand, concerns the constraints that link the
component parts to one another, it concerns the fact that different parts
are not independent from one another, but also the fact that the knowledge
of one part can enable us to determine the characteristics of other parts. In
the latter sense, connection is also a concept that is similar to redundancy.
On one hand, differentiation leads to disorder, to the growth of the entropy,
as occurs in a perfect gas, in which the position of a molecule is independent
of that of the others. On the other hand, connection leads to order, to the
diminution of the entropy, as occurs in a crystal in which the position of a
molecule (or of an atom) is totally determined by the position of the
molecules (or atoms) nearby. Complexity arises when both of these aspects
are present: neither total disorder, that renders the system describable only
statistically, nor perfect order, that renders the system totally describable
and its dynamics predictable in purely deterministic terms.
   Complexity, as we have said, is situated in an intermediate position
between order and disorder, or more precisely, when the system ﬁnds itself
at the ‘edge of chaos’. To use a signiﬁcative metaphor (Gandolﬁ, 1999),
order, complexity and chaos are like three physical states in which the
system ‘water’ can be presented: (1) in the solid state of ice: this is total
288   28 : What is complexity?

      order, the crystal, the translational symmetry (or periodicity); (2) in a liquid
      state: the molecules are linked together, but each of them can move with
      respect to the others, with the result that the water system appears change-
      able and is able to adapt itself to the form of the container (the environ-
      ment); symmetry is broken, this is complexity, the water system is in a
      condition of precarious equilibrium that exists only for restricted intervals
      of the temperature and pressure values; (3) in the aeriform state of steam:
      this is unpredictability, disorder, despite the fact that the laws that describe
      the behaviour of each molecule are known; this is chaos.
          It is interesting to observe how, on one hand, total order is characterized
      by the existence of symmetry, i.e. by invariance with respect to a group of
      transformations, but on the other hand, how complete disorder is also
      characterized by symmetry. In the ﬁrst case, there is symmetry in the
      position of the single parts of the system: the larger the group of transform-
      ations with respect to which the system is invariant, the smaller the part of it
      needed to reconstruct the whole. In the second case, there is a statistical type
      of symmetry. The origin of the symmetry is not the positions of the indi-
      vidual elements, but the equal probability for each element of the system of
      ﬁnding itself in any particular position. A perfect gas is statistically sym-
      metrical: any position can be occupied by any molecule with the same
      probability of any other molecule in any other position. Similarly, we note
      that the empty space129 is at the height of its symmetry and homogeneity, as
      it is invariant with respect to any transformation and any of its parts can be
      used to reconstruct the others.
          In one case, the symmetry is due to the static nature (or immobility), to
      the stable equilibrium, in which the positions are maintained constant
      (possibly asymptotically). In the other case, the symmetry is statistical: the
      component parts of the system lack a ﬁxed position and there is only
      symmetry in the spatial or spatial–temporal averages.130

         129
             In this context we are obviously referring to a Euclidean–Newtonian abstract three-
      dimensional linear space, ignoring both any consideration that refers to curved spaces due to
      the presence of masses, a concept pertinent to the theory of general relativity, and any
      conception of vacuum, from quantum physics and the theory of ﬁelds, contexts in which
      the vacuum assumes a meaning that is very different to the one we are referring to here (Parisi,
      1998).
         130
             The case in which we have total statistical symmetry is that in which the temporal
      averages are equal to the spatial ones, the case of a so-called ergodic system. Think, for
      example, of an ideal school class (a space of n students), in which the n students are all
      averagely good in all subjects, without distinctions. The arithmetic average of the marks of
      each student, in a year and in all subjects (temporal average) is equal to that of all of the other
      students and is equal to the arithmetic average of the marks of all n students in all subjects in a
      single day (spatial average).
                                Complexity of a system and the relations between its parts   289

   Complexity is neither one case nor the other. Complexity is characterized
by the breakdown of the symmetry, both that of the perfect order, and that
of the total disorder, due to the fact that no part of the system is able to
provide sufﬁcient information to predict, even statistically, the properties of
the other parts. This is precisely where the difﬁculty of modelling complex
systems lies. In reality, however, the very idea of complexity, seen as an
intermediate condition between order and chaos, also depends on the level
of representation. What appears complex in one representation can appear
ordered or disordered in another representation with a different scale. For
example, a system of cracks in a surface of dry mud may appear complex,
but seen from afar (zoom out), the surface appears to be ﬂat and homoge-
neous, i.e. ordered, i.e. translation invariant, while, seen from close up
(zoom in), considering each particle of mud individually, it appears to be
a totally disordered system, newly translation invariant. A further dimen-
sion that characterizes space and time also needs to be considered: the scale
(Havel, 1995). A system is more complex the more it appears to be invariant
to changes in scale: a crystal, whose structure is repeated at different scales,
and that is therefore ‘symmetrical’ to changes in scale, is more complex than
a molecule, in the same way in which a fractal is more complex, for
example, than a triangle.
   Complexity increases both as the number and/or variety of the elements
that constitute the system increase, and when the number of relations that
link them, i.e. the degree of integration between the elements, increases. The
variables in play are, therefore, the differentiation, expressed by the number
and the variety of the elements and the connection. These same variables,
however, should be seen in different dimensions: the spatial one (the geo-
metric structure), the temporal one (the dynamics) and that of the scale.
Therefore, to prove that there is an increase in the complexity of a system, it
has to be shown that, on one hand, the number and/or variety (i.e. the
system’s degree of differentiation) increases with respect to one of these
dimensions, and on the other hand, the connection in it (i.e. the system’s
degree of integration) increases with respect to one of these dimensions.
   In reality, neither the differentiation nor the connection are deﬁned
objectively, as both depend on how an observer relates to the observed
system. As we have already mentioned, the degree of variety and the
constraints that an observer recognizes in an observed system depend on
how he observes and on how much he distinguishes. In a certain sense, we
can say that they depend on his ‘resolving power’ with respect to that
system. What the observer does is identify the differentiations that in
some way he judges to be more important in the system’s phenomenology
and create generalized categories, in which he classiﬁes the phenomena that
290   28 : What is complexity?

      he sees as being similar to one another, ignoring the differences that exist
      between the members of those categories (Heylighen, 1990; for other
      observations Dendrinos, 1997).
         Depending on what distinctions he makes, the observer can perceive a
      greater or lesser degree of differentiation and connection, and therefore see
      the complexity increase or decrease. We could also say that this can depend
      not only on the observer’s perception but also, implicitly, on his personal
      choice (or deﬁnition) of the unit of measurement of complexity and the
      measurement technique that he adopts.
         Therefore there are subjective elements of evaluation alongside objective
      ones in the choice that the observer makes of which aspects of the system to
      model. The reliability of the model, therefore, also depends on the degree of
      interdependence between the system’s characteristics included in the model
      and those which, consciously or otherwise, are ignored. As we are not able
      to produce a complete model of the system (a ‘complete’ model does not
      exist), the introduction of the different dimensions, cited above, enables us
      to at least better perceive the system’s intrinsic complexity.
         The huge variety of ﬁelds to which the theory of complexity can be
      applied, thanks to the generality of the concept, appears to be one of the
      most important factors that unites the different branches of science. The
      very study of nonlinear models to describe complex phenomenologies, in
      recent years, has found a broad spectrum of application, both in natural
      sciences and in social sciences.
         In Chapters 29 and 30, we will be presenting several examples of how the
      new concepts of complexity can be applied, in different ﬁelds, to interpret
      the evolutionistic phenomenologies of systems.
               Complexity and evolution
 29

Introduction
In this chapter we will be presenting several applications of the ideas
proposed by the new approach of complexity to the evolution of systems,
focusing particularly on biological systems and on the appearance of life
following a spontaneous process of self-organization.
  Is there is a general tendency for complexity to increase as a system
evolves, just like, in a closed system, there is a tendency of the entropy to
increase? This question assumes particular importance, for example,
in biology, regarding the evolution of living species, but not only this.
The evolution of a complex system is spontaneous, whether it is a natural
system, like a galaxy, a planetary system, a biological organism, a crystal,
a liquid or a real gas in which the interactions between molecules, etc.
are not negligible, or whether it is a social system, such as a human
population, an economic aggregate or a language (intended in the strict
sense, as a complex of phonemes, words, rules of syntax, etc.). Systems
are usually assumed to evolve over time towards an increase in complexity,
but little or nothing is known of the mechanism that could cause
the evolution in that direction, rather than towards a simpliﬁcation or a
reduction in complexity. To complicate matters, remember that the problem
of a correct and effective deﬁnition of complexity is ever present, without
which it is difﬁcult to identify the growth of complexity in systems over
time.



The three ways in which complexity grows according
to Brian Arthur
The general issue of the evolution of complexity is discussed, for example,
by Brian Arthur (1994), who presents three different ways in which com-
plexity grows.
292   29 : Complexity and evolution

         The ﬁrst way is encountered in certain systems, such as a part of bio-
      logical or economic systems, in which complexity grows due to the increase
      in the number and the variety of the species, that takes place due to the
      effect of interaction with other systems. These are systems made up of
      entities, species or organisms that coexist with one another, together con-
      stituting a set of populations that reciprocally interact. Systems of this
      nature are called coevolutive systems. Typical examples are ecological and
      economic systems. In certain speciﬁc circumstances, in fact, the appearance
      of new species or of new goods and/or services can give rise to new niches
      (ecological or market), which are available to new species or new goods
      and/or services, that are located in said niches, and that previously would
      not have found a place in the system (biological, economic, etc.) and there-
      fore would have been eliminated from the scene. In their turn, the newly
      arrived species and the goods and/or services that arrive in the system,
      contribute to the formation of new niches for other new elements that
      locate themselves there, in a general increase in the variety of elements in
      the system that, in most cases, is classiﬁed as top-down. We therefore have a
      continuous increase in the number and the variety of the component parts
      starting from the ﬁrst that occupy an empty space.
         In this regard, the case of the so-called Cambrian explosion is well
      known, the rapid and unexpected increase in the variety of biological
      species that happened around 550 million years ago, at the beginning of
      the Palaeozoic age, when a biological creativity that had never been ob-
      served before gave rise to all of the most important phyla (with the excep-
      tion of the vertebrates), and gradually to the genera, families and species. As
      the ecological space became occupied by the ﬁrst genera, reducing the
      dimensions of the available niches, the low-level varieties increased. The
      genera differentiated into families and species that, in this way, better
      adapted to the niches that were formed and that the species themselves
      contributed to forming (Kauffman, 1995).
         The second way in which complexity grows according to Arthur can be
      seen in systems that evolve autonomously towards an increase in complex-
      ity, through an increase in the sophistication of their structure. The system,
      in this case, displays an increasing number of subsystems or subfunctions or
      even of subcomponents, to overcome constraints to the effectiveness of its
      behaviour or to improve its functioning or even to face new difﬁculties.
      Think, for example, of the evolution of human language, in general, but
      also of the individual languages, starting from the ﬁrst rudimentary ono-
      matopoeic sounds up to symbolic and structured language, and of the
      development of this over time due to the constant acquisition of new
      elements for different reasons, at times in contrast to each other. On one
                                            The three ways in which complexity grows   293

hand, in fact, there is a need to communicate new concepts, with increas-
ingly precise subtleties; on the other hand, there is a general tendency to
economize the energy employed in communication, the tendency, namely,
to reduce the mental and physical effort employed in communication to a
minimum, even taking into account the need for a certain level of informa-
tion redundancy (interested readers can consult popular works such as
Martinet, 1960, and Barber, 1964, and at a more technical level, works
by Lyons, 1968, and Horrocks, 1987).
   In systems in which the complexity increases in the two ways cited above,
it can sometimes occur that, even though in a general growth trend, there
are phases of degrowth, on occasion even rapid, of the complexity. Think of
the development of the verbal and nominal inﬂections that have character-
ized all of the Indo-European languages. The presence of these elements,
even though considerable in the past, has diminished in some groups of
modern languages. This is true, in particular, of Latin and Germanic lan-
guages; think of modern English, which is almost entirely lacking in gram-
matical genders, in which verbal inﬂections are reduced to ﬁve forms, and in
which adjective agreements have disappeared, even though such were pre-
sent in prior periods of the history of the English language, in particular in
Old English in the early Middle Ages in Britain. But this is also true of Neo-
Latin languages, such as Italian, whose morphological–syntactical structure
is less complex than that of Latin. Nevertheless we observe that this mor-
phosyntactic impoverishment, caused by the tendency to economize, that
we mentioned previously, does not inﬂuence the effectiveness of the lan-
guage for communication purposes, because other aspects of linguistic
structure replace them, i.e. other grammatical subsystems, that increase
their complexity; for example, the increased use of prepositions to compen-
sate for the loss of nominal inﬂections, or more rigid and more numerous
positional rules to compensate for the loss of the agreements (Lyons, 1968).
   As we have observed on a number of occasions, complexity science
studies characteristics that are common to the evolution of systems, regard-
less of the speciﬁc nature of the latter. This is particularly evident, if we
consider certain subsystems. On one hand, for example, in the rebound at
the beginning of the Mesozoic era, after the extinction of the Permian, the
genre of reptiles displayed an increased complexity. This same complexity,
however, diminished with the disappearance of the dinosaurs of the Cret-
aceous period, at the end of the Mesozoic era, around 65 million years ago,
to make room for the increase in the variety and the complexity of the
species of mammals that came to occupy the ecological niches that had
previously been the appanage of large reptiles (Kauffman, 1995). In the
same way, the complexity of the subsystem of the morphosyntatical rules of
294   29 : Complexity and evolution

      Latin diminished in favour of the increased presence of positional rules in
      Neo-Latin languages, with respect to those of Latin.
         The third way in which complexity grows, according to Arthur, regards
      systems that evolve by means of a mechanism that is different to those of the
      previous one, called capturing software. A system ‘discovers’ one of its
      elements or one of its subsystems and ﬁnds a way to use it for some very
      basic purpose, i.e. it ‘learns’. These elements or subsystems, however, are
      characterized by a set of operating rules that control the way in which they
      can be combined or used; we are dealing with a real form of interactive
      grammar that permits various combinations of simple elements or subsys-
      tems, and that the system, as it evolves, learns to use. In the end, when the
      system has fully mastered the grammar through which it can use the
      subsystems, it programes the elements, or the subsystems, as if it were
      software, hence the name given to the process, in order to use them for
      more complex purposes (i.e. more varied, more detailed, more numer-
      ous, . . . ) than the elementary ones with which the process started.
         A typical example of this process can be recognized in technology seen as
      a complex system. Electronics, which represents a subsystem of it, origin-
      ated from the study of several natural phenomena connected with electri-
      city. Once the grammar of electromagnetism, i.e. the laws that describe its
      functioning, had been thoroughly learnt, the system of modern technology
      developed the technology of electronics i.e., it learnt how to program the
      functioning of the elementary components, the electrons, for purposes that
      were much more varied and sophisticated than those that were envisaged
      when the study of electricity had just started.
         The same situation arises in numerous other sectors of scientiﬁc and
      technological research; for example, the development of quantum physics,
      which originated from a few experimental facts that had caught the atten-
      tion of physicists towards the end of the nineteenth century, subsequently
      gave rise to a vast and extremely detailed grammar. We observe how this
      mechanism could also be applied to complexity science itself. At present,
      complexity appears to be at the ﬁrst stage, that of the observation and the
      study of a few elements. Once we have thoroughly learnt the grammar of
      complexity, that is, once a real theory of complexity has been fully devel-
      oped, then we will probably be able to ‘program’ its functioning for various
      and numerous purposes. This would mean using complexity to its best
      advantage, i.e. managing complexity.131

        131
            In other words, one of the methods of complexity, or better, one of the schemas in
      which it develops and evolves, taken as a concept in itself, could give rise to a study, the
      subject of which is the complexity of complexity, i.e. basically metacomplexity.
                                                        The Tierra evolutionistic model   295

   Once again, linguistics provides us with an interesting example as regards
this process (Barber, 1964). It is generally believed that the ﬁrst men, some
hundreds of thousands of years ago, discovered that a few rudimentary
sounds could be used to communicate different concepts and pieces of infor-
mation in various human communities, which started to develop a grammar
of rules for their use. Over time, this system of phonemes and grammatical
rules became a complex interactive system, i.e. a real language. The human
society system had ‘captured the software’ and developed a program, lan-
guage, that was extremely effective for the highly complex purposes of
communicating concepts that could not be expressed onomatopoeically.
   One particularly interesting aspect of the relationship between complex-
ity and evolution is that regarding the evolution, in its strict sense, of living
species and the appearance of life on Earth (Kauffman, 1994, 1995).
Evolution in living species is an extremely powerful force which, given
sufﬁcient time, is able to create an extraordinary ecological complexity
starting from a few simple elements. Evolution is the process that led to
the creation, if not of all, certainly of the majority of known complex
systems, studied in social sciences (human and animal sciences, cultures,
economies, languages, etc.), and of many of the complex systems that are
the domain of the natural sciences, in particular biology (cellular systems,
organisms, ecological environments, etc.). The understanding of the mech-
anisms of evolution is therefore a fundamental step towards understanding
the way in which complex systems function.
   Nevertheless, we encounter a number of obstacles when we attempt to
investigate further into evolution. One of the greatest obstacles is the fact
that we only have one example of the result of evolution: what is in front of
our eyes everyday, i.e. that of life on Earth. But this is not the only obstacle.
A second difﬁculty, for example, can be attributed to the fact that evolution
cannot be followed for very long periods of time. Despite these limitations,
however, biology has succeeded in formulating the basic principles of
evolution by analysing the static results of evolution without conducting
experiments. The concepts developed by Darwin (1859) regarding evolu-
tion by means of natural selection, that he intuitively sensed without being
able to observe them directly, still represent the core foundation of evolu-
tionist theories.



The Tierra evolutionistic model
As we have already discussed in Chapter 2, when direct experimentation
is not possible, we try to simulate the real situation by using a model
296   29 : Complexity and evolution

      formulated on the basis of appropriate hypotheses and assumptions. Tho-
      mas Ray (1992, 1994) has developed a model of evolution called Tierra,
      based on the mechanism essential to the origins of the evolution of species:
      replication with random errors. The Tierra model takes its form from a
      particular computer program able to produce other copies of itself in the
      RAM memory of the computer, copies that, in turn, replicate themselves. At
      each replication, however, there can be a random introduction of errors, in
      the form of bits that have a different value to the original one. The repli-
      cated programs play the role of new creatures; they occupy the available
      RAM memory, which, in turn, plays the role of the environment, whose
      resources, i.e. the capacity of the RAM, are limited. The errors introduced,
      that each program, by replicating itself, passes on to the new programs (the
      new creatures) it creates, are the equivalent of genetic mutations. Selection
      is made by the limited nature of spatial resources, i.e. the capacity of the
      memory, and energetic resources, represented by the time that the CPU
      requires to replicate the program.
         The need for spatial and energetic resources differs in the various crea-
      tures, because the random genetic mutations inserted by the parent program
      are different; this necessity varies from one program to the next according
      to the bit conﬁguration of each. When the memory is full, a ‘killer’ program
      appears that eliminates the old creatures to leave room for the new ones that
      replace them. Starting from the rudimentary father creature (program), we
      therefore observe the development of an entire ecology of genotypes (the
      subsequent descendants) that emerge spontaneously. The most efﬁcient
      genotypes at replicating are those that, following the random mutations,
      leave a higher number of descendants and thus become those most present
      in the population that occupies the RAM. This whole processes represents a
      metaphor of evolution and of competition for resources.
         Evolution improves the adaptation of creatures to the environment.
      Initially, when the environment is a uniform space, available in abundance,
      the creatures do not interfere with one other and the most efﬁcient replica-
      tion is performed simply by optimizing the replication algorithm. Subse-
      quently, when the amount of available memory (the environment) has been
      ﬁlled with creatures, a new phenomenon occurs. The programs (species)
      present interact, thus becoming important components of the environment.
      If the environment is limited in some way, selection favours smaller crea-
      tures, because their duplication requires a lower calculation time than that
      needed to duplicate larger creatures.
         What we observe is that the maximum efﬁciency of the replication
      mechanism is achieved when each individual takes into account what exists
      around him, through a real learning process. This mechanism enables the
                                                                         The appearance of life   297

creatures to be kept small; they do not need to hold all of the information
needed, as long as the latter is available in the environment. Evolution
therefore drives the creatures to activate exploitation strategies and defence
strategies against exploitation, i.e. it gives rise to the development of
real information parasites, which multiply more quickly because they use
the information contained in the creatures they exploit (the hosts), and thus
keep their dimensions small.
   The joint parasite–host dynamics occurs in Volterra–Lotka cycles (see
Chapter 12). Subsequently, however, the evolutive competition gives rise
to creatures that are immune to exploitation by the parasites. These new
creatures increasingly develop through the sharing of information, i.e.
setting up real forms of very strict social cooperation that, in the end,
leads them to be the winning creatures that occupy all of the available
environment, thus causing the extinction of the parasites.
   This model therefore shows how, despite the fact that it does not form
part of the hypotheses, the best efﬁciency of a species from an evolutive
point of view is obtained when different creatures cooperate by sharing
information. Basically, what happens is that not only the most efﬁcient
evolution ends up depending on a species already present in the environ-
ment, but also that the most effective survival strategy is neither competi-
tion for resources, nor parasitism, but cooperation.132



The appearance of life according to Kauffman
Even before the evolution of the species, the appearance of life on Earth can
be interpreted from the perspective of the evolution of a complex chemical
system in a state of non-equilibrium. The received view about the origin of
life maintains that DNA and RNA molecules are the best candidates for the
ﬁrst living molecules due to the self-templating character of the polynucleo-
tide double helix. Much research has been carried out to demonstrate
the prebiotic synthesis of critical biomolecules such as amino acids and

  132
       The theme of the transition from competition to cooperation as a more efﬁcient way to
survive in a world dominated by the egotism of its actors (whether such are superpowers,
businesses, individuals, or other), which exclusively concentrate on their own utility without
the interference of any higher authority, is discussed by Robert Axelrod (1984, 1997), in
particular with reference to the prisoner’s dilemma, a well-known problem in the theory of
games widely studied in mathematics and used as a model in economics and sociology,
proposed in the 1950s, right in the middle of the cold war, within the framework of research
conducted with a view to possible applications to international political strategies (see also
Holland, 1996).
298   29 : Complexity and evolution

      nucleotides, and to achieve template replication of arbitrary RNA se-
      quences. This work at the moment, however, has not yet been successful,
      but it might well be in the future.
         Stuart Kauffman (1994, 1995) proposed the idea that life appeared
      following a phenomenon of self-organization that occurred in a situation
      of non-equilibrium. Before the origin of life, he suggests, there was a form of
      prebiotic chemical evolution that gave rise to the formation of the variety of
      existing organic compounds, in a general state of non-equilibrium due to
      the ﬂows (exchanges) of matter and energy to which these systems of
      molecules were subjected.
         From Darwin’s era, we have been used to considering living organisms as
      sort of strange devices that have organized themselves more or less ran-
      domly, through a sequence of numerous mutations, in themselves random,
      the vast majority of which unfortunate. Natural selection is the mechanism
      that is able to bring order to the disordered set of attempts produced by the
      mutations, eliminating the less efﬁcient organisms in terms of competition
      for resources (i.e. the less adapted) created by unfortunate mutations, from
      the scene. Again according to Kauffman, however, Darwin intuitively
      sensed only a part of the mechanism of life: selection due to competition
      for resources as the sole cause that produces order. In reality, life, seen as
      ‘self-reproducing chemical systems capable of evolution’ (Kauffman, 1994,
      p. 90), is by no means a random phenomenon, but could be considered as an
      emergent collective property of sufﬁciently complex chemical systems in a
      state of non-equilibrium, due to the presence of sets of catalytic polymers.
      The latter, as Kauffman proposes, would have inevitably contained auto-
      catalytic sets, systems, that is, in which each molecule sees its own forma-
      tion catalysed by some other molecule in the set. The appearance of
      autocatalytic systems is seen, in this context, as a kind of phase transition
      that occurs in a system that is self-organizing. As Kauffman writes, ‘The
      new view of the origin of life, is based on the generalization of small
      autocatalytic sets. I believe good theory exists to support the possibility
      that sufﬁciently complex sets of catalytic polymers will almost inevitably
      contain collectively autocatalytic sets. In such a collectively autocatalytic
      set of monomers and polymers, no molecule need catalyze its own forma-
      tion; rather, each molecule has its formation catalyzed by some molecule in
      the set such that the set is collectively autocatalytic. The set constructs itself
      from exogenously supplied monomers or other building blocks.’ (Kauff-
      man, 1994, p. 88).
         A simple image will help better understand the idea. Let us consider, for
      example, 10,000 buttons on the ﬂoor and begin to connect them at random
                                                             The appearance of life   299

with a thread. Every now and then let us pick up a button and see how many
buttons are connected to it. This connected set is called a component (or a
cluster) in a random graph made up of N nodes (or points) connected at
random with E edges (or lines). It can be shown that when E/N > 0:5
most of the nodes are connected in one giant component i.e. when E/N
passes 0.5 most of the clusters become cross-connected into one giant
cluster. When this giant web forms, the majority of buttons are directly or
indirectly connected to each other. In other words, when E/N passes 0.5, a
nonlinear process takes place resembling a phase transition; the size of the
maximum cluster increases abruptly, just like when separate water mol-
ecules freeze to form a block of ice. In a similar way, in reaction graphs,
when a sufﬁciently large percentage of reactions is catalysed, i.e. we have
the formation of a sort of network of interconnected nodes, a giant
component crystallizes. As the maximum length polymer increases, the
number of types of polymer increases exponentially, but the number of
types of reactions between them increases even faster. Thus for any ﬁxed
probability that an arbitrary polymer can act as a catalyst for an arbitrary
reaction, there are so many possible reactions per polymer that at least
one reaction per polymer is catalysed by some polymer. The autocatalytic
process has taken place, autocatalytic sets crystallize. The phase transi-
tion, the ‘crystallization’, has occurred. (For technical details on the
biochemistry of the autocatalytic processes that have led, amongst other
things, to the formation of DNA, see Kauffman, 1986, 1994, and the
references indicated therein.)
   Life might emerge, therefore, as an inevitable consequence of polymer
chemistry. At a critical diversity of monomers and polymers the system
will contain collectively autocatalytic sets: a phase transition is surpassed.
Collectively reproducing metabolisms, able to grow, survive environmental
changes and able to evolve in the absence of a genome are expected.
According to this perspective, life, therefore, is not a random phenomenon,
but appears as the necessary outcome of a situation of instability in a self-
organizing chemical system. ‘If so, the routes to life in the Universe
may be broad boulevards, not back alleys of thermodynamic improbability’
(Kauffman, 1994, p. 89). This is the meaning of the title of Kauffman’s
very successful book, At Home in the Universe (1995). The universe is
our home and we are its inhabitants by right, because we appeared not
due to the highly improbable fortuitous event of a combination of mol-
ecules, but due to a necessary order given by the union of energy and matter
in a system that found itself in a condition of non-equilibrium, at the edge of
chaos.
300   29 : Complexity and evolution

         Naturally, Kauffman’s proposal is only a proposal, an interesting theory
      to be discussed. Nothing is certain yet. This theory is destined to remain
      such until such time as a complete theory of self-organization and complex-
      ity is formulated.133

        133
             A similar type of process, i.e. phase transitions, also occurs in socioeconomic processes,
      and is common in human behaviour in general. When interactions between the components
      of the system are sufﬁciently dense and when these interactions add up in such a way as to
      generate large scale correlation, then a different entity emerges on a higher level of organiza-
      tion than its constituents, obeying certain laws of its own. This is what happens, for instance,
      when a group of people meet to discuss an issue of common interest. As the intensity of their
      interaction increases, clusters of ‘like-minded’ people begin to emerge spontaneously, linking
      up with other ‘like-minded’ clusters creating even larger clusters (Batten, 2000ab). Phase
      transition has also been applied to the description of urban development, interpreted as a
      phase transition in a graph of minor centres, which, when the graph becomes sufﬁciently
      connected (i.e. it crystallizes), give rise to a new system from the emergent properties: the city.
               Complexity in economic
 30            processes


In this section, we will continue to look at how the approach of complexity
has been applied, presenting several examples of models of economic
processes constructed according to this new vision of systems. Economics,
in fact, is actually one of the ﬁelds of research in which the concepts of
instability, chaos, and complexity that we have discussed in this book, can
best be applied, and it is one of the areas that has most attracted the
attention of scholars who have adopted the new concepts proposed by
complexity science (see, for example, Barkley Rosser, 1991; Brock, Hsieh
and Le Baron, 1991; Benhabib, 1992; Nijkamp and Reggiani, 1993, 1998;
Krugman, 1996; Thiel, 1998; Batten, 2000a).



Complex economic systems
One of the basic assumptions in economics, in certain situations almost an
axiom, is, to put it brieﬂy, that it is not so much current facts that determine
expectations for the future, as expectations for the future that determine
behaviour and therefore current facts. As a consequence of this, on one
hand, the present acts on the future, through actions decided and under-
taken, but on the other hand, the future acts on the present, because the
objective of the actions that are undertaken are based on future gain. Future
prospects and hopes, in fact, are what is behind present actions, aimed at
maximizing future gain. Therefore we are dealing with a typical feedback
cycle in the evolution of an economic system, in which the output, the
future, returns certain information to the input, the present, through ex-
pectations. In addition to the presence of feedback cycles, another charac-
teristic speciﬁc to economic systems is that in them, and more generally in
social systems, the actors are often very numerous, irrespective of situations
of monopoly or oligopoly.
   In economics we therefore encounter systems with lots of interacting
elements, in which there are also feedback cycles. It is natural, therefore,
to expect that the evolution of economic systems over time can display the
302   30 : Complexity in economic processes

      phenomenologies typical of chaos and complexity, such as for example the
      presence of a chaotic attractor towards which the unstable orbits direct
      themselves and along which they travel in a more or less cyclical way.
         As David Ruelle (1991) proposes, we could construct a parallel between
      the economy of a society at different stages of technological development,
      on one hand, and a dissipative physical system subjected to the action of
      external forces, such as a viscous liquid heated from underneath, on the
      other. The analogy, obviously, is purely qualitative; we maintain our dis-
      tance from a physicalism that has been superseded by the times. At low
      levels of technological development, we can think of the economy in a
      stationary state, like a liquid weakly heated from underneath. If the ﬂow
      of heat is not sufﬁcient to trigger convective motion, the heat spreads into
      the still liquid and disperses into the air by means of conduction. This
      situation corresponds to classical economics at the end of the eighteenth
      century: Adam Smith’s invisible hand that regulates prices, by matching
      supply and demand in a static economy. At more advanced levels of tech-
      nological development, we can expect to see oscillations that are more or
      less periodical such as economic cycles that correspond, according to the
      above analogy, to nonturbulent connective motion that a liquid subjected to
      a source of heat displays. This is the economics of the period just before the
      mid-twentieth century, that, just to be clear, of Keynes and Schumpeter. At
      even more advanced levels of technological development, such as those
      typical of a modern advanced society, we have a turbulent economy char-
      acterized by irregular variations and by a strong dependence on initial
      conditions. This case corresponds to that of a liquid heated from under-
      neath by a very intense ﬂux of heat, such that the liquid is kept boiling.
         Just as in the motion of a liquid, we can identify, even in turbulent
      conditions, relatively stable forms such as vortexes, that appear, live for a
      period of time, transform into other vortexes or die out; in the same way, in
      economic processes and more generally in social processes, we observe
      phenomena of self-organization, i.e. the formation of particular structures,
      whose extension is limited and whose functioning is complicated. The
      economic cycle theories of writers such as Marx, Keynes, Schumpeter and
      Samuelson (Allen, 1959) do not envisage situations analogous to turbulence
      and, therefore, need to be reviewed in the light of the modern interpretation
      of the complexity of economic systems. Many economic mechanisms can
      produce oscillations in the values of the macroeconomic magnitudes;134
      they appear both in capitalist economies without any form of regulation of

        134
            For the sake of brevity, hereinafter we will call these oscillations ‘cycles’ in line with
      current use, even if the periodicity that the term presumes is anything but rigorous.
                                                          Complex economic systems   303

free market competition, and in socialist ones with rigid centralized plan-
ning, and can result from nonlinear interactions between different eco-
nomic and political variables, as was already pointed out in the studies of
Marx, Keynes and Schumpeter.
   Economic analysis, as we are aware, shows that the historic evolution of
economic systems presents cycles that are more or less periodic, but also
shows that said cycles, in reality, are not identical in their repetition, unless
approximately; each cycle develops in a different form from the previous
one. In particular, the cycles, just like the various types of ﬂuctuations and
variations that are displayed in the growth of capitalist economies, such as
for example Kondratiev’s waves, superpose a general growth trend. This is
one-way historical evolution, that cannot be ignored; according to Schump-
eter (1934, 1939), the cycle is actually the form in which growth presents
itself. The engine of change in economics is the search for private gain and,
due to this, the economy does not only generate that sort of perpetual
cyclical motion, but evolves at the same time, on occasion changing its
structure, according to a process that can be considered analogous to that,
in biology, of a single species that changes its own structure. It is a process,
therefore, that can be considered similar to a real morphogenesis, or to the
selection of new species through competition for resources (Goodwin,
1991). Without this growth process, that gives the evolution of economic
systems their particular nature, the real, periodic, stable cycle could be
described, at least in ﬁrst approximation, in terms of a simple Volterra–
Lotka model, such as that illustrated in Chapter 13.
   The persistence of economic growth without shocks, even for a long
period of time, obviously doesn’t guarantee that this type of growth will
continue indeﬁnitely; there is always the possibility that an unexpected
morphogenetic change may occur. Alongside growth, a core element in
economic evolution, we have structural change, which is related to the
system’s structural instability or to its dynamic instability or to both. In
traditional economics, however, there is no theory that efﬁciently interprets
the irregular movements observed in the dynamics of economic data, using
any endogenous mechanism. One of the most interesting aspects that we
would like to highlight is that these irregularities, however, can also occur
for entirely endogenous reasons; namely due to mechanisms, internal to the
system in question, independent of external causes, mechanisms that can
remain dormant for a long period of time and then emerge unexpectedly in
particular circumstances, causing violent and sudden changes in the struc-
ture of the system itself, the so-called catastrophes. Phenomena of this
nature were a mystery up until the recent development of the theory of
nonlinear systems.
304   30 : Complexity in economic processes




      Synergetics
      A few decades ago, when new ideas on chaos and complexity had started to
      diffuse in scientiﬁc circles, the theoretical physicist Hermann Haken pro-
      posed, through a series of works, a general theory on the dynamic behaviour
      of complex systems in certain situations: synergetics (Haken, 1977, 1983,
      1985, 1990). More speciﬁcally, synergetics concerns the cooperative inter-
      action between many subsystems that can be the source of the macroscopic
      behaviour of the system. The synergetic approach is a direct result of the
      holistic vision of systems in which collective phenomena are displayed that we
      have called ‘emergent’. It is natural to consider the economy as a typical ﬁeld
      of application for the ideas of synergetics (Zhang, 1991). Economic syner-
      getics looks at the spontaneous formation of new macroscopic structures
      associated to discontinuous processes and shows how the parts of an eco-
      nomic system can organize themselves into new structures in certain particu-
      lar times of instability. The ideas of synergetics can be efﬁciently applied to
      problems of economic analysis that regard structural changes (bifurcations,
      catastrophes, the onset of chaotic dynamics), just as they can be applied to the
      study of the role of small random ﬂuctuations (the so-called stochastic noise)
      in economic structures, in relations between fast and slow economic pro-
      cesses, and in relations between economies at macro and micro level.
         In our era, the complexity of economic reality, and of socio-economic
      reality in general, is growing continuously. There are numerous factors be-
      hind this phenomenon: from the increase in the speed of communications, to
      the growth of capital and knowledge at the disposal of evolved societies. This
      leads to an increasing difﬁculty in ﬁnding a description for the evolutive
      processes in economics. Synergetics shows how the theory of nonlinear
      systems provides, in reality, a possible common tool for the analysis of the
      complexity of economic evolution. Synergetics generally concerns nonlinear
      and unstable systems, even regardless of the speciﬁc aspects of economic
      systems, and focuses on certain particular nonlinear phenomena that mani-
      fest themselves in said systems, such as structural changes, bifurcations, and
      chaos.
         Even though societies can be very different from one another, they can
      always be described using several common variables. The synergetic ap-
      proach can be adopted to examine the possible behaviour and the possible
      structures of socio-economic systems, considered in their temporal dynam-
      ics, referring to different combinations of said variables (Zhang, 1997). They
      can be grouped into several general sets, such as, for example: (1) monetary
      variables, such as prices, salaries, interest rates, etc. (2) material variables,
                                                                        Synergetics   305

such as infrastructures, capital, natural resources, etc. (3) variables linked to
knowledge, such as level of education, skills, technology, etc. (4) demo-
graphic variables, such as birth and death rates, the population structure in
terms of age, sex or other; (5) sociocultural variables, such as legal provi-
sions, tax systems, habits and tradition. Now, all of these variables depend
on time according to different speeds of change, according to the value of the
other variables, or of some of them. In general, we can describe the dynamic
interactions between the socio-economic variables considered, that we will
indicate with x1 , . . . , xn , in the form of a system of ﬁrst order differential
equations like (8.1) in Chapter 8, thus forming a dynamical system:

                             d
                                x1 ¼ F1 (x1 , . . . , xn )
                             dt
                             ...
                             d
                                xn ¼ Fn (x1 , . . . , xn )
                             dt

   The main objective of synergetics in economics is, therefore, to investi-
gate how these variables act on each other and how this inﬂuences, through
the n nonlinear functions Fi , in which i ¼ 1, . . . , n, the evolution of socio-
economic systems.
   The instability of economic systems was already considered in the studies
of Marx, Keynes, and Schumpeter, although these economists stated differ-
ent causes as the origin of such. As Wei-Bin Zhang (1991) observes, the
synergetic vision of economic development, in certain situations, is not that
far from that of Schumpeter. For example, the shock of innovation, to
which Schumpeter attributes the cause of the qualitative changes in eco-
nomic systems, plays a similar role to that of the ﬂows of energy in the
description of the economic evolution provided by synergetics. In both
approaches, an economy without innovation remains in its state of equilib-
rium, while innovation can lead to chaotic behaviour. The synergetic ap-
proach and that of Schumpeter in particular, however, even if similar in
terms of perspective, differentiate with regard to several aspects; this leads
to different levels of understanding of the phenomenology studied. In
synergetic economics, the role played by mathematical techniques is funda-
mental: mathematics is the main tool to express and to treat what we mean
by instability, cyclical development, chaos, etc. with precision, while there is
nothing comparable to this in the works of Marx, Keynes, or Schumpeter.
   Even though synergetics derives from physics, it is by no means a physical
theory that attempts to reduce complex phenomena to laws of matter. Right
306   30 : Complexity in economic processes

      from the start, Haken emphasized how the physical systems he considered
      displayed behaviour characterized by aspects similar to those of the phe-
      nomena of collective behaviour that are observed in a wide range of natural
      and social systems. Many elements in synergetic theory were actually
      developed starting from the observation and the study of numerous speciﬁc
      cases in a large variety of sectors: from physics to sociology, to psychology,
      to artiﬁcial intelligence, to spatial economy and regional and urban science.
      The guiding idea, in each case, is the search for the properties, at the macro
      level, of a complex system, starting from the components at the micro level.
         One of the original aspects of synergetics is therefore the fact that it can
      be applied to a large number of ﬁelds. As Léna Sanders (1992) observes, we
      are no longer simply transferring methods developed in physics to social
      sciences; synergetics conceives a direct similarity between natural and
      social systems, regardless of their comparability at the microscopic level.
      As we have already observed in Chapter 27, almost all systems, in fact, at
      the macroscopic level are structured in a similar way, therefore the math-
      ematical concepts developed to describe their dynamics can be applied to
      both natural and social systems (Weidlich, 1991).
         The synergetics approach has been successfully applied to the analysis of
      the dynamics of urban and regional systems, in particular to cities, consid-
      ered as complex systems that self-organize following cooperation between
      the components135 (Pumain, 1997; Staricco and Vaio, 2000). Monographic
      studies on the themes of synergetics and self-organization in urban and
      regional systems can be found, for example in Dendrinos and Sonis
        135
             In this regard, Juval Portugali (2000) observes how urban organization following
      cooperation is, in reality, simply a particular case of a more generalized situation, in which
      ordered and self-organized cities can still be chaotic, due to the permanence of chaotic
      phenomena. There are two aspects of this: local chaos, at the micro level, and deterministic
      chaos of the complex city system, at the macro level. The local chaos originates from the
      irregular movement of the numerous components of the complex city system, such as the
      movement of vehicles on a thoroughfare in conditions of light trafﬁc or the movement of
      individuals in an uncrowded square. In both cases, we are dealing with irregular movements
      that are not coordinated with other movements: the starting point for self-organization.
      Deterministic chaos, on the other hand, emerges as a consequence of self-organization
      (chaos from order), for example, when the various system components start to experience a
      push towards an attractor and, as a consequence, display coordination of the individual
      dynamics. Often, in cases like this, the systems are dominated, so to speak, by several
      parameters of order, whose behaviour is obviously chaotic. For example, for a certain period
      of time one parameter dominates over the others, then, suddenly, the dominant parameter
      becomes another. In this case the city passes rapidly from a structurally stable state to another
      structurally stable state. For example, a residential city (suddenly) becomes a commercial city.
      It can also occur, in this regard, that within a dynamically stable city, there are local chaotic
      areas, clearly deﬁned from a socio-spatial viewpoint, which act against the maintenance of
      global stability.
                                        Two examples of complex models in economics   307

(1990), Nijkamp and Reggiani (1998) and in Portugali (2000); reviews of
works on complexity in urban and regional sciences can be found in
Bertuglia and Vaio (1997a) and in Bertuglia, Bianchi and Mela (1998). In
particular, the evolution of the dimensions of cities as a function of their
location within an urban hierarchy, their localization in the territory and
their socio-economic proﬁle have been studied (Weidlich and Haag, 1983,
1988; Haag et al., 1992).
   Synergetics applied to the urban ﬁeld aims to identify the effects, at the
macro level, of the micro-geographic actions of the urban actors, such as
family nuclei, businessmen and administrators, and of their interaction,
starting from the basic roles of the actors. This has been implemented, for
instance, in the model of the system of French cities based on synergetics
presented in Sanders (1992) and in the model of spatial self-organization of
Allen (1997b), different versions of which have been applied to population
dynamics and economic activities in the United States, in the provinces of
Belgium and in Senegal (Allen, 1997a).
   The synergetics approach has also been applied to the study of the
processes of the diffusion of innovation in a given area (Sonis, 1988) and,
in particular, to the study of the effects of socio-cultural and economic
intervention on the diffusion of innovation (Sonis, 1991, 1995). The as-
sumption at the basis of these studies is that the diffusion of innovation can
be seen as the spatial-temporal realization of a dynamic choice between
‘old’ and ‘new’ alternatives, that arise due to the effect of the interaction
between the actors in the area in question. This means that we pass from the
micro level of the homo oeconomicus, who acts alone, driven by a search
for personal interests, to the meso level of the homo socialis, who acts in
search of his own interests, but exchanges information with his fellow men
and acts on the basis of the information he receives (Sonis, 1990a). It is
assumed, in other words, that there is a synergetic type of interaction
between the diffusion of the competitive innovations introduced to the
various functional niches, that is the result of numerous decisions at the
micro level, and the socio-economic structure of the area considered, which
evolves, at the meso level, following decisions at the micro level, resulting
from the opinions of the individual actors that the same socio-economic
structure contributes to forming.



Two examples of complex models in economics
Economic science can gain from developments in mathematics applied
to the study of system dynamics, particularly from the theories of
308   30 : Complexity in economic processes

      catastrophes, chaos, and complexity (of the many authors who have written
      on this subject, see, for example: Anderson, Arrow and Pines, 1988; Chiar-
      ella, 1990; Dendrinos and Sonis, 1990; Barkley Rosser, 1991; Hodgson and
      Screpanti, 1991; Zhang, 1991; Benhabib, 1992; Nijkamp and Reggiani,
      1992a, 1993; Krugman, 1996, Arthur, Durlauf and Lane, 1997; Fang and
      Sanglier, 1997; Hewings et al., 1999). In this section we will be brieﬂy
      presenting several recent models, as examples of the application of the
      new concepts that derive from complexity theory to economic systems.
         The ﬁrst model we are going to cite is that of Richard Goodwin
      (1991).136 Goodwin proposes a cyclical dynamic model of the evolution
      of an economic system with two variables v, the rate of employment of the
      population of an employable age, and u, the share of the gross domestic
      product represented by wages. The model attempts to take a new approach
      to the understanding of cyclical economic development based on the ideas
      of Marx, Keynes, and Schumpeter. In particular, the author wishes to
      develop a unitary theory of short and long growth waves, but in conditions
      of continuous change with endogenous origins, and to be able to account
      for, using the concepts of chaos theory, part of the general irregularities of
      the economic temporal series, obtaining, in the place of the classical closed
      cycles, a strange attractor (represented in Figure 30.1), whose form recalls
      that of the Rössler attractor (Figures. 16.3 and 16.4).
         Tönu Puu (1990), on the other hand, uses the model of the economic cycle
      formulated by Paul Samuelson (1939, 1947) and John Hicks (1950), which
      we mentioned in Chapter 9 (see p. 63, note 33) and shows that a simple
      accelerator can generate situations of chaos. This originates from the fact
      that Puu uses a third order relation for the function It that links investment
      to income Yt , therefore a nonlinear function, in place of Samuelson’s, which
      assumed a production structure in which capital is proportional to the
      income generated according to the following relation:

                                         It ¼ v(Yt1  Yt2 ):

      Puu assumes:

                             It ¼ v((Yt1  Yt2 )  (Yt1  Yt2 )3 )                      (30:1)

        136
             To avoid misunderstandings, we would like to point out that here we are not dealing
      with Goodwin’s famous model of the economic cycle dated 1951 (in addition to Goodwin,
      1951, see, for example, Allen, 1959). The model that we are referring to in the text is,
      however, basically a derivation of the latter, although with signiﬁcant differences. Goodwin’s
      article is also of particular interest, due to the considerations made by the author that
      originate from his personal acquaintance with Keynes and Schumpeter.
                                                 The complexity of the ﬁnancial markets   309




               Figure 30-1 Strange attractor from Goodwin’s model.
               Source: Goodwin (1991, p. 143).



   Equation (30.1), when xk ¼ (Yt1  Yt2 ), becomes equal to that of the
logistic map (20.4) with the sole difference of the exponent: 3 instead of 2.
Puu thus obtains that the dynamics of the economic cycle, under this as-
sumption, can display a chaotic attractor that has many elements in common
with the Feigenbaum tree in the logistic map presented in Chapter 22
(Figures 22.2–22.4), including therein those elements that we have indicated
as aspects of order from chaos. This should come as no surprise; as we said in
Chapter 22, the characteristics of the dynamics of the logistic map are
common to the dynamics of all unimodal quadratic maps with a continuous
ﬁrst derivative. The map (30.1) is continuous and presents one single max-
imum value in the interval [0,1]; it can be shown that a third order max-
imum, and not a second order one, does not result in any substantial changes
to aspects regarding the onset of chaos in the dynamics with respect to the
quadratic case of the logistic map.



A model of the complex phenomenology of the ﬁnancial
markets
Often, incomplete information and irrational decision-making in econom-
ics are other factors that are considered a cause of instability in economic
systems. This is particularly evident in the dynamics of the ﬁnancial
310   30 : Complexity in economic processes

      markets, often subjected to unexpected events that are not linked to causes
      that can be objectively identiﬁed in economic data, but that originate from
      events of a more psychological than economic nature.
         This is even more evident in a speciﬁc ﬁnancial market, the market where
      certain particular ﬁnancial instruments called derivatives, such as futures
      and options, are traded.
         Derivatives are typically highly speculative ﬁnancial instruments that
      originate from other ﬁnancial instruments, such as for example, shares
      traded on the stock market, or other goods of a different nature traded on
      other markets, and could not exist without them. Derivatives enable the
      investor to make a gain on price variations of the underlying instrument,
      let’s say a share, risking a lower amount of capital than that needed to buy
      the share itself. In practice, simplifying somewhat, the idea is that the
      investor, on the basis of expectations relative to the future price of the
      underlying share, bets on the future rise (if he invests in a so-called call
      option) or on the future fall (a so-called put option) of the share price. The
      purchase of an option gives the investor the right, but not the obligation, to
      buy (call option) or to sell (put option) the underlying share at any time
      before the option expires (American option) or exactly on the option’s
      expiry date (European option), at a price ﬁxed when the option is purchased
      (the strike price).
         To make this even clearer, let us consider the case of the European option.
      If on the expiry of the option, the market value of the share is higher than
      the sum of the price paid for the purchase of the option (the premium) and
      the strike price, then the investor that holds a call option gains, because, by
      paying the strike price, he becomes the holder of a share with a superior
      value (at least at that moment in time) to the total price he paid. If, on the
      other hand, the market value of the share is less than the sum of the
      premium and strike price, then the investor can choose whether to buy it
      anyway, and suffer a loss, or forsake the purchase, let the option lapse and
      thus lose all the capital invested in the option. Vice versa, the investor that
      possesses a put option when the option expires will collect the difference
      between the strike price, i.e. the pre-established sale price and the current
      value of the share, and will make a gain if said difference is higher than the
      premium paid for the option (in the case of futures, the mechanism is
      similar; the only difference with respect to options is that by buying a
      future, the investor does not have a right, but is committed to purchase,
      in one case, or to sell, in the other, the underlying share).137

        137
            In reality the topic of derivative ﬁnancial instruments is much wider and more detailed
      than we have presented here. For example, as we have said, there are also derivatives that
                                                           The complexity of the ﬁnancial markets   311

   What we are interested in pointing out is that options and futures do not
only suffer the expectations that the market has on the underlying shares,
but because they exist as derivatives, they themselves, through a real feed-
back mechanism, act on the underlying shares, whose quotations are sub-
ject to the expectations of the market (this is commonly known as
‘discounting’) and, therefore, also feel the impact of the quotations of
their derivatives (Dendrinos, 2000). In fact what happens is that the in-
vestor that foresees an increase in the share price buys a call option, whereas
the investor that foresees a fall in the share price buys a put option.138 But
by doing thus, both contribute to forming the expectations of other inves-
tors in the market, and therefore contribute, through their decisions, to
establishing the price trend of the underlying shares.
   The relation between the price of the derivative instrument and that
of the underlying share is highly nonlinear and describes a positive
feedback cycle; the changing and often irrational psychology of the investor
also plays its part, as investors usually act in conditions of incomplete
information. The result of this is that the percentage variations during
the life of a derivative are usually larger than those of the underlying
share. On one hand, this gives the investor the opportunity to make higher
gains with respect to those that he could obtain by buying the underlying
share, but on the other hand, it presents the risk of losing the entire amount
of capital invested when the derivative expires; a derivative instrument,
in fact, does not represent the ownership of a share in a company, but
merely a right (or a duty in the case of futures) to purchase (or sell), and
at its expiry, leaves nothing in the hands of the investor that does not
exercise it.
   Price trends in ﬁnancial markets have been analysed ever since the stock
markets have existed, basically since the mid-sixteenth century (Bruschini
Vincenzi, 1998). In the past few decades, new mathematical techniques
have been applied in an attempt to identify recurrences and deterministic
mechanisms in the trends of prices on the ﬁnancial markets, borrowing and



refer to goods other than shares; furthermore, there are different mechanisms to deﬁne and
trade so-called American, European and Asian options, and there is an important formula,
called the formula of Black and Scholes (1973), which is widely used for the calculation of the
theoretical reference value (the so-called fair value) of options. We will not be introducing any
technical aspects that are not relevant to our discussion. Interested readers can consult current
literature on this topic, for example Wilmott, Howison and Dewynne (1995) and Neftci
(2000).
  138
       In ﬁnancial jargon it is normally said that, in the ﬁrst case, the investor has a long
position, or ‘goes long’, whereas in the second case has a short position, or ‘goes short’.
312   30 : Complexity in economic processes

      transforming even approaches and concepts from the world of physics. This
      has led to the birth of a new discipline, called econophysics, whose objective
      is to apply the mathematical concepts, models, and techniques, that have
      enjoyed considerable success in physics, to the ﬁnancial markets (Mantegna
      and Stanley, 2000; Mantegna, 2001).
         In this regard, the collection of studies by Benoı̂t Mandelbrot (1997a; see
      also Mandelbrot, 1997b, 1999ab), is particularly interesting, in which
      fractal geometry is used, developed mostly by Mandelbrot himself, and in
      particular the invariance of scale that it is based on, to obtain a model that
      describes the price trend of securities traded on the ﬁnancial markets, as we
      already mentioned in Chapter 9 (on this subject, see also Peters, 1994,
      1996; Franses and Van Dijk, 2000). In any event, we should point out
      that the opinion that there is an unknown, but identiﬁable deterministic
      law behind the dynamics of the ﬁnancial markets, and that therefore the
      markets are not intrinsically stochastic, but deterministic, is anything but a
      commonly held belief. This is due, above all, to the lack, at the moment, of
      effective models and really signiﬁcant results.139
         The idea that the ﬁnancial markets have a fundamentally reﬂexive and
      self-referential nature, as the expectations that the actors form are con-
      structed on the basis of the anticipations that they make with regard to the
      expectations of other actors, generally without a real logical-deductive
      procedure based on economic data, forms the basis of a stock market
      model studied by a group of researchers (Arthur et al., 1997), from the
      Santa Fe Institute (see pg. 275, note 128). The authors propose a theory of
      price formation that considers a heterogeneous set of actors, which con-
      tinuously adapt their expectations to the market that they themselves, all
      together, construct. The model refers in particular to the reality of the US
      stock market, in which the practice of direct speculative investment in
      ﬁnancial markets is more widespread than in European ones. Said invest-
      ments are made by means of frequent purchases and sales of ﬁnancial
      instruments, in general via the Internet, so-called trading on line, by private
      investors called traders. Traders act in a way that is fundamentally different
      to that of institutional investors. In fact they usually act from a short-term
      perspective, often in an inductive way and, in any event, are more often
      driven by factors, often with emotional origins, that are generally not
      ascribable to economic and ﬁnancial data (the so-called ‘fundamentals’)
      of listed companies. Usually a trader moves relatively small sums of money,
      very frequently, often several times in one day, in contrast to institutional

        139
            Somebody ironically said that the only way to make money by applying the chaos
      theory to ﬁnancial markets is to write books on the subject.
                                               The complexity of the ﬁnancial markets   313

operators. It can occur, however, that traders, all together, move a consid-
erable sum of money and that this, in certain situations, reaches critical
values that trigger important movements in the market that are not based
on purely economic data, such as the so-called speculative bubbles or a
sudden fall in prices. Movements of this nature are difﬁcult to predict,
because they are linked to the spreading and the self-reinforcement of a
feeling or a hope, according to a type of positive feedback mechanism, more
than a rational decision taken following information based on new object-
ive data.
   Arthur et al.’s model (1997) considers traders as actors that act by
continuously making hypotheses, exploring the market in the light of
certain patterns of expectations, and that buy or sell securities on the
basis of the conjectures that they form relative to the performance of the
securities themselves. Traders act in an inductive way; the perfect rational-
ity, which is at the basis of deductive reasoning, ceases to be the market
engine. Traders produce individual patterns of expectations and constantly
try them, adapt them, completely change them or abandon them to go on to
new patterns. In this way, individual opinions and expectations act endo-
genously to the ﬁnancial system and are in continuous competition with
the opinions and expectations of others, within an environment formed of
opinions and expectations that are related to one another and that evolve
over time. The market, in this way, is moved by changing opinions, which
adapt themselves endogenously, i.e. without the intervention of forces
external to the actors in the market, to the environment (the ‘landscape’)
of relations, the environment which, on the other hand, these same expect-
ations have contributed to creating.
   The implications and the effects of a system such as that described above
have been explored by means of computer simulation, using an artiﬁcial
environment called the ‘artiﬁcial stock market of Santa Fe’ created several
years ago as a simulation model of the real stock market (Palmer et al.,
1994). Arthur et al. (1997) have reached the conclusion that the ﬁnancial
market can operate in two different regimes. In conditions in which there is
a low rate of exploration of alternative forecasts, the market stabilizes in a
simple regime that corresponds to a sort of stable equilibrium alternative
based on rational decision-making, described in the standard theory as an
efﬁcient market (see p. 64, note 34). In a market of this nature, in fact, the
mechanism – highly efﬁcient – of circulating information does so in such a
way that the information is immediately taken into consideration by each
operator as soon as it is available (or, as it is commonly said, this informa-
tion is ‘discounted by the market’). The hypothesis of a totally efﬁcient
market means, however, in reality, that the information is immediately
314   30 : Complexity in economic processes

      reﬂected in current prices and that the ‘best’ estimate of the intrinsic value
      of a share (in this hypothesis we presume it exists) is its current price, which
      is formed as the immediate result of the diffusions of the information
      (Batten, 2000a).
         In the more realistic conditions of high rates of exploration of the alter-
      natives, and of information that circulates in an imperfect way, on the other
      hand, the market self-organizes into a complex regime, in which a much
      more varied price behaviour emerges that displays the statistical type char-
      acteristics that are encountered in the real market. In this second case,
      alongside trader activities conducted according to the rules of technical
      analysis, in which the use of past time series (past performance) is an
      essential instrument for future predictions, we have the speculative bubbles
      and the crashes generated by the self-reinforcing and the rapid circulations
      of opinions and feelings. Phenomena of this type emerge when individual
      expectations mutually reinforce one another, ending up by distorting the
      role of market indicators.140 The indicators, in this situation, no longer
      perform their primary role of reﬂecting the current situation, but also
      become signals that coordinate opinions and feelings, and end up contrib-
      uting to the self-reinforcing and to the circulations of sets of opinions and
      feelings. Following the simulations, the authors sustain that the real mar-
      kets, with irrational and inductive traders, operate according to the regime
      that has just been described, in which the markets themselves are charac-
      terized by a heterogeneity of opinions and by deviations to rational deci-
      sion-making based on the values of fundamental data.


        140
             The term ‘market indicators’ is given to the various quantitative magnitudes, measured
      in the ﬁnancial markets, that are used by analysts to formulate predictions on future price
      trends. Technical indicators and fundamental indicators are usually distinguished between.
      The former includes, for example, average prices over time, calculated according to various
      deﬁnitions, and the relative indices of volatility; the latter includes for example the volumes
      traded by a certain share or eventual information on insider trading activities (in markets
      where such is permitted).
               Some thoughts on the
 31            meaning of ‘doing
               mathematics’



The problem of formalizing complexity
In this Chapter and in Chapter 32 and 33, to conclude the book, we would
like to reﬂect for a moment on the fact that, as we have said on many an
occasion, at the moment there is no formalization of complexity that
enables it to overcome its current, rather confused state, which for now is
known as the ‘complexity approach’, and to achieve the objective of ﬁrst
becoming a method and then a bona ﬁde scientiﬁc theory. The complexity
approach that has recently appeared in modern scientiﬁc circles is generally
still limited to an empirical phase in which the concepts are not abundantly
clear and the methods and techniques are noticeably lacking. This can lead
to the abuse of the term ‘complexity’ which is sometimes used in various
contexts, in senses that are very different from one another, or at times even
erroneously, to describe situations in which the system does not even display
complex characteristics.
   Formalizing complexity would enable a set of empirical observations,
which is what complexity is now, to be transformed either into a real
hypothetical–deductive theory, similar to the role of physics when it is
treated with mathematical methods, or into an empirical science, like
biology, geology, economics, and sociology, in which the hypothetical–
deductive method is rarely applied (there are no theorems in these ﬁelds).
Here, however, we don’t intend to discuss epistemological matters that are
not the subject of this book. In this section, more than complexity in the
strict sense, we will be looking at the fact that, at present, the study of
complexity from a mathematical perspective is substantially vague, in terms
of deﬁnition, ineffective in terms of methods and lacking in terms of results.
   Therefore, at least for the moment, there is no uniﬁed theory of com-
plexity able to express the structures and the processes that are common to
the different phenomena, observable in different contexts, that can be
316   31 : The meaning of ‘doing mathematics’

      grouped under the general heading of complexity, even though such belong
      to different areas of science. As we have repeatedly said in this ﬁnal part of
      the book, there are several evident shortcomings in modern mathematics,
      which make the application of a complexity theory of little effect. Basically,
      this can be put down to the fact that mathematics is generally linear, where
      chaotic and complex phenomenology are regulated by positive feedback
      mechanisms, and can be modelled in the form of nonlinear differential
      equations which, usually, cannot be solved in formal or general terms but
      only through the use of approximated numerical methods.
         As we mentioned in Chapter 27, one of the fundamental notions of the
      complexity approach is that according to which the idea that we have of a
      system’s complexity is strictly linked to the interaction between the complex
      system and the observer, who is also complex (design complexity vs. control
      complexity). The problem of the interaction between the observed and the
      observer already exists in quantum theory; in fact it is one of the basic
      theoretical elements. However, quantum theory is substantially linear. The
      evolution of quantum systems is described, limiting ourselves to considering
      a non-relativistic approximation, by a linear equation with second order
      partial derivatives, Schrödinger’s equation; therefore it is a substantially
      deterministic theory. It is true that in the description of quantum systems,
      probabilistic concepts are extensively used; however, the unpredictability
      that derives from said systems is not chaotic, but is due to the two following
      reasons. On one hand, it is postulated that it is theoretically (and not only in
      practice) impossible to know the values of all of a system’s state variables
      simultaneously and with arbitrary precision, but it is possible to fully
      determine a subset of them only (Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle); on
      the other hand, the probability associated to measuring the state of a
      quantum system can be directly related to the principle of state superpos-
      ition, i.e. to the fact that it is postulated that a system, before being observed
      (i.e. before the observer interacts with it) ﬁnds itself in several different
      states simultaneously, one of which, according to a probability distribution,
      is ‘forced’ to appear like the state of the system from the act of measurement
      itself.141 In the context of quantum physics, therefore, the concept of
      indetermination distinguishes itself in a different way both with respect to
      chaos and with respect to that intermediate, but clearly deﬁned, area
      between determinism and chaos that we call complexity.

        141
             These concepts that are out of the ordinary sense have given rise to the formulation of
      renowned paradoxes, such as that known as ‘Schrödinger’s cat’, or the Einstein, Podolsky,
      and Rosen’s paradox (1935). An original discussion of these paradoxes, and more generally
      of the current situation of quantum physics theory, can be found in Accardi (1997).
                                                        The problem of formalizing complexity   317

   There are studies that are leaning towards deﬁning rules appropriate to
the description of complex systems; however, they are still not sufﬁcient to
formulate a general complexity theory, nor even to establish methods for
the theoretical and practical determination of a measurement of complexity
unequivocally applicable to systems.
   We could say that the situation, in some ways, is similar to that which the
natural sciences, in particular astronomy, experienced during the seven-
teenth century. Algebra had taken great steps forward, mainly thanks to
the work of several scholars from the Bolognese school (general solution of
third and fourth degree equations, ﬁrst introduction of complex numbers,
etc.) and of several French scholars (such as François Viète with the formal-
ization of algebraic symbols) and British ones (such as John Napier with the
introduction of logarithms). What was missing, however, was a tool that
enabled the analysis of the ‘continuum’, that is to say even just the deﬁnition
of concepts such as instantaneous speed, a straight line tangent to a curve at
a point, the surface area of a non-rectilinear section, etc. Therefore the
search for a new horizon in mathematical techniques and conceptions
began, and was led, initially, by Pierre de Fermat and René Descartes and
later by Newton and Leibniz. The work of these scholars led to the creation
of inﬁnitesimal calculus, which turned out to be a particularly effective tool
to describe motion in several relatively simple cases, for example, in the case
of the movement of two bodies in reciprocal gravitational interaction.
   With regard to this objective, the algebra of the previous century was
insufﬁcient, as it was basically static in terms of vision and technique, and
incapable of giving a meaning to the still unclear concept, but that was
gaining ground, of ‘instantaneous motion’ (Boyer, 1968; Kline, 1990).
   The fundamental aspect that distinguished the emerging branch of math-
ematics with respect to existing algebra was represented by the concept of
inﬁnitesimal and, strictly linked to this, the concept of the continuity of a
curve. In this regard, the long diatribe that opposed Newton and Leibniz
and the harsh criticism of the very idea of inﬁnitesimal by the bishop and
philosopher George Berkeley are very well known. The latter’s criticism was
in reality more than justiﬁed by the approximate and contradictory deﬁn-
ition that Newton gave of the ‘inﬁnitesimal quantities’, even though Berke-
ley recognized the usefulness of the technique of the so-called Newtonian
ﬂuxions.142

  142
       ‘And what are these Fluxions? The Velocities of evanescent Increments? And what are
these same evanescent Increments? They are neither ﬁnite Quantities nor Quantities inﬁnitely
small, nor yet nothing. May we not call them the Ghosts of departed Quantities?’ (quotation
from The Analyst written by Berkeley in 1734).
318   31 : The meaning of ‘doing mathematics’

         The concept of inﬁnitesimal, which had already been partially discov-
      ered, even though in a different form and context, by Archimedes, and later
      by Galileo Galilei and mathematicians from his school, such as Evangelista
      Torricelli and Bonaventura Cavalieri, is a typical example of how a happy
      intuition ﬁnds it difﬁcult to take the form of a concrete theory and to be
      accepted by the scientiﬁc community (on this point see Giusti, 1999, and the
      discussion that the author presents on what a mathematical object is and
      how such emerges).
         The development of calculus techniques that used concepts linked to
      inﬁnitesimals was extremely important during the entire course of the
      eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, even though the theoretical founda-
      tions at the basis of the techniques developed had not been speciﬁed.
      Basically, inﬁnitesimals were used without it being completely clear as to
      what their nature was. The study of the continuum did not make any
      signiﬁcant progress until the work of Bernhard Bolzano, in the ﬁrst half of
      nineteenth century, and of Karl Weierstrass some years later. The most
      signiﬁcant contribution, however, was made from the early 1870s onwards
      by the work of Georg Cantor and Richard Dedekind, who, in a series of
      publications, created a totally new theoretical framework, in which the
      concepts of inﬁnity143 and continuum were included and given meaning
      (Dedekind, 1901, 1915; see also Hallett, 1984, and above, p. 197,
      note 71).


         143
              More correctly, we should distinguish between actual inﬁnite and potential inﬁnite.
      Actual inﬁnite is associated to the idea of a segment being made up of ‘inﬁnitely numerous’
      points. This is the problem tackled by Cantor and Dedekind, the arguments of which return
      to and go beyond known paradoxes, some of which come from ancient Greece, such as that of
      Zeno of Elea (Southern Italy), also known as ‘the arrow’ and ‘Achilles and the tortoise’, of
      which Aristotle writes in his book Physics, that can be summarized as follows. In order to
      traverse a line segment it is necessary to reach its midpoint. To do this one must reach the 1/4
      point, but to do this one must reach the 1/8 point and so on ad inﬁnitum, hence motion can
      never begin, because space can be inﬁnitely divided. The argument here is not only that the
      well-known inﬁnite sum 1=2 þ 1=4 þ 1=8 þ . . . ¼ 1 never actually reaches 1, more perplex-
      ing is the attempt to sum 1=2 þ 1=4 þ 1=8 þ . . . backwards. Before traversing a unit distance
      we must get to the middle, but before getting to the middle we must get 1/4 of the way, but
      before we get 1/4 of the way we must reach 1/8 of the way and so on, therefore we can never
      get started since we are trying to build up this inﬁnite sum from the ‘wrong’ end. The
      paradoxical conclusion is that ‘there is no motion’. Potential inﬁnite, on the other hand, is
      associated to the idea of the growth of a function without a ﬁnite limit, a problem already
      tackled by Augustin Cauchy, together with that of the clariﬁcation of the concept of a ﬁnite
      limit of a function, in several fundamental works in the 1820s, in particular in the monu-
      mental work Cours d’analyse de l’École Polytechnique in 1821 (Cauchy, 1882–1970), in
      which he gave inﬁnitesimal calculus its formal deﬁnition that, with the fundamental contri-
      bution that Weierstrass brought some decades later, it maintains even today.
                                                           The problem of formalizing complexity    319

   We are now faced with the following problem. We are not able to
describe chaotic phenomenology or even that type of organized chaos that
is complexity by means of adequate general laws; consequently, we are not
able to formulate effective long-term predictions on the evolution of com-
plex systems. The mathematics that is available to us does not enable us to
do this in an adequate manner, as the techniques of such mathematics were
essentially developed to describe linear phenomena, in which there are no
positive feedback mechanisms that unevenly amplify any initial uncertainty
or perturbation. In which direction then should we search for an adequate
solution? In the direction of the development of new mathematical tech-
niques in the general context of the current foundations of mathematics or
in the direction of a review of both the foundations themselves and of the
meaning of mathematical methodologies that they form the basis of? In
other words, is it a purely technical matter, i.e. limited to the development
of new theoretical–practical methods to solve problems, or is it a conceptual
issue, i.e. pertinent to problems regarding the very notion that we have of
mathematics, and only at a later stage, and as a consequence of the latter,
regarding technical aspects?
   Probably, the problem of formulating a complexity theory on mathemat-
ical foundations should be tackled through a review of the foundations at
the basis of currently used mathematical methodologies, particularly the
concepts of number and of continuity. The very problem of understanding
the continuum of a curve, just as that of the continuity of a set of real
numbers, have still not actually been resolved. In particular, there are still
open issues that date back to the scientiﬁc world of more than a century
ago, regarding, for example, Cantor’s continuum hypothesis and Zermelo’s
(or Zermelo–Fraenkel’s) later postulate on inﬁnite sets, known as the
‘axiom of choice’,144 questions that are at the basis of what we mean by
number, set (particularly inﬁnite set), and mathematical object.

   144
        In 1874 Cantor proved that there is more than one order of inﬁnity, even going as far as
stating that a real hierarchy of inﬁnite orders of inﬁnity can be constructed (see p. 197, note
71). The lowest order is the inﬁnity called countable or numerable, which characterizes the set
of natural numbers, as well as the set of rational numbers. Inﬁnities of a higher order, for
example the inﬁnity that characterizes the set of real numbers, are uncountable or not
numerable. In 1877, after three years of research without any conclusive results, Cantor
hypothesized that there are no intermediate orders of inﬁnity between the numerable one, of
natural and rational numbers, and that of real numbers. In this way the latter is the order
immediately superior to the numerable one. This hypothesis was called the ‘continuum
hypothesis’, because, as it is possible to establish a one-to-one correspondence between the
set of real numbers and the points on a straight line, the real numbers, so to speak, ‘render the
idea’ of the continuity of a straight line (Cantor, 1915; Weyl, 1918; Hallett, 1984). In
response to the antinomies such as that of Russell on inﬁnite sets (see p. 336, note 156),
320   31 : The meaning of ‘doing mathematics’




      Mathematics as a useful tool to highlight and express
      recurrences
      We have already discussed the matter of why we tend to apply a predom-
      inantly linear version of mathematics to our descriptions of the world in
      Chapter 25. Now we would like to return brieﬂy to this point and reﬂect on
      the reasons why we use mathematical methods in natural and social sci-
      ences. The reason could be related to the habit, or possibly to the necessity,
      of looking for recurrences in the phenomenology that we perceive, formu-
      lating laws that summarize said recurrences. As the mathematician John
      David Barrow writes, ‘the process of evolution has deemed it appropriate to
      employ a fair number of our resources in recognizing schemes: if we were
      not capable of recognizing regularities we wouldn’t be able to store infor-
      mation about the environment and adapt ourselves to it, but if we were to
      store the most minute details of the structure of the world that surrounds us,
      we would waste energy accumulating useless information and also in this
      case run risks to our survival’ (1994, p. 22–23, our translation).

      which emerged at the end of the nineteenth century following the ﬁrst attempts to construct a
      theory of arithmetics on strict logical–formal bases, Ernst Zermelo (1908) started to review
      the theory of Cantor sets, rejecting the intuitive approach adopted by these to the concept of a
      set and formulated, instead, a series of postulates at the basis of a new formal conception of
      sets. In particular the eighth of these postulates, the axiom of choice, was and is a particular
      subject for discussion, insofar as not all mathematicians agree in accepting it. It is stated as
      follows: if F is any family of non-empty pairwise disjoint sets X1 , X2 , X3 , . . . , Xn , . . . , then
      a set G exists (this is the point of contention) containing one element of each of the
      X1 , X2 , X3 , . . . Xn , . . . , for all the sets Xn of F. In rather more approximate terms, this
      means that, by choosing a ﬁrst element from one set, a second element from a second set, a
      third element from a third set, and so on, the elements chosen represent, in their turn, a new
      set. If F consists of a ﬁnite number of sets Xn , then the postulate does not present any
      problems. For example, if X1 is the set of even numbers and X2 that of odd numbers (in
      this case F consists of two sets only), it would be sufﬁcient to choose any one even number (for
      example 4) and any one odd number (for example 7) to construct G, which thus results as
      being composed by the numbers 4 and 7. The problem arises if the set F is made up of an
      inﬁnite number of sets Xn ; in a situation of this kind, the postulate ceases to be evident. At the
      basis of the very concept of number there is the theory of sets, in the ambit of which the axiom
      of choice plays a role similar to that in geometry of Euclid’s ﬁfth postulate on parallel lines. As
      it is a postulate, it can be accepted or not. By accepting it, or accepting its negation, we
      construct a so-called standard theory; if, on the contrary, we do not recognize either the
      postulate or its negation, we construct a so-called non-standard theory. Despite the fact that
      more than a century of research has passed, Cantor’s continuum theory and Zermelo’s axiom
      of choice still provoke debate. Two well-known theorems, the ﬁrst by Kurt Gödel and the
      second by Paul Cohen (who was awarded the Fields medal in 1966 thanks to this), have
      demonstrated the complete independence of the standard theory of sets from Cantor’s
      continuum hypothesis (Devlin, 1980; Hallett, 1984).
                                                Highlighting and expressing recurrences   321

   Mathematics is not just about numbers. As well as numbers, modern
mathematics also looks at the relations between them. The passage from
pure numerology to this new vision has derived from the realization that the
most profound meaning is not in the numbers but in the relations between
them. Mathematical investigation is precisely the exploration and the study
of the different possible relations; some of them ﬁnd a concrete and imme-
diate application in the environment in which they are immersed, others just
‘live’ in the minds of those that conceive them. Again, according to Barrow:
‘If we see things in this way, we understand why there has to be something
‘‘similar’’ to mathematics in the Universe we live in. We, like any other
sentient human being, are none other than examples of organized complex-
ity. We are stable complex schemes in the fabric of the Universe. As long as
life exists, in any form, randomness and total irrationality need to be kept at
a distance. Where there is life, there are schemes and whether there are
schemes there is mathematics. If there is a seed of rationality and order in
the potential chaos of the cosmos, then mathematics exists as well. A non-
mathematical universe containing living observers could not exist’ (1994,
p. 24–25, our translation).
   The search for recurrences that can be expressed in the form of math-
ematical laws, however, has not always been successful. Economists, for
example, produce knowledge, which, however, does not lead to universal
laws, valid at all times and in all places. They rather lead to relations that are
valid momentarily, locally and partially, without producing a general for-
mula in a rigorous language such as mathematics, as we have been doing in
physics for the last four centuries. Economic knowledge, in fact, links certain
speciﬁc behavioural hypotheses with certain particular conclusions, valid in
a schematized environment, by introducing some sort of mechanism that can
account for the connection. But the empirical validity of these types of
mechanism depends both on the particular nature of the real behaviour of
the individuals and on the institutional context within which these individ-
uals act which prevents these mechanisms from being transformed into laws
(Orléan, 1999). By systematically analysing these mechanisms, economists
have constructed that sector of applied mathematics called social mathemat-
ics. The language of mathematics is useful because it is not ambiguous and it
is precise: it enables hypotheses and results to be controlled in the ambit of a
theory expressed in the form of a mathematical model. We must not forget,
however, that these are forms of thought reconstructed in a ‘mathematical
laboratory’, far from the changing and many faceted reality of society.
   When we make social statements and claim to give them the universal
validity that distinguishes what we call ‘regularity’, an expression commonly
used in the context of the social sciences, or, borrowing the term from physics
322   31 : The meaning of ‘doing mathematics’

      tout court ‘law’, we often observe counter-trends that set themselves against
      the former and that may also conceal them. So, if this is true, they are not
      authentic laws (even though, for the sake of convenience, we will continue to
      refer to them in this way). Karl Marx, for example, formulated in the Capital
      (1867) the law of the tendential fall in the proﬁt rate, according to which, in a
      developing capitalist economy, the increase in competition ‘necessarily’ leads
      to a continuous increase in the amount of capital invested (more precisely, a
      continuous increase in the relation between means of production and the
      workforce employed) with the outcome, in the long term, of a progressive
      reduction in the proﬁt rate, i.e. the relationship between the proﬁt produced
      and the capital invested.145 Marx, however, highlighted how there are a great
      number of counter-trends that oppose the law of the tendential fall in the
      proﬁt rate, counter-trends that, at present and with hindsight, appear even
      more interesting to our understanding of the evolution of capitalism than the
      very law of the tendential fall in the proﬁt rate. So, then, we cannot say that
      the tendential fall in the proﬁt rate, even if we accept its existence in some
      form, qualiﬁes as an authentic law, if it can potentially be contradicted.
         Despite the fact that it is convenient to use laws formulated in a math-
      ematical form (i.e. models) in economics and in social sciences in general,
      various conceptual obstacles hinder the transformation of the mechanisms
      proposed (or assumed as true) into laws, making the use of the laws, if taken
      to the letter, fundamentally unacceptable. André Orléan (1999) identiﬁed
      four basic obstacles. The ﬁrst is the one that we have just mentioned with
      regard to the law of the tendential fall in the proﬁt rate: the ambivalence of
      the mechanisms, i.e. the simultaneous presence of tendencies and effects in
      opposition to those envisaged by the law. A second obstacle is represented
      by the role of history, which profoundly changes the institutional structures
      and therefore makes it difﬁcult to identify recurrences, due to the need to
      historicize the basic mechanisms. The third obstacle, which is more com-
      plicated than the other two, draws its origins from the fact that men learn,
      and therefore change their beliefs and their behaviour as a function of the
      knowledge they acquire. Simply the fact of stating an economic or social
      law can provoke new behaviour that invalidates the freshly formulated law.
      As Bernard Guerrien (1999) points out, there is a vicious circle between
      theories and facts in social sciences. The statements themselves are social

        145
            The idea that the growth of an economic system leads to a reduction in proﬁts was
      proposed in similar terms, by David Ricardo, in his Essay on the Inﬂuence of a Low Price of
      Corn on the Proﬁts of Stock (1815) several decades before Marx. According to Ricardo, the
      growth of the economic system leads to the progressive utilization of increasingly less fertile
      land in order to handle the growing demand for agricultural products; in the absence of
      technological innovation, this leads to an increase in the unit cost of an agricultural product
      and therefore a fall in proﬁts (what became known as the law of diminishing returns).
                                              The efﬁcacy of mathematics to describe the world   323

products; they are used by the social actors that formulate them and that
can change their behaviour as a consequence of the freshly formulated
statement, rendering it worthless and leading to the formulation of a new
statement, which, in turn, leads to a change in the behaviour of the social
actors and to the consequent formulation of a new statement instead of the
old, and so on.146 The fourth and ﬁnal obstacle to the formulation of
mathematical laws in social sciences regards the fact that human actions,
such as for example buying and selling, are never strictly economic actions;
economic interest and rationality are not, in reality, the only reasons behind
an individual’s actions.
   In conclusion, in social systems, typical examples of complex systems, the
recurrences (laws) that we attempt to highlight by stating them in math-
ematical form, are inadequate to be applied in the same way as they are in
natural sciences, at least in the so-called ‘hard’ sciences. Nevertheless, we
should not forget that often, in the natural sciences themselves, the laws
formulated with mathematical tools are inadequate to describe a phenom-
enology that is effective in terms of forecasting, even if for reasons that
generally, but not always, are different to those that are true for social
sciences. On the other hand, as the history of science over the past four
centuries has demonstrated, mathematics is just as often an extremely
effective descriptive tool.
   The time has come to ask ourselves the core questions that we have often
touched upon during the course of the book: why is mathematics an
effective tool to describe the world? And, in any event, to what extent is
this true? Can the point at which mathematics ceases to be an effective tool
be extended by means of an appropriate review of its foundations and
methods? And ﬁnally, more signiﬁcantly: what is mathematics, what is it
about and what does ‘doing mathematics’ mean?



A reﬂection on the efﬁcacy of mathematics as a tool
to describe the world
Without going into an in-depth discussion on the above questions, which
would be somewhat beyond the scope of this book, we would like, in any
event, to express our thoughts on the same.
  146
      We have already come across the notion of the vicious circle that instils itself between
the behaviour of social actors and the regularities of the social systems in Chapter 19, where
we highlighted the difﬁculty of recognizing and formulating deterministic laws to describe
market dynamics, because such laws are immediately violated by the actors in their constant
search for ways of maximizing proﬁts.
324   31 : The meaning of ‘doing mathematics’

         A basic characteristic of the human mind is knowing how to
      make reductions, i.e. knowing how to recognize, in the incessant ﬂow of
      empirical observations of a continually changing reality, the presence
      of elements that repeat themselves (recurrences) or elements common
      to different situations. All scientiﬁc thought in the past four centuries
      has been employed in a continual attempt to make reductions, expressed
      in the form of recurrences in the varied and many-faceted phenomenology
      that surrounds us. We could even go as far as saying that science exists
      because reality appears to be ‘algorithmically compressible’, that is to
      say, susceptible of being read in such a way that its description can be
      expressed, very often at least, in a ‘compressed’ way, without stating, one
      by one, all of the facts observed, but by formulating a set of general laws
      that describe the facts, expressed in a more concise way than would be
      necessary if we were to describe the phenomena one by one. The math-
      ematical formulae that we use to state recurrences that we call ‘laws’, from
      this perspective, are no more than reductions made to economize both the
      language and the information that the language encodes and transmits,
      eliminating the superﬂuous, starting from enormous sequences of data on
      the world.
         If we were to imagine a completely random world, its properties could
      only be described by means of a very long list of innumerable sequences of
      phenomena that follow one another over time. When we talk about chaotic
      phenomenology in real systems, on the other hand, we are imagining that
      there is an underlying determinism; let us imagine that there is a determin-
      istic law at the origin of the observed data, interpreted as the manifest result
      of the dynamics generated by the relevant unknown deterministic law. The
      identiﬁcation of the deterministic law (if such exists) at the origin of the
      data and the formulation of a model that reproduces the series of observed
      data (the dynamics) would enable us to consider those data, and in general
      the phenomenon to which they refer, not as having a random origin, and,
      therefore, to economize the quantity of information to be acquired and
      preserved in order to obtain a complete description of the systems (see
      Chapter 19).
         In practice, however, we are not able to pin down the underlying deter-
      minism, i.e. the concise law that describes the phenomena in a deterministic
      way. In fact, it is extremely difﬁcult to identify the underlying recurrences
      (the laws) that generate chaotic phenomena unless we know them already
      through another source. Chaos (determinism is present, but it is hidden) and
      chance (absence of determinism) both manifest themselves in the same way.
      Both are characterized by disorder: apparent (deterministic) in chaotic
      phenomena, real (stochastic) in random phenomena.
                                                The efﬁcacy of mathematics to describe the world     325

   If we interpret science as an attempt to algorithmically reduce the world
of experience and if the universe is a single entity, we would expect, or
rather we would like, the entire universe to be algorithmically compressible;
i.e. we would like it to be possible to concentrate the description of all of the
sequences of all of the phenomena into a series of formulas, in a sort of
‘theory of everything’.147
   As we have already said, there are numerous classes of phenomena that,
for various reasons, cannot be reduced. In addition to those we have already
cited relative to chaos, we encounter non-reducible phenomena every time,
often without considering the question’s methodological and epistemo-
logical implications, that we qualify a phenomenon as random. In reality,
the concept of randomness is a concept of convenience, that represents
either our ignorance of the laws of a phenomenon or the impossibility of
observing any recurrences for any excessive length of observation time and/
or calculation time for data processing. Strictly speaking, in fact, the fact of
not seeing a recurrence does not imply that it doesn’t exist, but just that it
may be characterized by a period superior to the observation time; to be
certain that there is no recurrence, an inﬁnite observation time would be
needed.
   Alongside the previous situations, in which we seek to identify and model
recurrences using mathematics, there are other situations in which, even
though not seeking mathematical laws, we use partially mathematical tools
in any event, i.e. tools that even though not mathematical in the strict sense,
share some characteristics with mathematics. Every time we make a com-
parison between magnitudes, we take measurements and perform oper-

   147
       ‘Theory of everything’ is the expression that originally indicated all those theories that
aimed to unite the four fundamental interactions of physics: the gravitational interaction; the
electromagnetic interaction (this, in its turn the result of the uniﬁcation of electrical and
magnetic interactions), whose intensity tends to zero as the distance tends to inﬁnity; the
strong interaction; and the weak interaction, whose ranges of action are limited to subatomic
distances. The most famous and most recent of these theories is known as superstring theory.
In its original context, the word ‘everything’ just referred to the description of elementary
particles and their interactions and didn’t indicate a theory of everything that is recognizable
in the universe. The link between the behaviour of the elementary particles and the phenom-
ena of the universe in their entirety is too indirect to allow one of these theories to be useful,
for example, for predicting the trend of the ﬁnancial market on a given day starting from laws
of subatomic physics. A theory of everything is fundamentally and essentially reductionist
and as such ineffective for a global understanding of the universe. As J. Cohen and Stewart
write: ‘The physicist’s belief that the mathematical laws of a Theory of Everything really do
govern every aspect of the universe is very like a priest’s belief that God’s laws do. The main
difference is that the priest is looking outward while the physicist looks inward. Both are
offering an interpretation of nature; neither can tell you how it works’ (1994, p. 364–65; on
this point see also, for example, Gell-Mann, 1994).
326   31 : The meaning of ‘doing mathematics’

      ations on the numerical data that come from said measurements. We make
      comparisons, however, even when we are not dealing with real magnitudes
      that can be measured. In these cases, the result of the comparison is not
      expressed as a number. In this case we talk of qualitative evaluations that
      often, for no other reason than communications convenience, we nonethe-
      less attempt to express in a quantitative form. This is sometimes carried out
      by using universally comprehensible conventions; think, for example, of the
      marks of an exam conducted in the form of an interview, in which the
      evaluation is the result of the subjective impressions that certain errors leave
      and not an objective calculation of the errors, as is the case, on the contrary,
      when the exam is conducted in the form of a written test.
         Over the past few decades, processes have been developed for the math-
      ematization of qualitative evaluations based on various hypotheses, aimed
      at the rigorous treatment of qualitative data. These are called multicriteria
      analyses (see, amongst others, Nijkamp, Rietveld and Voogd, 1991),
      decisional techniques that are useful when there are, in part or exclusively,
      qualitative elements of evaluations in the form of an ordinal number that
      expresses a scale of priority or preference, and not in the form of a cardinal
      number, the result of a measurement, i.e. a quantitative judgement. In these
      situations, due to the convenience of the cultural habit of using mental
      quantitative tools, we seek, by introducing particular hypotheses, to ‘math-
      ematize’ sensations, impressions, and judgements, that are only qualitative
      and not the result of measurements expressed in numerical form, by pro-
      jecting them onto a quantitative plane. This type of method is based on the
      assumption that the mind applies schemes of logical-deductive reasoning
      that we are not aware of but that we know the ﬁnal outcome of (the
      qualitative judgement), which, in some way, we attempt to justify and
      render rigorous by transforming it into a quantitative judgement (Nijkamp,
      Leitner and Wrigley, 1985). This is accomplished by hypothesizing schemes
      of reasoning constructed and expressed according to the formal mathemat-
      ics that we are used to in other ﬁelds; however, we know nothing of the
      ways in which the mind actually works; the mathematization that we
      perform in these decision-making techniques is merely a working hypoth-
      esis (Bertuglia and Rabino, 1990), that has a sense and an efﬁcacy from a
      practical perspective, but no more than that.
         On one hand, the method that involves making reductions and expressing
      them in a mathematical form, i.e. the application of mathematics to both
      natural and social sciences, as we have said, is imperfect from various
      viewpoints. Sometimes, in some contexts, it is extremely effective; other
      times, above all in several branches of social science, it is ineffective (Israel,
      1999). On the other hand, mathematics is a useful tool of analysis, in
                                                The efﬁcacy of mathematics to describe the world    327

practice, also when the reduction of data is too difﬁcult, or even when the
data are not even numerical.
   The conclusion that we reach from various directions is that the mind has
developed a powerful tool of thought, mathematics, that can be applied to
process data gained from experience. This tool is highly sophisticated, in
theory, but in practice the mind does not always know how to manage it
adequately or to use it appropriately. It works well in some cases, little and
badly in others, and it doesn’t work at all in numerous situations; in a word,
it is an imperfect tool. The abstraction of schemes from the world of
empirical data carried out using this tool is, beyond a certain point, imper-
fect or even fundamentally impossible; this is the case, for example, of
complexity and chaos, in which the study of the consequences of the
abstractions made, i.e. the application of the model, is too difﬁcult.148
   In Chapter 25, we touched on the question of deﬁning what mathematics
is in reality, namely what is the mental tool that we apply when we make
reductions in the enormous ﬂow of data that comes from the external world
and that would end up clogging our mental computation processes with
superﬂuous information if we don’t identify the recurrences through some
sort of mental algorithm. During the course of this book we have used
mathematical methods to describe different phenomenologies, and we have
often pointed out the shortcomings and the distortions displayed by com-
monly applied mathematical methods, in particular, the tendency to apply

  148
        In the 1960s, a logic different to the formal one, called fuzzy logic, was developed
(Zadeh, 1965), as an attempt to reproduce the schemes of thought of the human mind in a less
rigid and more effective way, in practice, than the usual formal logic. As Lofti Zadeh writes in
the preface to a book by Arnold Kaufmann (1975, p. ix): ‘The theory of fuzzy sets is in effect a
step toward the rapprochement between the precision of classical mathematics and the
pervasive imprecision of the real word: a rapprochement born of the incessant human quest
for a better understanding of mental processes and cognition.
   At present we are unable to design machines that can compete with humans in the
performance of such tasks as recognition of speech, translation of languages, comprehension
of meanings, abstraction and generalization, decision-making under uncertainty and, above
all, summarization of information.
   In large measure, our inability to design such machines stems from a fundamental differ-
ence between human intelligence on the one side and the machine on the other.
   The difference in question lies in the ability of the human brain, an ability which present
day digital computers do not possess to think and reason in imprecise, non-quantitative fuzzy
terms.
   It is the ability of humans to think and reason in imprecise, non-quantitative terms that
makes it possible for humans to decipher sloppy hand-writing, understand distorted speech,
and focus on that information that is relevant to a decision. It is the lack of this ability that
makes even the most sophisticated computer incapable of communicating with humans in
natural – rather than artiﬁcially constructed – languages’ (see also, for example, Sangalli,
1998).
328   31 : The meaning of ‘doing mathematics’

      the methods of linear mathematics to all phenomena. We have also ob-
      served how in many branches of science, in particular social sciences, at
      present it is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to provide a mathematical descrip-
      tion, as, on the contrary, it is possible to do in other areas of science, in the
      last four centuries, particularly the natural sciences.
         From what does the difﬁculty of understanding the phenomenology of
      complexity in mathematical terms originate, or better why, in this ambit,
      are we not able to associate an effective mathematical description to a
      phenomenology? Can a natural law, i.e. a recurrence observed in empirical
      data, be associated to a mathematical law, i.e. a formulation in a language
      that expresses abstract concepts in a rigorous way? Are the concepts and the
      mathematical methods at our disposal sufﬁcient, or can they be improved or
      replaced by new concepts or new methods? We would now like to reﬂect on
      these points, with a view to extending mathematical methods and making
      their application to complexity issues better and more effective. To do this,
      we need to further investigate the foundations of mathematics themselves,
      because a reﬂection of this nature could possibly generate an idea useful for
      the formalization of complexity. In Chapter 32, therefore, we will be
      making a digression into the main interpretations that have been given of
      the foundations of mathematics.
               Digression into the main
 32            interpretations of the
               foundations of
               mathematics



Introduction
In this section, we will be making a digression from the main theme of the
book, to take a brief look at the main interpretations that scientiﬁc thought
has given, at least in the last century and a half, to the foundations of
mathematics, and more generally, to the meaning of working with math-
ematics. A reﬂection on the actual meaning that is attributed to mathemat-
ics and its limitations, in fact, is necessary in order to attempt to clarify the
question of the applicability of mathematics (and of which mathematics) to
complexity, i.e. if and in what way could it be possible to formulate
mathematical laws to describe the complex phenomenology.
   The problem of answering the questions ‘what is mathematics?’, ‘from
what does it draw its foundations?’ is by no means new. Right back to the
times of Pythagoras, if not as far back as Taletes, there have been different
ideas on ‘doing mathematics’. The problem became particularly signiﬁcant
from the mid-nineteenth century onwards, following the important devel-
opment of real and complex analysis and the breakthrough of non-Euclid-
ean geometry into general culture rather than just academic circles. There
have been, and there still are, numerous trends of thought that deﬁne
mathematics in different ways and, based on such, give different meanings
to the ‘objects’ covered by the same. We will brieﬂy list them in this section,
without wanting to enter into detail; interested readers should consult the
wealth of literature on the philosophy and the history of mathematics
(merely by way of example, of the many, Weyl, 1949; Cellucci, 1967;
Boyer, 1968; Wilder, 1973; Stewart, 1981; Benacerraf and Putnam, 1983,
Kline; 1990, Maddy, 1990; Shapiro, 2000; Lolli, 2002).
330   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics




      Platonism
      How ‘real’ are the objects in the world of mathematics? From Plato’s
      perspective, the objects of geometry are only approximately realized in
      terms of the world of actual physical things. The mathematically precise
      objects of pure geometry inhabited a different world: Plato’s ideal world of
      mathematical concepts, accessible to us only via the intellect. One current
      of thought, probably the most widespread, sees mathematics from a Pla-
      tonic perspective: mathematics deals with abstract objects, entities that
      exist in a world of ideas; the images that we draw from experience are no
      more than an imperfect copy of them. These images stimulate in us the
      reminiscence of that which exists in an unreal world, independent of our
      minds, and that we in some way and in some place have known. The
      Platonic approach, which is clearly derived from the thought of the classical
      era, is often that which dominates scholastic teaching. For a Platonic
      mathematician, one can talk about the ‘truth’ of a mathematical concept,
      like a mirror of the world of ideas: a proposition is true if it reﬂects one
      characteristic of an object of which we have a reminiscence from the world
      of ideas. For a Platonist, research in mathematics, basically, does not invent,
      but discovers. Objects and properties are discovered that ‘exist’ somewhere,
      even if up until now no one has ever seen them. As, for example, the
      theoretical physicist Roger Penrose (1989, 1994), a declared Platonist,
      writes (1989, p. 95): ‘The Mandelbrot set is not an invention of the
      human mind: it was a discovery. Like Mount Everest, the Mandelbrot set
      is just there!’ (see p. 341 following, note 162).
         Platonist mathematics is substantially a form of realism. The mathemat-
      ical objects ‘exist’ even though in an immaterial form, mathematics ‘exists’,
      the number indicated by p ‘exists’, no more and no less than whole num-
      bers, than all of the other real and complex numbers. This is true on the
      Earth just as it is in any other place in the universe, whether or not it is
      discovered by mathematicians, almost as if it were a divine creation. Math-
      ematical knowledge assumes, in this framework, a completely different
      meaning to that which it has in empirical sciences. We enter into contact
      with the objects of empirical science, belonging to the real world, in a more
      or less random way, through our senses; on the other hand, according to the
      Platonic vision, we have a very different, almost mystical, relationship with
      the ‘metaphysical’ objects of mathematics, as if they belonged to a tran-
      scendental world. The Platonic realists, however, do not provide any an-
      swer to the question of ‘where’ these mathematical objects are assumed to
                                                                     Formalism and ‘les Bourbaki’    331

‘exist’ and to ‘how’ we enter into contact with them: mathematical concepts
simply ‘exist’ and are said to be ‘intuitive’.



Formalism and ‘les Bourbaki’
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, new elements in the develop-
ment of mathematics, such as the introduction of non-Euclidean geom-
etries, the extensive study of functions in the complex ﬁeld, and the new
notions regarding numbers and sets, progressively led to the rejection of the
Galilean vision of a direct connection between empirical objects and math-
ematical objects (the ‘felt experiences’ and the ‘certain demonstrations’ as
Galileo Galilei called them149). Mathematics ceased to ﬁnd its foundation
in the concrete experience of an empirical reality. As Enrico Giusti observes:
‘If mathematics can no longer ﬁnd its justiﬁcation in nature, it will ﬁnd it in
freedom ( . . . ) The need for mathematics retreats towards the most interior
regions of demonstrations, which, however, can start on their way only
after the liberal choice of the deﬁnitions and the axioms has been fully
exerted’ (1999, p. 19, our translation).
   This is how the formalist current of thought was established, in particular
thanks to the work of David Hilbert. According to this interpretation, math-
ematics is seen as a simple manipulation of symbols, made according to a
grammar and coherent (at least in its intentions). We are no longer dealing
with a realist perspective. There are no objects to discover, hidden some-
where; there are only symbols, postulates, and formal rules of deduction of
concepts (propositions) that are already contained in the original postulates.
This is a complete antithesis of Platonism. For a formalist, the concept of
truth refers to the context of the assumed postulates and is strictly limited to
its formal coherence with the latter: ‘truth’ now means ‘coherence’.150

   149
       Galileo Galilei sets ‘le sensate esperienze’ against ‘le certe dimostrazioni’ and discusses
the different roles they have in the ‘new science’ in his book Dialogo sopra i due massimi
sistemi del mondo, tolemaico e copernicano, published in Florence in 1632; the full original
Italian text is available on the website http://www.astroﬁlitrentini.it/mat/testi/dialogo.html.
   150
       The fundamental criticism of formalism stems from this identiﬁcation between truth
and coherence, and is well-described in a passage from a singular book on logic written by the
mathematician Raymond Smullyan:
   ‘The formalist position really strikes me as most strange! Physicists and engineers certainly
don’t think like that. Suppose a corps of engineers has a bridge built and the next day the army
is going to march over it. The engineers want to know whether the bridge will support the
weight or whether it will collapse. It certainly won’t do them one bit of good to be told: ‘‘Well,
in some axiom systems it can be proved that the bridge will hold, and in other axiom systems
332   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics

         The ambitions of the formalist school of rewriting all of mathematics in a
      complete and coherent system of postulates, to which rigorous logical–
      deductive laws could be applied, underwent a dramatic redimensioning
      following the demonstration of the two well-known theorems of the formal
      incompleteness of arithmetics by Kurt Gödel, a staunch Platonist, in 1931.
      Gödel’s theorems are: (1) every consistent axiomatic system (i.e. such that a
      statement and its negation cannot be proven in it) sufﬁcient to express the
      development of the elementary arithmetic of the integers, always contains
      statements that can neither be proven to be true, nor be proven to be false,
      using its basic axioms (ﬁrst theorem of incompleteness); (2) the consistency
      of the system itself is one of the unprovable statements using its basic
      axioms (second theorem of incompleteness).
         In more approximate terms, simplifying the matter somewhat, Gödel
      showed that mathematics cannot be demonstrated as ‘true’ from within
      it.151 The collapse of the ancient idea of mathematics as a synonym of
      ‘truth’, caused by Gödel’s theorems, is well-summarized by John Barrow:
      ‘it has been suggested that if we were to deﬁne a religion to be a system of
      thought which contains unprovable statements, so it contains an element of

      it can be proven that the bridge will fall.’’ The engineers want to know whether the bridge will
      really hold or not! And to me (and other Platonists) the situation is the same with the
      continuum hypothesis: is there a set intermediate in size between N and P(N) or isn’t there?
      If the formalist is going to tell me that in one axiom system there is and in another there isn’t, I
      would reply that that does me no good unless I know which of those two axiom systems is the
      correct one! But to the formalist, the very notion of correctness, other than mere consistency,
      is either meaningless or is itself dependent on which axiom system is taken. Thus the deadlock
      between the formalist and the Platonist is pretty hopeless! I don’t think that either side can
      budge the other on iota!’ (1992, p. 249, italics original).
         151
             Gödel’s theorems were the answer to the widespread desire, in the era between the
      nineteenth and twentieth centuries, to deﬁne rigorous formal foundations for mathematics,
      that reached its height on August 8, 1900, at the 2nd International Congress of Mathematics
      in Paris, when David Hilbert, a well-known professor from the University of Göttingen, held
      a conference in which, summarizing the current progress of mathematics, he listed 23
      unresolved problems, as a subject for research for the new century. The second of those
      problems asked whether it was possible to demonstrate that a given system of axioms, placed
      at the foundations of arithmetics, was compatible. The idea, in Hilbert’s mind, was that, if the
      system of axioms is compatible, then with a ﬁnite number of logical operations it cannot lead
      to a contradictory result, while, if it is incompatible, a contradiction in the consequences of
      the axioms, sooner or later, can be found. The formalist programme asked for a response: yes,
      compatible system; no incompatible system. It was actually Gödel, 30 years later, who
      showed this programme to be unachievable, proving that any system of axioms at the basis
      of arithmetics inevitably leads to propositions that are not true and not false, i.e. undecidable.
      Gödel’s omnia works were published in English, a few years ago, in three volumes, edited by
      Feferman et al. (1986, 1990, 1995). For a general illustration of Gödel’s theorems, see Nagel
      and Newman (1958), Benacerraf (1967), Penrose (1989); an in-depth presentation of the
      ﬁgure and works of Gödel can be found in Guerriero (2001).
                                                                       Formalism and ‘les Bourbaki’     333

faith, then Gödel has taught us that not only is mathematics a religion but it
is the only religion able to prove itself to be one’ (1992b, p. 19).152
   On December 10, 1943, in a café in Paris’s Latin Quarter, a group of
young mathematicians, students of the École Normale Supérieure, formed a
club that they named Nicolas Bourbaki;153 the members of this group, who
initially wanted to be considered almost like a secret society of revolution-
aries, were often nicknamed ‘the Bourbaki’ (les Bourbaki). The group
proposed to resume the formalist approach but on less ambitious bases
than those of Hilbert, without giving up the use of an absolute formal rigour
and avoiding the use of intuition (Marshaal, 2000). This formulation also
entailed the refusal of Poincaré’s methods, a dominant ﬁgure in French
mathematics in the ﬁrst few decades of the twentieth century, who, accord-
ing to the Bourbaki, used intuition too often, without rigorously demon-
strating his claims. The Bourbaki school (because it can be considered a
bona ﬁde school, given the widespread popularity of its ideas, particularly
within French mathematical schools) is still today the standard bearer of the
formalist approach: mathematics is only made up of formal syntactic rules

  152
        Another well-known theorem demonstrated by the Polish mathematician Alfred Tarski
in 1933 (Tarski, 1956), two years after Gödel’s theorems, posing further limitations on
axiomatic systems. The essence of Tarski’s theorem, generalizing somewhat, can be expressed
in the statement: ‘no program can decide, for each sentence of number theory, whether the
sentence is true or false’ (see Hofstadter, 1979). According to this theorem, to decide the
truthfulness of mathematical propositions in the universe of mathematics, a (meta)theory is
needed, of which said universe is just an object, that proves the non-contradictoriness of
existing mathematics. Tarski demonstrates that no logically coherent language can be gifted
with semantic completeness and that a hierarchy of (meta)languages needs to be conceived,
each of which is coherent, but none of which is sufﬁciently wealthy to express its entire
semantic content. The semantic completeness of a given language can only be found with a
metalanguage at a higher level. Only in this way does it become possible to distinguish the
statements of logic from those on logic, avoiding problems of self-referencing that emerge in
the case of propositions like ‘this statement is false’. In the light of Tarski’s theorem, talking of
mathematical truth is inevitably vague if the language is informal, or leads to an inﬁnite
deferment to rigorous metalanguages. If Gödel had highlighted that the notion of demon-
strability is weaker than that of truthfulness (because there are statements than cannot be
demonstrated as true, but by no means are necessarily false), Tarski makes the very concept of
arithmetic truth totter. Gabriele Lolli writes, ironically: ‘Each realist mathematician should
hang a sign in front of his workplace with the words Memento Tarski’ (2002, p. 81, our
translation). On this point see also Tarski (1967) and Barrow (1992b).
   153
        The pseudonym draws its origins from the name of Charles Denis Sauter Bourbaki,
who was not even a mathematician, but a general in Napoleon III’s regiment, of Greek origin,
who distinguished himself in the 1870 Franco-Prussian war. The reasons for the choice of this
pseudonym can be found in the aura of folklore and mystery, that was not lacking in
studentesque elements, that enveloped the group of young mathematicians in Paris in the
early 1930s; these reasons, together with many aspects of the activity of the Bourbaki circle,
are extensively illustrated in the original, well-documented and in-depth monograph on the
Société secrète des mathématiciens Bourbaki edited by Maurice Marshaal (2000).
334   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics

      applied to a set of symbols, starting from a set of axioms. The group
      compiled a famous monumental treatise in ten volumes (called books)
      and more than 30 tomes (called ﬁles), published at irregular intervals
      from 1939 onwards and not yet complete, Éléments de mathématique154
      (Bourbaki, 1939–1998), in which they wanted to re-present all of math-
      ematics from the same and unique formalist perspective. For formalists,
      contrary to the opinion of the Platonists, mathematics is not a discovery, but
      an invention, a creation of the mathematician who acts as a skilful, yet
      rigid, applier of formal rules.
         Today, the majority of mathematicians, probably including those that
      were educated under the Bourbaki school, lean more towards Platonic
      inspiration, i.e. they are convinced that their afﬁrmations regard objects
      that have a real and objective existence somewhere, even though such are
      not tangible (Giusti, 1999). Nonetheless, the formalist school, and the
      Bourbaki in particular, made a signiﬁcant contribution to mathematical
      thought. First of all, it provided an answer to the difﬁculties that were
      being debated in mathematics. Perhaps, more than difﬁculties, we should
      talk of a real crisis in the foundations, a crisis that reﬂected the general crisis
      in science at the beginning of the twentieth century.
         The formalist approach forced mathematicians to thoroughly review the
      basic axioms and led to a rigorous development of formal and logical
      techniques. Following this work, from the 1930s onwards, Alan Turing
      brought to light the fundamental question regarding the concept of com-
      putability for the system of real numbers, i.e. the question of whether the
      decimal representation (or that of any other basis) of a number can be
      generated by an algorithm155 (Turing, 1937; see also Cutland, 1980;

        154
             Note in the title the explicit use of the singular ‘de mathématique’, whereas in French
      the plural form ‘des mathématiques’ should be used, to underline the unitary vision founded
      on rigorous formalism that the Bourbaki group proposed for all branches of mathematics.
        155
             Without going into the technical details, we can observe that, if for a given real number
      we have an algorithm that is able to provide all of the decimal places in a ﬁnite time, then we
      can say that we are in possession of a rule to know the inﬁnite sequences of its decimal places.
      This is a computable number. For example, 3:47 is a computable number, because the rule to
      generate all of the decimal places is: ‘repeat 47 continuously’, therefore we can immediately
      say that the one thousandth decimal ﬁgure is 7, even without expressing (or calculating) all of
      the previous ﬁgures. Various numerical sets are computable. For example, all rational
      numbers, but also the roots of integers, whatever index they are; logarithms are computable,
      and even p and the basis of natural logarithms e (each of these, in fact, can be expressed as the
      sum of a particular numerical series). A number like 0.12112211122211112222 . . . is also
      computable, because the rule that generates the decimal places is immediately identiﬁable. On
      the other hand, a number, even though deﬁned in a logical and non-ambiguous way, is not
      computable, if its deﬁnition is, in practice, inexecutable. To better clarify the question, we
      have illustrated below an example taken from Cutland (1980). Let us imagine we have to
                                                                           Formalism and ‘les Bourbaki’      335

Herken, 1983; Penrose, 1989). It was realized that non-computable num-
bers, i.e. the numbers for which there is no algorithm to calculate the
sequence of decimal places, represent the great majority of real numbers
(technically, it is said that they represent a non-numerable inﬁnity in the
continuum of real numbers). The consequences of this, from a methodo-
logical and epistemological point of view, are surprising, to say the least,
insofar as computable numbers, all of those that we ordinarily use in all
kinds of measurement and in calculations made by machines, turn out to be
nothing more than ‘rare exceptions’ in the ‘background’ of the continuum
of real numbers that was presented by Cantor, a background that now
appears to be ‘ﬁlled’ with non-computable numbers.
   The awareness of the existence of non-computable numbers, i.e. of
calculations that do not lead to a result in ﬁnite time, that thus surfaced
into the scientiﬁc conscience, represented, alongside Gödel’s theorem, the
negative response to Hilbert’s tenth problem (see p. 332, note 151), the
famous Entscheidungsproblem, the problem of decidability, i.e. the prob-
lem of whether there is a general algorithmic procedure that can, in prin-
ciple, decide on the validity or falsity of any mathematical proposition.
Given that any mathematical problem translates into a series of proposi-
tions, the Entscheidungsproblem translated into the question of whether,
from a conceptual point of view, an algorithmic procedure existed that was
able to solve any mathematical problem, i.e. a procedure that once started
to be processed on an appropriately deﬁned abstract calculating machine,


write a certain positive number A that is less than 1, whose successive decimal places are all 0
or 1. A is, therefore, in the form 0:a1 a2 . . . an . . . , where the generic place an can only be 0 or 1.
The rule (algorithm) to write A is as follows: to decide if the decimal place an is 0 or 1, let us
consider the number p and examine its decimal places in sequence from left to right. If in the
inﬁnite decimal places of p we ﬁnd, somewhere, a sequence of the number 7 that repeats itself
n times in succession, then we put an ¼ 1; if, on the other hand, we never ﬁnd (and this is the
crucial point) a sequence of this type, then we put an ¼ 0. The deﬁnition of the procedure is
clear and unambiguous, but in operational terms, it does not work. By applying this rule, in
fact, when we ﬁnd the sequence of n number 7s we were looking for, then we can assume that
an ¼ 1 without any problem. The problem, on the other hand, lies in the fact that, while we
are looking for this sequence, we do not know whether it exists, somewhere, in the decimal
representation of p and we haven’t found it yet, but sooner or later we will ﬁnd it, or if we
never ﬁnd it, simply because it doesn’t exist. We can never know it, unless we ﬁnd it: the
search that is made on the inﬁnite decimal places of p can end only with a positive answer and
never with a negative one, as the latter case would only be the never-achievable outcome of an
inﬁnite search. In other words, if for a given value of n, we do not ﬁnd a sequence of n number
7s, we cannot decide to interrupt the search: the fact that up until now we haven’t found it,
doesn’t authorize us to conclude that such a sequence doesn’t exists, therefore, in reality, we
will never be able to assume that an ¼ 0. This makes the number A uncomputable. This is the
basis for the link between uncomputability and logical undecidability.
336   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics

      called a Turing machine (Turing, 1937), gave a result in a ﬁnite time. The
      negative response suggested by the existence of non-computable numbers,
      signiﬁed, in other words, the awareness that not all mathematical problems
      can be resolved in a ﬁnite time.



      Constructivism
      Towards the end of the nineteenth century, following the attempt to estab-
      lish the entire framework of mathematics on a rigorous logical basis starting
      from the little-developed theory of sets, an attempt led by ﬁgures such as
      Gottlob Frege and Giuseppe Peano, the inevitability of internal contradic-
      tions came to light, the so-called antinomies (often, although inappro-
      priately called logical paradoxes), such as Russell’s (1903) famous
      antinomy.156

        156
             Bertrand Russell told the mathematician Gottlob Frege of his antinomy in a letter dated
      1902, just before the latter published the result of his lengthy work of logical formalization of
      arithmetics on set bases in a book. The antinomy was then published and discussed in
      Chapter 10 of Russell’s The Principles of Mathematics (1903). Russell’s antinomy is formu-
      lated as follows. Let us imagine dividing all sets into two large groups: (1) the sets that are not
      elements of themselves, called ordinary sets (for example, the set of cats is not a cat and
      therefore is not an element of the set of cats), and (2) sets that are elements of themselves,
      called non-ordinary sets (for example the set of all the sets of cats grouped according to the
      various breeds, is still a set of cats, and therefore belongs to the set of all of the sets of cats, i.e.
      is an element in itself; in the same way also the set of all abstract concepts is itself an abstract
      concept and therefore and element of itself). Let us now consider the set N of all the (inﬁnite)
      ordinary sets (the set of the sets that do not belong to themselves) and let us ask ourselves: is N
      an element of itself or not? Let us try to answer (Devlin, 1988, 1998):

      1. If we respond yes, i.e. if we say that N belongs to itself, this means that, by the same
         deﬁnition of N, N has the property of not having itself as an element; if this is true, it
         cannot belong to itself, and therefore we fall into contradiction.
      2. If we respond no, i.e. if we say that N does not belong to itself, this means that, by the same
         deﬁnition of N, N has the property of having itself among its elements, and therefore, we
         fall into contradiction again.

      What made Russell’s antinomy so profound was its absolute simplicity. It only used funda-
      mental concepts on which practically all mathematics is based. Russell’s antinomy, in reality,
      was a simpliﬁed version, so as to speak, of a previous antinomy, which, in 1897, Cantor
      himself, the creator of the theory of the sets, had found.
         Setting aside the technical aspects that link it to Cantor’s, Russell’s antinomy is not new,
      also because it is none other than a reformulation of the old antinomy known as the paradox
      of Epimenides the Cretan (who lived in the sixth century BC) according to which: ‘Epime-
      nides, Cretan, claims that all Cretans lie’, translated more simply as ‘I always lie’. The
      paradox is attributed to St. Paul, who involuntarily fell into the trap citing Epimenides in a
                                                                                  Constructivism    337

   One of the answers given to the ferment of uncertainty caused by logical
paradoxes at the beginning of the century was constructivism (also indi-
cated as intuitionism) that derived from a vision that had already been
proposed several decades earlier by Leopold Kronecker, in open and po-
lemic antithesis to Cantor and Dedekind’s development of the theory of
inﬁnite sets, which he considered to be metaphysics and not science. The
non-realistic vision of constructivism holds that mathematical entities that
we are unable to tangibly experience, such as inﬁnite sets, cannot be taken
into consideration (Heyting, 1956). In other words, mathematical con-
structivism asserts that it is necessary to ﬁnd (‘construct’) a mathematical
object to prove that it exists: when we assume that an object does not exist,
and derive a contradiction from that assumption, we still have not found it,
and therefore not proved its existence.
   For constructivists, mathematics is none other that a series of proposi-
tions that can be construed by means of a ﬁnite number of deductive
operations on natural numbers only, the only acceptable starting point,
that are assumed almost as if they were the subject of a revelation. In this
regard, Kronecker made the famous remark ‘God created the integers, all
else is the work of man’ (quoted in Cajori, 1919).157 Constructivists refuse,
retaining them beyond the scope of mathematics, all proofs ab absurdo (the
so-called reductio ad absurdum): a proposition can be true or false if it can
be demonstrated as such in a number of ﬁnite operations, but it can also be
neither true nor false, if neither its truthfulness or its falsity can be demon-
strated in a ﬁnite number of operations. From this it follows that the non-
truthfulness of a statement does not guarantee its falsity. Falsity must be
demonstrated as such, not as a ‘non-truth’. Constructivism did not win a
great deal of popularity with mathematicians,158 nor with other scientists


letter to Titus, in which he wrote: ‘Even one of their own prophets has said, ‘‘Cretans are
always liars, evil brutes, lazy gluttons. This testimony is true. Therefore, rebuke them sharply,
so that they will be sound in the faith’’ ’ (Titus, 1, 12–13, Bible’s New International Version).
See Weyl (1949), on Russell’s antinomy and on other philosophical matters connected to it.
   157
       ‘Die ganze Zahl schuf der liebe Gott, alles Ubrige ist Menschenwerk’ (Cajori, 1919). To
be precise, this position is known as ﬁnitism, an extreme form of constructivism, according to
which a mathematical object does not exist unless it can be constructed from natural numbers
in a ﬁnite number of steps, whereas most constructivists, in contrast, allow a countably
inﬁnite number of steps.
   158
       Here, we will restrict ourselves to remembering the Dutch mathematician Luitzen
Egbertus Jan Brouwer, one of the most dogmatic supporters of constructivism (Brouwer,
1913; see also Heyting, 1956; Van Sigt, 1990), editor of the very important German period-
ical Mathematische Annalen. For the entire time he held this position, Brouwer stubbornly
refused to accept any article that used proofs ab absurdo. After a long struggle in often very
harsh tones, Hilbert, who incidentally had helped Brouwer in 1912 to obtain the chair of the
338   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics

      that make extensive use of mathematics, such as physicists. Physical theor-
      ies, such as quantum theory and general relativity, in reality, made wide use
      of a non-constructivist way of reasoning.
         In complete antithesis to Platonic realism, constructivism is totally an-
      thropocentric. There is no mathematics outside of natural numbers and
      everything that can be deduced from them must be done so in a ﬁnite number
      of operations. But a constructivist could never say whether the very intuition
      of natural numbers is the same for all people and at all times.159
         Note that, although the constructivist vision was developed in the nine-
      teenth century, some of the elements that qualify it are not that distant from
      the characteristics that geometry was thought to have, in its most remote
      pre-Greek origins. Pre-Greek geometry, for example, also does not use the
      metaphysical entities typical of Platonism, and it is not concerned with a
      rigorous deductive–logical formalism, nonexistent before Euclid, while it
      focuses, instead, on resolving tangible problems such as, for example, land
      surveying.
         The fundamental message of constructivisim is that there will always be
      undecidable propositions. This concept is strictly linked to the question that
      we mentioned a little earlier, regarding the meaning of non-computable real
      numbers, brought to light by Turing in the 1830s. At present, we do not
      know whether the nature of the world we are immersed in is such that it
      includes non-computable elements; in other words, we do not know
      whether the laws of nature are all computable, i.e. whether they provide a
      result in ﬁnite time, or whether they contain non-computable elements, in a
      framework compliant to that of the constructivist perspective. In the ﬁrst
      case, we will be able to ‘manage’ the numbers obtained; in the second case,
      on the other hand, we ﬁnd ourselves unable to treat non-computable
      numbers that evade an algorithmic deﬁnition and therefore an ‘understand-
      ing’ in terms of logic, which would render a complete description of the
      world impossible.
         Finally, it is important to observe that the essence of Gödel’s theorems of
      incompleteness, that had managed to shatter Hilbert’s formalist pro-

      theory of sets at the University of Amsterdam, managed to get the editorial committee
      disbanded and reconstituted without Brouwer, a person whose behaviour was considered
      tormented, unbalanced and even paranoiac by his contemporaries (Barrow, 1992ab, Van
      Dalen, 1999).
         159
             It should be noted that constructivism is often confused with mathematical intuition-
      ism, but, in fact, intuitionism is only one kind of constructivism. Intuitionism maintains that
      the foundations of mathematics lie in the individual mathematician’s intuition, thereby
      making mathematics into an intrinsically subjective activity. Constructivism does not, and
      is entirely consonant with, an objective view of mathematics.
                                                                                      Constructivism     339

gramme, lies in the self-referential nature of the problem: the arithmetic
that wants to ﬁnd its foundations in itself, justifying itself in arithmetic
form. More generally, we encounter self-referential situations every time
that the symbol of an object gets confused with the object and becomes an
object itself, making the difference between the use of a word and the
mention of a word disappear. In these cases, our logic inevitably ﬁnds
elements of undecidability. This is what is found at the origin of Russell’s
and Cantor’s antinomies, in which the self-referencing originates from the
introduction of the idea of the ‘set of sets’, and of Epimenides the Cretan’s
antinomy (paradox) (see p. 336, note 156), in which the self-referencing lies
in the fact that ‘I am talking about what I am saying’. The situations
without a logical outlet that self-referencing leads to160 are the consequence
of an intrinsic limitation of our minds and of our way of thinking.161 It is


  160
          The tippler that the little prince meets in the story of the same name by Saint-Exupéry
ﬁnds himself in a situation of this type (see the quote at the beginning of this part).
    161
          As regards this last point, we quote Smullyan again:
‘ ‘‘Now, the Russell and Cantor paradoxes are more serious and disturbing because they show
that there is something basically wrong with our way of thinking. What I have in mind is this:
Doesn’t it seem obvious that given any property, there exists the set of all things having that
property?’’
    ‘‘It would certainly seem so!’’ said Annabelle.
    ‘‘That seems obvious enough,’’ said Alexander.
    ‘‘That’s the whole trouble!’’ said the Sorcerer. ‘‘This principle – called the unlimited
abstraction principle – the principle that every property determines the set of all things having
that property – that principle indeed seems self-evident, yet it leads to a logical contradic-
tion!’’
    ‘‘How so?’’ asked Annabelle.
    ‘‘Il leads to the Russell paradox as well as the Cantor paradox. Suppose that it were really
true that for any property, there exists the set of all things having that property. Well, take the
property of being an ordinary set. Then there must exist the set B of all ordinary sets, and we
get the Russell paradox: the set B can be neither a member of itself nor not a member of itself
without presenting a contradiction. Thus the unlimited abstraction principle leads to Russell’s
paradox. It also leads to the Cantor paradox, since we can consider the property of being a
set, and so there is then the set of all sets, and this set is on the one hand as large as any set can
be, but on the other hand, for any set there is a larger set (by Cantor’s theorem), and so there
must be a set larger than the set of all sets, which is absurd. Thus the fallacy of the Cantor
paradox is that there is such a thing as the set of all sets, and the fallacy of Russell’s paradox is
that there is such a thing as the set of all ordinary sets. Yet, the unlimited abstraction principle,
which seems so obvious, leads to these paradoxes, and hence cannot be true. The fact that it
seems true is what I meant when I said that there was something basically wrong with our
naı̈ve way of thinking about sets.
    The discovery of these paradoxes was at ﬁrst very disturbing, since it seemed to threaten
that mathematics might be inconsistent with logic. A reconstruction of the foundations of
mathematics was necessary which I will tell you about next time.’’ ’ (1992, p. 238–239, italics
original).
340   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics

      precisely in this limitation that the origins of Godel’s theorems can be
      found.
         So self-referencing implies that there are situations of undecidability and,
      therefore, non-computable operations; this means that by adopting the
      constructivist viewpoint, we cannot achieve complete knowledge and an
      effective description of the world. This is true if the time needed for the
      calculation is inﬁnite, but even if the time needed is ﬁnite but ‘too’ long, for
      example longer than the life of the universe; in practice there is no differ-
      ence: neither case leads to a result.




      Experimental mathematics
      In recent years, especially following the signiﬁcant development of infor-
      mation technology and, in particular, of automatic iterative calculation
      methods, a vision of mathematics has been developed that we can call
      experimental (Barrow, 1992ab). More than a philosophical deﬁnition,
      and all the more reason, a school of thought, perhaps it is more appropriate
      to speak about, pragmatically, research ambit and methodology in a sector
      that is totally new with respect to the past, open and made practicable by
      new technological means. Research is conducted essentially on ‘objects’
      constructed using automatic calculation procedures, iterations of formulae
      and graphic visualizations on a computer screen. The graphic visualizations
      in particular are fundamental. They represent the only tool useful to high-
      light the properties of certain ﬁgures that are created from the iterative
      formulae that they generate and that are not intuitable or predictable by any
      other means.
         A large part of the development of fractal geometry and of its applica-
      tions is only possible in this new experimental formulation of mathematics,
      which, in a certain sense, brings together the investigations conducted by a
      mathematician with the research work of a scientist in a laboratory. We are
      no longer dealing with just demonstrating theorems, but also of observing,
      in a strict sense, the properties of formulae, equations, etc. This is particu-
      larly important in the mathematical study of nonlinear dynamics, of chaos,
      and of complexity. For example, the Feigenbaum tree (Figures 22.2–22.4)
      and the Mandelbrot set are fractal objects constructed using algorithmic
      procedures that we would never have been able to visualize, describe, and
      examine, or even conceive, even though in possession of the elementary
      formulae that are at their origin and of the techniques to process them, if we
      had not had the technological means at our disposal for the creation of the
                                                          The paradigm of the cosmic computer     341

images that derived from these formulae and that, in a certain sense, make
them tangible.162



The paradigm of the cosmic computer in the vision
of experimental mathematics
Up until the end of the Renaissance era and Aristotelianism, the universe
was considered to be a large organism, which displayed Plato-inspired
geometric harmony. At the end of the seventeenth century, in Newton’s
time, when the pendulum clock had been signiﬁcantly perfected and was
ﬁnding widespread application, the mechanistic perspective (or paradigm,
as we would call it in contemporary scientiﬁc language) was dominant,
according to which the universe works like a huge clock (a ‘cosmic clock’),
  162
       One of the possible extensions of the logistic map to the complex ﬁeld, the simplest and
certainly the most well-known case, is the following map:

                                        znþ1 ¼ z2n þ c                                  (32:1)

where z is a complex variable and c is a complex parameter. By separating the real
(xn ¼ Re zn ) and imaginary (yn ¼ Im zn ) components, the map (32.1) is transformed into
the following two-dimensional map with real variables:

                        xnþ1 ¼ x2n  y2n þ Re c ynþ1 ¼ 2xn yn þ Im c                    (32:2)

Equation (32.1) can be understood, and therefore iterated in two different ways:

1. A complex value is established for parameter c and the region of the complex plane (or
   ‘Argand plane’) in which the initial values z1 of (32.1) are examined, which generate a
   sequence of zn (an orbit) that does not tend towards inﬁnity, but towards an attractor. The
   z1 from which such orbits originate deﬁne the basin of attraction of the attractor, the
   boundary of which is called the Julia set for that given value of c.
2. In (32.1) we assume that Re z1 ¼ Im z1 ¼ 0 and we examine which values of c generate a
   sequence of zn (an orbit) that does not tend towards inﬁnity, but remains limited in the
   complex plane; the set of such points c constitutes the Mandelbrot set (Figure 32.1).

The Mandelbrot set re-proposes geometric properties in a different form that correspond to
some of those described by the Feigenbaum tree generated by the logistic map: in this regard,
this is the most famous case interpretable as a chaotic dynamic in the complex ﬁeld. The
Mandelbrot set is characterized by very particular properties that we will not be discussing
here. They are illustrated in a wide number of books and articles, both speciﬁcally dedicated
to chaos (for example, Mandelbrot, 1986; Peitgen and Richter, 1986; Gleick, 1987; Devaney,
1989, 1992; Stewart, 1989; Falconer, 1990; Pickover, 1990; Schroeder, 1991; Casti, 1994;
Cohen and Stewart, 1994), and that mention the subject marginally with respect to other
topics (for example Penrose, 1989; Bertuglia and Vaio, 1997; Puu, 2000); interested readers
are invited to consult these texts.
342   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics




              Figure 32.1 The Mandelbrot set(2 # Rez # þ 0:8;  1:25 # Imz # þ 1:25).



      in itself a metaphor of determinism. In the second half of the nineteenth
      century, however, in the midst of the second industrial revolution, the
      dominant metaphor was that of the steam engine. The in-depth studies
      that had been conducted in the ﬁeld of gases and steam engines, aimed at
      perfecting the latter, had led to a signiﬁcant development in thermodynam-
      ics theory and had established the idea of an arrow of time, i.e. of a
      temporal asymmetry, that had not been previously conceived, that sur-
      passed Newton and Kant’s Euclidean and isotropic spatial–temporal
      schema. In that cultural era, the industrialized West, in analogy to the
      metaphor of the steam engine, had matured a concept of the universe as a
      huge machine dominated by exchanges and ﬂows of all types of energy
      (Dioguardi, 2001).
         Today’s technology leads us to consider the treatment of information as
      the dominant metaphor and, in relation to this, to assume the computer,
      obviously meant in a very general sense of ‘machine that runs a calculation
      program’, as a paradigm in our attempt to understand the world (Barrow,
      1992ab). The computer is not only a paradigm, but also the real foundation
      and the engine of the enormous development in experimental mathematics
      over the past few decades, a development that has taken place by adopting a
      perspective that in practice is not that distant from the realist one, therefore
      in antithesis with the formalist one.163
        163
            James Gleick (1987) tells how Benoı̂t Mandelbrot, the inventor (according to the
      constructivist perspective) or the discoverer (according to the Platonic one) of fractals, aban-
      doned France, the country he had grown up in and had been educated in, but where math-
      ematical research was dominated by the Bourbaki group, to travel to the United States to IBM.
      There Mandelbrot found a cultural environment that was less rigid and more open to the new
      way of ‘doing mathematics’, that which we have called experimental, which he adopted.
                                             Platonism, formalism and constructivism   343

   In the evolution of scientiﬁc thought, the perspective of experimental
mathematics appeared as one of the most important steps, an authentic
new category of thought, a manifestation of the culture of this era. By
adopting the vision of experimental mathematics (sometimes called com-
putational mathematics) and by taking the computer as a paradigm of the
world (‘the cosmic computer’), as the watch had been to the mechanistic
vision that sought deterministic laws at the origin of the observed dynamics,
we could ask ourselves whether the evolution and the structure of the
universe itself should not be considered as the manifestation of a recursive
calculation. We could ask ourselves, that is, whether the laws of mathemat-
ics and those of society should be sought (or conceived) in a recursive form,
as if they were a calculation program; in other words, if the world functions
and evolves due to the effect of a sort of large and universal calculation
program.
   The vision that imposes the laws of nature in a symmetrical and invariant
form, such as those provided by classical dynamics, is in line with the
Platonic vision: the laws within which nature mirrors itself and that control
it ‘exist’ somewhere. It is the task of the scientist to discover them and
mathematics is one of the tools used to do this. According to the formalist
vision, however, the image of the world is that of an all-comprehensive
mathematical law, logically necessary and absolutely general, able to ac-
count for any sequence of observations in the form of pure logical connec-
tions. The vision that is founded on the image of a cosmic computer is closer
to the notions of constructivism. There are neither transcendent nor imma-
nent deterministic laws, i.e. that ‘exist’ at the origins of the observed
dynamic. On the contrary it is just a calculation program, whose results,
i.e. the general dynamics of the world, we (also) describe by using a tool
such as mathematics.



A comparison between Platonism, formalism,
and constructivism in mathematics
The study of mathematical objects such as fractals, conducted using the
methodologies of experimental mathematics, leads to the adoption of elem-
ents of all three of the above interpretations of mathematics. The most
relevant of all is the Platonic realistic vision, in which the images of the
fractals represent ‘existing’ mathematical objects that are simply visualized
by means of an approximation of a purely technical nature. In the non-
realistic vision of formalism, on the other hand, fractal ﬁgures are taken
into consideration insofar as they are based on rigorously deﬁned formulae.
344   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics

      Lastly, the antirealist constructivist vision gives fundamental signiﬁcance to
      the method by means of which such objects are produced, but does not ﬁll
      the gap between a simple calculation procedure iterated by a machine a
      ﬁnite number of times, and the abstract idea that we have of the object,
      which goes beyond the simple graphic image produced by the machine, but
      refers to the outcome (or rather the limit) of an iteration repeated an inﬁnite
      number of times.164
         Let us look further into the diversities and the limitations of the contri-
      butions of the three approaches, still with the aim of better clarifying the
      meaning of ‘doing mathematics’, by referring, for the sake of convenience,
      to a particular case of a fractal: the Mandelbrot set (see p. 341, note 162).
         The constructivist vision gives its important contribution when it warns
      us against the hasty and superﬁcial use of certain concepts and deﬁnitions,
      such as, for example, the concept of the boundary line of a geometric ﬁgure
      that we would take from elementary geometry, a boundary line between an
      ‘inside’ and an ‘outside’ that are not clearly deﬁned in speciﬁc ﬁgures such
      as, for example, the Mandelbrot set. This, in actual fact, does not have an
      ‘inside’ and an ‘outside’ separated by a line in the usual sense of elementary
      Euclidean geometry, which has a realistic and Platonic perspective and
      according to which the lines ‘exist’ and we conceive them ‘intuitively’ as
      unidimensional objects.165
         According to Platonism, the Mandelbrot set ‘was already there’, i.e. it
      ‘existed’ even before it was seen (Penrose, 1989). However, we would never
      have been able to ﬁnd it without the use of mental processes and methods
      that, in reality, are unrelated to the Platonic vision. We would never have
      even been able to sense it intuitively, as we ‘intuitively sense’, for example, a
      sphere or a straight line, i.e. simply by abstracting from experience, by
      closing our eyes, so to say, and ‘by imagining’ a sphere or a straight line
      that will never exist as such in the experience of our senses. Our senses, in
      fact, perceive objects that are only approximately round or straight. In these
      objects, according to Platonism, we recall the image of a sphere or of a

         164
             We must be very careful to keep the object that we talk about and its image on the
      computer screen separate. The image is merely the result of a ﬁnite number of operations
      iterated automatically, and furthermore the same image is inevitably reproduced with an
      approximation in the resolution. We, on the other hand, see a different object behind it: what
      we imagine to be obtained (if we can say that) with an inﬁnite number of iterations of the
      calculation formula, of which the image displayed is nothing but an approximation, as long
      as, obviously, the iterated formula converges towards a ﬁnite limit; otherwise the image
      created would have no meaning, but would be an intermediate step in a construction process
      that leads to nothing.
         165
             Mitsuhiro Shishikura (1994) demonstrated that the border of the Mandelbrot set is a
      fractal object with a Hausdorff–Besicovich dimension of 2.
                                               Platonism, formalism and constructivism   345

mathematical line with which we have already entered into contact in a
world of ideas. A process of abstraction from experience, alone, however,
can never lead us to ‘discover’ the Mandelbrot set, even conceding that it
‘exists’ in a world of ideas, and, in particular, will never lead us to ‘encoun-
ter’ an object such as its boundary, simply on the basis of its deﬁnition,
which, remember, is all we possess. To discover it, therefore, we must start
from natural numbers, extend the concept of number to the complex ﬁeld
and apply the deﬁnition, operating according to the rules that deﬁne the
properties of the numbers, as constructivist mathematics does.
   However, the constructivist vision of mathematics alone is not sufﬁcient.
It replaces the concept of fractal, the limit of an inﬁnite number of iterated
calculations, with the image of a geometric object that is not fractal,
because it has been obtained with a ﬁnite number of operations, as we
have said, but that we can bring close to the real fractal that cannot be
represented as such. Visual experience, thus enhanced with respect to what
it would be without the use of constructivist mathematics and of the com-
puter, at this point, is able to abstract the Mandelbrot set in the Platonic
sense, starting from various approximations and without ever having seen it
as such. Constructivist mathematics, in fact, shows its intrinsic limitations
every time it refuses to take into account any situation that cannot be treated
in algorithmic terms, as being, in their view, tout court lacking in meaning; it
refuses, that is, any question that cannot be resolved in ﬁnite time and which
requires the use of mental tools such as abstraction and intuition, without
which we would never be able to understand the properties (we would say
the ‘essence’), for example, of objects such as the Mandelbrot set.
   The formalist vision of mathematics, for its part, fails when it encounters
the logical difﬁculties that derive from the formal deﬁnition of the Mandel-
brot set. The fact that a line (intended in the standard meaning of the term,
i.e. as a unidimensional object) that separates an ‘inside’ from an ‘outside’
of the Mandelbrot set cannot be conceived Platonically, is a situation that is
totally analogous to that of the undecidability of a proposition; just like
‘neither true nor false’, in the same way ‘neither in nor out’.
   In more general terms, the formalist vision fails because it inevitably
comes up against the intrinsic impossibility for mathematics to demonstrate
the coherence of its entire system from within, as proved by Gödel’s the-
orems (see p. 332, note 151). In this regard, the aphorism with which
Russell, a realist like Gödel, ironically expressed his critical position with
regard to formalism is well known: according to this approach ‘pure math-
ematics may be deﬁned as the subject in which we never know what we are
talking about, not whether what we are saying is true’ (Russell, 1917,
chapter 4, see also Nagel and Newman, 1958). And that’s not all, we
346   32 : Interpretations of the foundations of mathematics

      could also add that formalists isolate mathematics into a sterile mental
      exercise that is not related to any reality, and, in any case, gives no consid-
      eration whatsoever to the fact that mathematical methodologies can actu-
      ally be applied successfully to descriptions of the world.
         Undoubtedly, the attention that the formalist approach pays to the in-
      ternal aspects of mathematics and to the importance of rigour in the
      arguments with which Platonic intuitions are sustained, has been and still
      is a very useful contribution to the modern development of the discipline, as
      we have already seen; however, we must not forget the risk implicit to
      formalism of falling into unfruitful self-contemplation. As the mathemat-
      ician Bruno de Finetti wrote: ‘The ivory tower of the ‘‘end in itself’’ is full of
      pitfalls. Would it not be an aberration – by way of an analogy – if a linguist,
      to purify the language by suppressing that which regards uses and purposes
      beyond it, wanted to reduce it to only the words and structures necessary to
      exclusively express the rules of its grammar and syntax? Or if someone
      placed a red triangle in the middle of the road with the sole purpose of
      signalling the inconvenience caused by the presence of the same red tri-
      angle?’ (1963, p. 5, our translation).
         To conclude this section, we observe how it is difﬁcult, in any event, to
      respond in a general way to the question ‘what is mathematics?’.166 The
      excerpt that follows, taken from the book La serva padrona (The bossy
      maid) (Boncinelli and Bottazzini, 2000, p. 117–118, our translation),


        166
             In reality a vast number of varied answers have been given to this question in the
      history of Western thought, by philosophers and mathematician alike. However, as Lolli
      (2002) observes, each answer is partial and the result reﬂects both the general culture of the
      era it was formulated in, and the state of advancement of mathematics at that time. It should
      be borne in mind, in any event, that the question ‘what is mathematics?’, similar to the
      question ‘what does doing mathematics mean?’, is different to the question ‘what are the
      foundations of mathematics?’. The ﬁrst two questions are more general and still actual, while
      the third, concerning the philosophy of mathematics, has perhaps become less actual from the
      mid-twentieth century onwards. As Lolli himself writes: ‘It is worth remembering that set
      theory is not the last metamorphosis of mathematics; abstract mathematics continues to be
      important, above all in close symbiosis with physics theories, but today computational
      mathematics, with the problems set by the computer, is preferred and prominent. In the
      second half of the twentieth century, the advent of the computer was the only really new
      phenomenon in mathematics and its environs. The problems that it poses, however, do not
      seem to be dramatic, do not necessitate any conceptual revisions – except for ( . . . ) certain
      empiricists. They may be worrying for other humanistic or spiritualistic reasons. It is possible
      that, as at the present time, no dramatic challenges are envisaged, not only have we lost
      interest in the problem of its foundations, but also that there is no need for interpretation and
      reconstruction, and, in deﬁnitive, that philosophy doesn’t have any (new) problems to deal
      with. If the philosophy of mathematics languishes, perhaps this is a sign of the vitality of
      mathematics’ (2002, p. 64, our translation).
                                              Platonism, formalism and constructivism   347

provides a good summary of the main visions (in addition to this paragraph,
see also Chapters 2 and 3). The two scientists that wrote the book, Edoardo
Bonicelli, a scholar of natural science, and Umberto Bottazzini, a scholar of
so-called ‘pure’ mathematics, discuss their own different opinions on math-
ematics:

Edoardo – Human beings observe the world and conceive questions that are
generally tangible and speciﬁc. To respond to some of these, modelling and
at times formalization is required. This often implies a translation of the
tangible problem into the abstract and ultra-rareﬁed language of mathemat-
ics. The resulting mathematical problem can then be treated with the tools
that mathematicians have perfected and that are applied according to their
principles. This application can also be very long and laborious, but at a
certain point it all has to be retranslated into the language of the real world
to be studied and compared with the data of the observation. In my mind,
this fairly well clariﬁes what mathematics represents for a physicist or a
biologist with respect to what it represents for a mathematician. For the
mathematician, it is a stand-alone plan of the real situation, autonomous,
self-sufﬁcient and (almost) always complete. For the experimental scientist,
mathematics is this subterranean navigation that leads from certain things
to other certain things thanks to the rigorous use of an impressive number of
mental constructs.

Umberto – I prefer to think that mathematics is a very complex, beautiful
mental construction and, at the same time, the most efﬁcient tool that
mankind has equipped itself with to identify regularities in natural phe-
nomena that are apparently chaotic.
               The need for a
 33            mathematics of (or for)
               complexity



The problem of formulating mathematical laws
for complexity
As we have said on a number of occasions, sciences exist as such because the
world often appears algorithmically compressible into laws, often ex-
pressed in mathematical forms, that are none other than reductions carried
out starting from enormous sequences of data. Reductions are possible
when the phenomena display recurrences; in a completely chaotic world,
the latter would not appear and reductions would be impossible. The chaos
in the measured data means precisely that the deterministic law that is
assumed to be behind the phenomena and that should appear as a result
of the reduction made on the observations, is not easily visible, so much so
that it makes the same phenomena appear to be random, i.e. not due to a
deterministic law. But even a complex world is difﬁcult to describe in
a deterministic way. The phenomenology of complex systems, in fact, is
characterized by properties such as emergence, self-organization, etc. (see
Chapters 27 and 28) and evades (at least for now) the possibility of a
formulation that enables, a priori, the manifestation of such to be predicted.
The situations of complex systems are not repeated in the same way, maybe
similar, but never exactly the same, and it is precisely because of this that it
is difﬁcult to recognize the laws constructed following reductions. The
phenomenology that we observe in nature and in society often appears to
be characterized by chaos and/or complexity, and therefore, in reality, the
operation of mathematically reducing the data, effective in other situations,
in these cases, ceases to be so. Nonetheless, we want to ﬁnd effective laws,
expressed in a mathematical form, to describe chaotic and/or complex
phenomenology.
   When we attempt to describe a chaotic and/or complex phenomenology
in mathematical terms, we ﬁnd ourselves in difﬁculty especially if we adopt
                                                     Formulating mathematical laws for complexity      349

the formalist interpretation of mathematics, as we run aground in the
undecidability that evades the claim of any omni-comprehensive law. The
condition we ﬁnd ourselves in with chaos, in this sense, is analogous to that
which leads us to state undecidable propositions of mathematical logic such
as Russell’s antinomy or that of Epimenides (Agnes and Rasetti, 1998).
   If the observed dynamics are very intricate, the ‘compression’ of the
phenomenology into laws is difﬁcult to perform: the data on which the re-
ductions are to be made, in this case, must be very numerous, because the laws
that are obtained from them are often too detailed and they are extremely
difﬁcult to analyse.
   On occasion, the laws are known and they are perhaps relatively simple
in their formulation, but nevertheless they are ineffective because we do not
know how to use the equations written to describe the phenomenology
observed, and, in some way, make predictions. For example, a two-body
system in gravitational interaction is relatively simple to describe and its
evolution is predictable with arbitrary precision, starting from the law of
universal gravitation, which, so to speak, ‘works’ very well. Up until now
no interaction in an isolated two-body system has ever been observed that
violates this law,167 such as, for example, by a sort of antigravity that
distances one body from the other. Already with three bodies, however, as
we know, the description of the system’s dynamics presents a signiﬁcant
level of difﬁculty: the law of universal gravitation is still the same, but it is
not sufﬁcient for predictions. The formal laws do not change with respect to
the two-body case, but we are not able to use them adequately. Long-term
prediction is impossible and, in practice, it is as if the law of universal
gravitation were not effective. In other words, if the system is made up of
three bodies, the phenomenology that is displayed is too rich and varied,
and the reductions operated on the data are not sufﬁcient to lead to a better
formal law, that is really effective, even though the system is subjected to
gravitational forces, the functioning of which is well known. In the absence
of theoretical results obtained from laws, the numerical simulations con-
ducted by applying iterative formulae, in accordance with the notions of
modern experimental mathematics, shows that the motions present dy-
namic situations that are extremely hard to imagine, a priori, on the basis

  167
       In reality, it could be argued that neither has a completely isolated system ever been
seen, as it is a totally abstract concept, nonexistent in the real universe. Nonetheless, however,
with good approximation, we can consider a double star system, i.e. a system made up of two
stars that are close to one another, and that both orbit around the common barycentre, very
distant with respect to the other stars, to be ‘sufﬁciently’ isolated from the rest of the universe.
The phenomenology displayed by these systems, which are very common in our galaxy, is
described well by the law of universal gravitation.
350   33 : The need for a mathematics of (or for) complexity

      of intuition. If the system is made up of more than three bodies, the
      phenomenology is even more intricate and the description even more com-
      plex. In certain cases, it may even occur that gravity, although exclusively
      attractive, gives rise to a dynamics such that one or more interacting bodies
      are literally expelled from the system (Saari and Xia, 1995).
         Just as for systems that display chaotic dynamics, such as, for example,
      many-body systems in gravitational interaction with one another, even with
      complex systems we have to tackle the question of the formulation (if
      possible) of a formal law on mathematical bases that manages to describe
      the rich and many-faceted phenomenology that they display. We have to
      tackle the question, that is, of a mathematical theory of complexity. But in
      doing this we encounter several problems.
         As we know, mathematics is a descriptive and predictive tool that ﬁnds it
      difﬁcult to ‘work’ with chaotic dynamics, for which, even if the laws are
      known, the predictability can only be extended for a short distance. Can the
      same type of mathematics be applied to describe complex systems? Or what
      type of mathematics would be able to? More speciﬁcally, is differential and
      integral calculus, that has achieved so many brilliant successes in numerous
      ﬁelds (especially in several natural sciences), but that has also had its fair
      share of failures, such as, for example, the case of the study of many-body
      systems or that of turbulence, or in the case of the various failed attempts to
      apply it to social sciences, still an effective mathematical tool for complex-
      ity? Are the concepts of real numbers and continuum, on which mathemat-
      ical analysis is based, and the very concept of differential equation still
      adaptable to complex systems, without being changed? What mathematical
      objects should we refer to, to describe the evolution of a complex system?
      Do we need to review the postulates and the foundations of mathematics,
      for example like Robinson’s (1966) non-standard analysis?168 Could

        168
             Non-standard analysis represents one of the more successful attempts to re-establish
      inﬁnitesimal calculus on new conceptual bases. It is developed starting from axioms that are
      weaker than those of classical mathematical analysis. Basically it is characterized by the
      introduction of the set of hyperreal numbers, considered as an extension of the, so to say,
      ‘usual’ set of real numbers. In the set of hyperreal numbers we assume (using for the sake of
      simplicity a rather inappropriate but straightforward expression) the ‘existence’ of inﬁnite
      numbers and inﬁnitesimal numbers. The former have the property of being larger than any
      natural number, the latter that of being smaller than the inverse of all natural numbers, 1/2,
      1/3, 1/4, . . . , but larger than zero. Non-standard analysis, in reality, is portrayed as a real
      theory of inﬁnitesimals; it has had various applications, amongst others, in mathematical
      physics (Albeverio et al., 1986; Albeverio, Luxemburg and Wolff, eds., 1995; Honig, 1995)
      and in economic mathematics (Anderson, 1991; van den Berg, 2000). In the preface to the
      second edition of 1973 of his book entitled Non-Standard Analysis, ﬁrst published in 1966,
      Abraham Robinson writes: ‘A non-standard proof can always be replaced by a standard one,
                                                    Complexity linked to an understanding of inﬁnity    351

further extensions of the very concept of number possibly be usefully
applied? Is the mathematics that we use effective as a tool for investigation,
in particular mathematical analysis, with the concept of the continuity and
of the inﬁnity on which it is based, or do we need to seek new forms? We
would like to remind readers that these are the fundamental questions that
need to be tackled. Lastly, we would like to make some reﬂections on these
points, by referring to the different interpretations of the foundations of
mathematics illustrated in Chapter 32.



The description of complexity linked to a better
understanding of the concept of mathematical inﬁnity:
some reﬂections
When attempting to deﬁne the laws of the phenomenology of complexity,
we cannot ignore the fact that, in practice, the models of the processes
observed, even if written as sets of mathematical formulae, have been made
to evolve only after having been translated into the form of computer
programs, with the exception of a few simple cases. This inevitably recalls
the paradigm of the world as a cosmic computer and re-proposes the
perspective of experimental mathematics. The fact that, in practice, what
we use is simply the numerical result of a program, leads us to assume
numbers as the only knowable element of reality: not only the measured
number, i.e. the ﬁgure obtained from the measurements, but also the calcu-
lated number, i.e. the number resulting from the descriptions and predic-
tions of the system’s evolutions.
   Note, however, that we are by no means returning to a Pythagorean
perspective, according to which numbers have an almost mystical signiﬁ-
cance, the most profound essence of reality. We simply ﬁnd it somewhat

even though the latter may be more complicated and less intuitive ( . . . ) The application of
non-standard analysis to a particular mathematical discipline is a matter of choice: it is natural
for the actual decision of an individual to depend on his early training’ (p. xv). Again, the same
foreword also illustrates Kurt Gödel’s opinion: ‘There are good reasons to believe that non-
standard analysis, in some version or other, will be the analysis of the future ( . . . ) I think, in
coming centuries it will be considered a great oddity in the history of mathematics that the ﬁrst
exact theory of inﬁnitesimals was developed 300 years after the invention of the differential
calculus’ (p. xvi). An axiomatic approach to non-standard analysis, different from Robinson’s
constructivist approach has been given by Edward Nelson (1977), whereas, in a celebrated
article, Imre Lakatos (1978) discussed a few philosophical and historical questions relating to
non-standard analysis; presentations of ordinary calculus at college level from a non-standard
standpoint are in Keisler (1976), Deledicq and Diener (1989); for a general introduction to
non-standard analysis see, e.g., Diener and Diener (1995), Goldblatt (1998).
352   33 : The need for a mathematics of (or for) complexity

      difﬁcult to adopt a Platonic vision of complexity referred to a transcendent
      object, that exists in the world of ideas, and that expresses an ‘exact’ law.
      Basically, laws wouldn’t be abstract entities that express the most profound
      expression (the quintessence, to put it in Platonic terms) of a phenomenon
      in its entirety, but merely a program that generates numbers which describe
      a sequence of states over time. The logical game of formalist mathematics is
      even less relevant to a vision of this nature, in which everything depends on
      the choice of a set of initial postulates. Even constructivism, while less remote
      from the Platonism and formalism of the paradigm of the cosmic computer,
      in reality, does not appear to be wholly sufﬁcient in this context, because
      rather than a positive proposal of an effective method to describe evolutive
      processes, it places restrictions on what is permitted, like a track that forces
      us only to give values to numbers and what can be obtained from them.
         The experimental mathematics approach does not use the symmetry of
      laws as a primary characteristic, but processes ‘small pieces’ of information,
      due to its substantially discrete vision. The search for a ‘law for everything’,
      that includes all of the symmetrical laws established to date (and even
      those that we don’t know, because we haven’t been able to determine
      them, but that we imagine to exist), not only in natural sciences but also
      in social sciences, is based on the basic assumption that the laws possess
      symmetrical properties in time and/or space (for example translation sym-
      metry in periodic phenomena, symmetry by reﬂection in mechanical and
      classical phenomena), and that time and space are continuous, because this
      is the intuition we have of them. However, up until now this has only
      worked partially. Whole branches of science, for example, biology, soci-
      ology, and economics, as we have observed on a number of occasions, make
      poor use of laws, intended in the way that they are generally conceived, i.e.
      expressed in a mathematical form, or are completely lacking in them. And
      this generally happens even if the cultural setting is reductionist and at
      times, in practice, when adopting approaches similar to the so-called hard
      sciences, such as physics and chemistry, are adopted.
         And that’s not all; the same mathematical laws that exist in a disciplinary
      ﬁeld that make wide use of them, such as physics, sometimes display
      imperfections, and above all, inadequacies, when the systems are very
      (‘too’) complex. We can say that the more complex the systems considered
      are, as often happens when passing from the scope of physics to that of
      chemistry, and then biology, and then further to the ambits of social sciences,
      the greater the difﬁculty in recognizing and applying laws expressed in a
      mathematical form, the current nature of which is essentially reductionist.
         The interpretation of complexity according to the vision proposed by
      experimental mathematics, i.e. the laws are considered as calculation
                                                 Complexity linked to an understanding of inﬁnity   353

programs, leads us back to the concepts of numbers, sets, and numerical
systems. But, inevitably, this leads us to encounter the same concepts of the
continuity of the set of real numbers and, in general, of numerical inﬁnity,
imposing an in-depth analysis and (possibly) a review of the same.169 From
this perspective, inﬁnity would be considered a human intuition in a reality
that is substantially discrete, in which the very existence of tiny elements
that constitute the ‘minimum’ element, absent if the reality was continuous,
may be at the origin of the effects that are increasingly displayed during the
course of the evolution of a system, giving rise to all those characteristics of
complexity that we call surprise, emergence, self-organization, and to the
very phenomenology of chaos. In this way, inﬁnity would change the role
that it has laboriously attained through interminable and harsh conceptual,
philosophical, and even technological debate (Suber, 1998).
   We would like to better explain what we mean. All things considered, we
can state that the set of real numbers, which is at the basis of the intuitive
concept that we have of continuity, in a certain sense is only a representation
that we create (or that we ‘intuitively sense’) and that we use to construct
differential equations. However, we mustn’t forget that the results of any
experimental measurement are only represented by rational numbers, far
from the continuity that characterizes the set of real numbers, which leads us
to think that a description in non-continuous terms, i.e. in discrete terms, is
more relevant. Thinking in terms of spatial–temporal continuity, at least for
many processes, is instinctive. In the same way, we all instinctively think of
the objects of ordinary geometry as continuous bodies as this is how the real
situation appears to us in ﬁrst approximation (or on ﬁrst sight).
   A sudden change in the evolutive dynamics of a system (a ‘surprise’) can
emerge, apparently violating a symmetrical law that was formulated by
making a reduction on some (or many) ﬁnite sequences of numerical data.
This is the crucial point. As we have said on a number of occasions,
complexity emerges as a breakdown of symmetry (a system that, by evolv-
ing with continuity, suddenly passes from one attractor to another) in laws
which, expressed in mathematical form, are symmetrical. Nonetheless, this
breakdown happens. It is the surprise, the paradox, a sort of butterﬂy effect
that can highlight small differences between numbers that are very close to
one another in the continuum of real numbers; differences that may evade
the experimental interpretation of data, but that may increasingly amplify
in the system’s dynamics. However, we can never disregard numerical
approximations, both when taking measurements of any magnitude, and

  169
       For the sake of clarity, we would like to specify that in this concept we are referring to
the actual inﬁnite and not the potential inﬁnite (see p. 318, note 142).
354   33 : The need for a mathematics of (or for) complexity

      when processing the data contained in a computer, the only tool which, in
      practice, enables us to make the laws ‘work’ and make systems evolve. Non-
      rational numbers, in practice, are always and in any event approximated
      with numbers belonging to the inﬁnite, discrete and countable set of ra-
      tional numbers. In particular, in applications with automatic calculation,
      approximations are even made with integers, almost completely losing sight
      of the non-countable inﬁnity of the continuum.
         In this perspective, the mathematical techniques used have to be recon-
      sidered on new bases, possibly starting from a substantial critical review of
      the concept of continuum, maybe resuming some of the ideas of construct-
      ivism, as in Weyl (1918); see also Freiling (1986) and Maddy (1998). The
      tool of investigation provided by mathematical analysis, and that originates
      from intuition, is based on the intuitive concept of continuity, which proves
      difﬁcult and evasive to formalize: numerical continuity (non-computable
      numbers included), on one hand, in its conceptual foundation, spatiotem-
      poral continuity, on the other hand, insofar as its applications are con-
      cerned. In practice, however, we operate with rational numbers, i.e. with a
      countable inﬁnity of an order that is no different to that of the more familiar
      whole numbers. When we use the tools of mathematical analysis, we
      oscillate, so to say, between the discrete perspective of rational numbers,
      which is more immediate and easier in terms of practical calculations, and
      the continuous perspective of real numbers, which, at least on occasion, is
      more immediately intuited, at least in some aspects, but is often more
      difﬁcult in terms of calculation techniques, even though, where calculation
      techniques permit, it leads to effective conclusions. One moment we use this
      vision, the next we use the other, and often we use the ﬁrst as an image of the
      second (this is also how, for example, fractals are represented in computa-
      tional mathematics).
         However, by working in this way, we use concepts that partially belong to
      the technical perspective, but that possess several aspects that refer to
      foundations that are not wholly clear. For example, we do not have any
      idea of how to bridge the gap – by means of a numerical construction, a
      theorem or otherwise – between the countable inﬁnity and the non-count-
      able inﬁnity of the continuum of a higher order (see p. 157, note 71), nor do
      we know if there is an intermediate order of inﬁnity (the assumption that
      there is not is known as Cantor’s hypotheses of the continuum). And we are
      lacking this idea, both as reminiscence, according to the Platonic vision, and
      as the logical deduction of a set of postulates, according to formalism, and
      further still as a construction starting from the natural numbers, according
      to the constructivist approach. We use the concept of going to the limit, in
      mathematical analysis, to jump between two orders of inﬁnity, but this
                                         Complexity linked to an understanding of inﬁnity   355

does not bridge the gap between an experimental reality, made up of
measurements necessarily expressed using numbers with ﬁnite decimal
places (countable inﬁnity), and an abstraction that lives in a different
ambit, the numerical continuum, the vast majority of which is made up of
non-computable numbers and that intrinsically leads to situations similar to
those of logical undecidability, as we saw in Chapter 32.
   We do not know if the dynamics of nature and of society are intrinsically
continuous or discrete, even if we instinctively picture them as continuous
and we portray them in continuous spaces. We have no proof one way or
the other, with the sole exception of the fact that the energy is transmitted in
discrete quantities that are multiples of a basic magnitude. It is interesting to
observe, in this regard, that such basic magnitude, the so-called energy
quantum, was introduced in a daring hypothesis of Max Planck in 1900,
initially as a simple calculation artiﬁce: a step backwards with respect to the
use of classical mathematical analysis, made by replacing an integral (i.e.
a sum of inﬁnitesimals in the continuum of real numbers) with a summation
of ﬁnite quantities, the energy quanta. This was done with the aim of
providing a description, i.e. a law, for certain experimental facts that evaded
understanding (see, in this regard, the detailed presentation by the physicist
Max Born, one of the fathers of quantum physics in his well-known book
published in 1935). Later, the daring hypothesis of quanta revealed itself to
be extremely fecund to signiﬁcant development of all of modern physics,
but that hypothesis arose from a disconnection between the technique of
mathematical analysis, incidentally still widely, continuously, and very
successfully used in quantum physics, and real experimental facts that
didn’t ﬁt the idea of the continuum which is at the basis of mathematical
analysis and its techniques.
   Probably, complexity, although applicable to numerous scientiﬁc discip-
lines, is in a situation similar to that of physics at the end of the nineteenth
century. Perhaps some audacious hypothesis, such as Planck’s, is needed,
which, by revolutionizing the foundations of mathematics, and not simply
mathematical technique, would provide new and more fertile notions and
a mathematical tool to describe a system’s dynamics more effectively as well
as being able to account for the emergent phenomena that characterize
complexity. For this reason, it will probably be necessary to clarify concepts
such as the numerical continuum, and the different orders of inﬁnity in
more depth, continuing the research work that started in the seventeenth
century. The objective is to develop a theoretical–mathematical framework
that is able to describe the dynamics characterized by complexity and by
chaos, in the same way as Newton’s and Leibniz’s mathematical analyses
made their contribution to the ﬁeld of mechanics in the seventeenth century.
References

Abarbanel H.D.I. (1996) Analysis of Observed Chaotic Data, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
Accardi L. (1997) Urne e camaleonti, Il Saggiatore, Milan.
Agnes C., Rasetti M. (1988) Chaos and Undecidability: A Group Theoretical View, in
  Solomon A.I. (ed.) Advances in Statistical Mechanics, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 57–73.
Albeverio S., Fenstad J., Hoegh-Krohn R., Lindstrøm T. (1986) Nonstandard Methods in
  Stochastic Analysis and Mathematical Physics, Academic Press, New York.
Albeverio S., Luxemburg W.A.J., Wolff R.P.H. (eds.) (1995) Advances in Analysis, Prob-
  ability and Mathematical Physics, Mathematics and its Application, Vol. 314, Kluwer,
  Dordrecht.
Albin P.S. (1998) Barriers and Bounds to Rationality, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
  New Jersey.
Allen P.M. (1997a) Cities and Regions as Self-organizing Systems. Models of Complexity,
  Gordon and Breach, London.
Allen P.M. (1997b) Le città come sistemi complessi autoorganizzativi, in Bertuglia C.S., Vaio
  F. (eds.) La città e le sue scienze, Volume 1, La città come entità altamente complessa,
  Franco Angeli, Milan, 1–60 [English edition: (1998) Cities as Self-Organising Complex
  Systems, in Bertuglia C.S., Bianchi G., Mela A. (eds.) The City and Its Sciences, Physica-
  Verlag, Heidelberg, 95–144].
Allen P.M., Deneubourg J.L., Sanglier M., Boon F., de Palma A. (1978) The Dynamics of Urban
  Evolution, Final Report of the U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington D.C.
Allen R.G.D. (1959) Mathematical Economics, Macmillan, London.
Alligood K., Sauer T., Yorke J.A. (1996) Chaos, An Introduction to Dynamical Systems,
  Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
Alvesson M. (1995) Management of Knowledge-intensive Companies, Walter De Gruyter,
  Berlin.
Anderson Ph.W., Arrow K.J., Pines D. (eds.) (1988) The Economy as an Evolving Complex
  System, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings Volume 5,
  Perseus Books, Reading, Massachusetts.
Anderson R.M. (1991) Nonstandard Analysis with Applications to Economics, in Hilden-
  brand W., Sonnenschein H. (eds.) Handbook of Mathematical Economics, Volume 4,
  2145–2208, North Holland, Amsterdam.
Andrecut M. (1998) Logistic map as a random number generator, International Journal of
  Modern Physics B, 12, 921–930.
Anosov D.V., Arnold V.I. (eds.) (1988) Dynamical Systems I, Ordinary Differential Equa-
  tions and Smooth Dynamical Systems, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Arditi R., Ginzburg L.R. (1989) Coupling in Predator–Prey Dynamics: Ratio-Dependence,
  Journal of Theoretical Biology, 139, 311–326.
Arnold V.I. (1983) Geometrical Methods in the Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations,
  Springer Verlag, New York.
Arnold V.I. (ed.) (1987) Dynamical Systems III, Mathematical Aspects of Classical and
  Celestial Mechanics, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
                                                                                  References    357

Arnold V.I. (1992) Ordinary Differential Equations, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Arsenin V.Ya. (1987) Problems on Computer Diagnostics in Medicine, in Tikhonov A.N.,
  Goncharsky A.V. (eds.) Ill-Posed Problems in the Natural Sciences, Mir, Moscow, 206–219.
Arthur W.B. (1994) On the Evolution of Complexity, in Cowan G.A., Pines D., Meltzer D.
  (eds.) Complexity – Metaphors, Models and Reality, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the
  Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings Volume 19, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachu-
  setts, 65–81.
Arthur W.B., Durlauf S.N., Lane D.A. (eds.) (1997) The Economy as an Evolving Complex
  System, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings Volume 27,
  Perseus Books, Reading, Massachusetts.
Arthur W.B., Holland J.H., Le Baron B., Palmer R.G., Tayler P. (1997) Asset Pricing Under
  Endogenous Expectations in an Artiﬁcial Stock Market, in Arthur W.B., Durlauf S.N.,
  Lane D.A. (eds.) The Economy as an Evolving Complex System, Santa Fe Institute Studies
  in the Sciences of Complexity, Proceedings Volume 27, Perseus Books, Reading, Massa-
  chusetts, 15–44.
Ashby W.R. (1957) An Introduction to Cybernetics, Chapman & Hall, London.
Atlan H. (1994) Ideali e limiti della conoscenza e della libertà, in Ceruti M., Fabbri P.,
  Giorello G., Preta L. (eds.) Il caso e la libertà, Laterza, Rome, 38–51.
Axelrod R. (1984) The Evolution of Co-operation, Basic Books, New York.
Axelrod R. (1997) The Complexity of Co-operation. Agent-Based Models of Competition
  and Collaboration, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Bachgus R., Van Nes P., Van der Zaan A. (1985) Stedelijke Dinamiek, een Schatting van het
  Prooi-roofdier Model voor Rotterdam, Erasmus University, Department of Theoretical
  Spatial Economy, Working Paper.
Bak P. (1996) How Nature Works, Springer Verlag, New York.
Barber C.L. (1964) The Story of Language, Pan Books, London [revised edition: 1972].
Barkley Rosser J. (1991) From Catastrophe to Chaos, A General Theory of Economic
  Discontinuities, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.
Barrow J.D. (1992a) Perché il mondo è matematico?, Lezioni italiane, Laterza, Rome.
Barrow J.D. (1992b) Pi in the Sky. Counting, Thinking and Being, Oxford University Press,
  Oxford.
Barrow J.D. (1994) Caso e determinismo, in Ceruti M., Fabbri P., Giorello G., Preta L. (eds.)
  Il caso e la libertà, Laterza, Rome, 15–27.
Barrow J.D., Tipler F.J. (1986) The Anthropic Cosmological Principle, Oxford University
  Press, New York.
Barrow-Green J. (1997) Poincaré and the Three Body Problem, American Mathematical
  Society, Providence, Rhode Island.
Batten D.F. (2000a) Discovering Artiﬁcial Economics, Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Batten D.F. (2000b) Emergence and Co-Evolutionary Learning in Self-Organised Urban
  Development, in Batten D.F., Bertuglia C.S., Martellato D., Occelli S. (eds.) Learning,
  Innovation and Urban Evolution, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 45–74.
Batten D.F., Bertuglia C.S., Martellato D., Occelli S. (eds.) (2000) Learning, Innovation and
  Urban Evolution, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.
Bayly B. (1990) Complexity in Fluids, in Nadel L., Stein D.L. (eds.) 1990 Lectures in
  Complex Systems, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Lecture Volume
  3, Addison Wesley, Redwood, California, 53–97.
Bechhoeffer J. (1996) The Birth of Period 3, Revisited, Mathematics Magazine, 69, 115–118.
358   References

      Bellacicco A. (1990) La rappresentazione frattale degli eventi, La Nuova Italia Scientiﬁca,
         Rome.
      Bellomo N. (1982) Modelli matematici e sistemi con parametri aleatori, Levrotto e Bella, Turin.
      Bellomo N., Preziosi L. (1995) Modelling Mathematical Methods and Scientiﬁc Computa-
         tion, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
      Beltrami E. (1987) Mathematics for Dynamic Modelling, Academic Press, London.
      Benacerraf P. (1967) God, the Devil and Gödel, The Monist, 51, 9–32.
      Benacerraf P., Putnam H. (eds.) (1983) Philosophy of Mathematics, Cambridge University
         Press, Cambridge.
      Ben-Akiva M., Lerman S.R. (1979) Disaggregate Travel and Mobility Choice Models and
         Measures of Accessibility, in Hensher D.A., Stopher P.R., Behaviour Travel Modelling,
         Croom Helm, London, 654–679.
      Bender W., Orszag S. (1978) Advanced Mathematical Methods for Scientists and Engineers,
         McGraw-Hill, New York.
      Benhabib J. (ed.) (1992) Cycles and Chaos in Economic Equilibrium, Princeton University
         Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
      Berkeley G. (1734) The Analyst; Or, A Discourse Addressed To An Inﬁdel Mathematician,
         J. Tonson, London [available on the website http://www.maths.tcd.ie/~dwilkins/Berkeley].
      Bertuglia C.S., Bianchi G., Mela A. (eds.) (1998) The City and its Sciences, Physica Verlag, a
         Springer Verlag Company, Heidelberg.
      Bertuglia C.S., Clarke G.P., Wilson A.G. (1994) Modelling the City, Routledge, London.
      Bertuglia C.S., Fischer M.M., Preto G. (eds.) (1995) Technological Change, Economic
         Development and Space, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Bertuglia C.S., Leonardi G., Occelli S., Rabino G.A., Tadei R., Wilson A.G. (eds.) (1987)
         Urban Systems: Contemporary Approach to Modelling, Croom Helm, London.
      Bertuglia C.S., Leonardi G., Wilson A.G. (eds.) (1990) Urban Dynamics: Designing an
         Integrated Model, Routledge, London.
      Bertuglia C.S., Lombardo S., Nijkamp P. (eds.) (1997) Innovative Behaviour in Space and
         Time, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Bertuglia C.S., Rabino G.A. (1990) The Use of Mathematical Models in the Evaluation of
         Actions in Urban Planning: Conceptual Premises and Operative Problems, Sistemi urbani,
         12, 121–132.
      Bertuglia C.S., Staricco L. (2000) Complessità, autoorganizzazione, città, Franco Angeli,
         Milan.
      Bertuglia C.S., Vaio F. (eds.) (1997a) La città e le sue scienze, 4 volumes, Franco Angeli,
         Milan.
      Bertuglia C.S., Vaio F. (1997b) Introduzione, in Bertuglia C.S., Vaio F. (eds.) La città e le sue
         scienze, Volume 1, La città come entità altamente complessa, Franco Angeli, Milan,
         I–XCIII.
      Besicovich A.S. (1934) On Rational Approximation to Real Numbers, Journal of the London
         Mathematical Society, 9, 126–131.
      Besicovich A.S. (1935) On the Sum of Digits of Real Numbers Represented in the Dyadic
         System, Mathematische Annalen, 110, 321–330.
      Birkhoff G.D. (1927) Dynamical Systems, American Mathematical Society, Providence,
         Rhode Island, [revised edition: (1966) available on the website http://www.ams.org/
         online_bks/coll9/].
      Black F., Scholes M. (1973) The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities, Journal of
         Political Economics, 81, 637–659.
                                                                                    References    359

Blair D., Pollack R. (1999) La logique du choix collectif, Pour la science, Dossier: Les
   mathématiques sociales, July, 82–89.
Blum L. (1989) Lectures on a Theory of Computation and Complexity over the Reals (or an
   Arbitrary Ring), in Jen E. (ed.) 1989 Lectures in Complex Systems, Santa Fe Institute
   Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Lectures Volume 2, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City,
   California, 1–47.
Bohm D. (1957) Casualty and Chance in Modern Physics, Routledge, London.
Boncinelli E., Bottazzini U. (2000) La serva padrona. Fascino e potere della matematica,
   Raffaello Cortina Editore, Milan.
Born M. (1935) Atomic Physics, Blackie and Son Ltd., London.
Borwein J., Bailey D. (2004) Mathematics by Experiment: Plausible Reasoning in the 21st
   Century, A.K. Peters, Natick, Massuchusetts.
Bottazzini U. (1999) Poincaré, il cervello delle scienze razionali, Le scienze, I grandi della
   scienza, 2, 7.
Bourbaki N. (1939–1998) Éléments de mathématiques, Hermann & C. Éditeurs, Paris
   [English edition: (1987–1999) Elements of Mathematics, 10 volumes, Springer-Verlag,
   Heidelberg].
Boyce D.E., Nijkamp P., Shefer D. (eds.) (1991) Regional Science, Retrospect and Prospect,
   Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Boyer C.B. (1968) A History of Mathematics, Wiley, New York [Italian edition: (1980) Storia
   della matematica, Mondadori, Milan].
Briggs K.M. (1991) A Precise Calculation of the Feigenbaum Constants, Mathematics of
   Computation, 57, 435–439.
Briggs K.M., Quispel G.R.W., Thompson C.J. (1991) Feigenvalues for Mandelsets, Journal of
   Physics A, 24, 3363–3368.
Brock W., Hsieh D., Le Baron B. (1991) Nonlinear Dynamics, Chaos and Instability:
   Statistical Theory and Economic Evidence, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Brouwer L.E.J. (1913) Intuitionism and Formalism, Bulletin of the American Mathematical
   Society, 20, 81–96 [re-edited: (1999) in Bulletin (new series) of the American Mathematical
   Society, 37, 1, 55–64].
Bruner J.S. (1994) Modelli del mondo, modelli di menti, in Ceruti M., Fabbri P., Giorello G.,
   Preta L. (eds.) Il caso e la libertà, Laterza, Rome, 67–94.
Bruschini Vincenzi L. (1998) Storia della Borsa, Il sapere, Newton, Rome.
Burke Hubbard B., Hubbard J. (1994) Legge e ordine nell’universo: il teorema KAM,
   Quaderni di Le Scienze, 81, 8–16.
Byrne D. (1998) Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences, Routledge, London.
Cajori F. (1919) History of Mathematics (2nd edition), Macmillan, New York.
Camagni R. (1985) Spatial Diffusion of Pervasive Process Innovations, Papers and Proceed-
   ings of the Regional Science Association, 58, 83–95.
Çambel A.B. (1993) Applied Chaos Theory, Academic Press, San Diego, California.
Campisi D. (1991) I fondamenti della modellistica urbana, in Bertuglia C.S., La Bella A. (eds.)
   I sistemi urbani, Franco Angeli, Milan, 509–551.
Cantor G. (1915) Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transﬁnite Numbers
   (edited by Jourdain E.B.), Open Court, Chicago [new edition: (1955), Dover, New
   York].
Carey H.C. (1858) Principles of Social Science, J.B. Lippincot, Philadelphia [available on the
   website http://socserv2.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/]
360   References

      Casti J.L. (1986) On System Complexity: Identiﬁcation, Measurement and Management, in
        Casti J.L., Karlqvist A. (eds.) Complexity, Language and Life: Mathematical Approaches,
        Springer Verlag, Berlin, 146–173.
      Casti J.L. (1987) Alternate Results. Mathematical Models of Nature and Man, Wiley, New
        York.
      Casti J.L. (1994) Complexiﬁcation, Abacus, London.
      Casti J.L. (2000) Five More Golden Rules, Wiley, New York.
      Cauchy A.L. (1882–1970) Oeuvres complètes, 27 volumes, Gauthier-Villars, Paris.
      Cellucci C. (eds.) (1967) La ﬁlosoﬁa della matematica, Laterza, Bari.
      Changeux J.-P., Connes A. (1989) Matière à pensée, Éditions Odile Jacob, Paris [English
        edition: (1995) Conversations on Mind, Matter and Mathematics, Princeton University
        Press].
      Chavel I. (1994) Riemanian Geometry: A Modern Introduction, Cambridge University Press,
        New York.
      Chiarella C. (1990) The Elements of a Nonlinear Theory of Economic Dynamics, Springer
        Verlag, Berlin.
      Chossat P., Iooss G. (1994) The Couette–Taylor Problem, Applied Mathematical Sciences,
        Volume 102, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
      Christensen K.S. (1999) Cities and Complexity, Making Intergovernmental Decisions, Sage
        Publications, London.
      Cohen I.B. (1993) The Natural Sciences and the Social Sciences: Some Historical and Critical
        Perspectives, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Boston, Massachusetts.
      Cohen J., Stewart I. (1994) The Collapse of Chaos, Penguin, New York.
      Collatz L. (1966) Functional Analysis and Numerical Mathematics, Academic Press, New
        York.
      Condorcet M.J.A.N. (1785) Essai sur l’application de l’analyse à la probabilité des décisions
        prises dans une pluralité de voix, in Arithmétique politique. Textes rares ou inédits (1994)
        INED, Paris.
      Coveney P., Highﬁeld R. (1995) Frontiers of Complexity. The Search for Order in a Chaotic
        World, Fawcett Columbine Books, New York.
      Crépel P. (1999) La naissance des mathématiques sociales, Pour la science, Dossier: Les
        mathématiques sociales, July, 8–13.
      Crilly A.J., Earnshaw R.A., Jones H. (eds.) (1991) Fractals and Chaos, Springer Verlag, New
        York.
      Crutchﬁeld J.P., Farmer J.D., Packard N.H., Shaw R.S. (1986) Chaos, Scientiﬁc American,
        255, 38–49.
      Cutland N.J. (1980) Computability, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
      Czyz J. (1994) Paradoxes of Measures and Dimensions Originating in Felix Hausdorff’s
        Ideas, World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
      Daganzo C. (1979) Multinomial Probit, Academic Press, New York.
      Darwin C. (1859) On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection or the Preservation
        of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life, Murray, London.
      Davies P.C.W. (1989) The Physics of Complex Organization, in Goodwin B, Saunders P.
        (eds.) Theoretical Biology, Epigenetic and Evolutionary Order from Complex Systems,
        Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, 101–111.
      Davies S. (1979) The Diffusion of Process Innovation, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
        bridge.
                                                                                       References    361

Dedekind R. (1901) Essays on the Theory of Numbers (English translation ed. Beman W.W.),
  Open Court, Chicago [new edition: (1963) Dover, New York].
de Finetti B. (1963) L’apporto della matematica nell’evoluzione del pensiero economico,
  Edizione Ricerche, Rome.
Deledicq A., Diener M. (1989) Lesons de calcul inﬁnitésimal, Editions Armand Colin. Paris.
Dendrinos D. (1980) A Basic Model of Urban Dynamics Expressed as a Set of Volterra–Lotka
  Equations, Catastrophe Theory in Urban and Transport Analysis, Department of Trans-
  portation, Washington D.C.
Dendrinos D. (1984a) Madrid’s Aggregate Growth Pattern: A Note on the Evidence Regard-
  ing the Urban Volterra–Lotka Model, Sistemi urbani, 6, 237–246.
Dendrinos D. (1984b) The Decline of the US Economy: A Perspective from Mathematical
  Ecology, Environment and Planning A, 16, 651–662.
Dendrinos D. (1984c) The Structural Stability of the US Regions: Evidence and Theoretical
  Underpinnings, Environment and Planning A, 16, 1433–1443.
Dendrinos D. (1991a) Methods in Quantum Mechanics and the Socio-Spatial World, Socio-
  Spatial Dynamics, 2, 81–110.
Dendrinos D. (1991b) Quasi-Periodicity in Spatial Population Dynamics, Socio-Spatial
  Dynamics, 2, 31–59.
Dendrinos D. (1992) The Dynamics of Cities, Routledge, London.
Dendrinos D. (1997) Sui fondamenti della dinamica sociale. Efﬁciente formulazione mate-
  matica di un quadro generale alla base del determinismo sociale complesso non lineare:
  sovraosservatore e sovrastruttura, in Bertuglia C.S., Vaio F. (eds.) La città e le sue scienze,
  Volume 1, La città come entità altamente complessa, Franco Angeli, Milan, 129–153
  [English edition: (1998) On the Foundation of Social Dynamics: An Efﬁcient Mathemat-
  ical Statement of a General Framework Underlying a Complex Nonlinear Social Deter-
  minism, Incorporating a Supra-Observer and a Suprastructure, in Bertuglia C.S., Bianchi
  G., Mela A. (eds.) The City and Its Sciences, Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg, 203–223].
Dendrinos D. (2000) Nonlinear Dynamics, Innovation and Metropolitan Development, in
  Batten D.F., Bertuglia C.S., Martellato D., Occelli S. (eds.) (2000) Learning, Innovation
  and Urban Evolution, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 75–106.
Dendrinos D., Mullally H. (1981) Evolutionary Patterns of Urban Populations, Geographical
  Analysis, 13, 328–344.
Dendrinos D., Mullally H. (1985) Urban Evolution: Studies in the Mathematical Ecology of
  Cities, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dendrinos D., Sonis M. (1986) Variational Principles and Conservation Conditions in Volter-
  ra’s Ecology and in Urban Relative Dynamics, Journal of Regional Science, 26, 359–372.
Dendrinos D., Sonis M. (1990) Chaos and Socio-Spatial Dynamics, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Devaney R.L. (1989) An Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems, Perseus Books, Read-
  ing, Massachusetts,
Devaney R.L. (1992) A First Course in Chaotic Dynamical Systems: Theory and Experiment,
  Perseus Books, Reading, Massachusetts.
Devlin K. (1980) Fundamentals of Contemporary Set Theory, Springer Verlag, New York.
Devlin K. (1988) Mathematics. The New Golden Age, Penguin Books, New York.
Diener F., Diener M. (1989) Nonstandard Analysis in Practice, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
Dioguardi G. (1995) Dossier Diderot, Sellerio editore, Palermo.
Dioguardi G. (2000) Al di là del disordine, discorso sulla complessità e sull’impresa, CUEN,
  Naples.
Dioguardi G. (2001) Sui sentieri della scienza, Sellerio editore, Palermo.
362   References

      Dirac P.A.M. (1982) Pretty Mathematics, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 21,
         603–605.
      Ditto W.L., Spano M.L., Savage H.T., Rauseo S.N., Heagy J., Ott E. (1990) Experimental
         Observation of a Strange Non-chaotic Attractor, Physics Review A, 39, 5, 2593–2598.
      Dobb M. (1973) Theories of Value and Distribution since Adam Smith – Ideology and
         Economic Theory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
      Drazin P.S. (1992) Nonlinear Systems, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
      Dufﬁng G. (1918) Erzwungene Schwingungen bei Veränderlicher Eigenfrequenz, F. Vieweg
         und Sohn, Braunschweig.
      Eckmann J.-P., Oliffson Kamphorst S., Ruelle D., Ciliberto S. (1986) Lyapunov Exponents
         from Time Series, Physics Review, A, 34, 4971–4979.
      Eckmann J.-P., Oliffson Kamphorst S., Ruelle D., Scheinkman J. (1988) Lyapunov Exponents
         for Stock Returns, in Anderson Ph.W., Arrow K.J., Pines D. (eds.) The Economy as an
         Evolving Complex System, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity,
         Proceedings Volume 5, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 301–304.
      Eckmann J.-P., Ruelle D. (1985) Ergodic Theory of Chaos and Strange Attractors, Review of
         Modern Physics, 57, 617–686.
      Edmonds B. (1999) What is Complexity? – The Philosophy of Complexity per se With
         Application to Some Examples in Evolution, in Heylighen F., Bollen J., Riegler A. (eds.)
         The Evolution of Complexity, The Violet Book of ‘Einstein Meets Magritte’, Kluwer
         Academic Publishers, Dordrecht [article available on the website http://bruce.edmonds.
         name/evolcomp].
      Einstein A. (1922) The Meaning of Relativity, Methuen & Co., London.
      Einstein A., Podolski B., Rosen N. (1935) Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical
         Reality Be Considered Complete?, Physical Review, 47, 777.
      Ekeland I. (1995) Le chaos, Flammarion, Paris.
      Elliott R.N. (1946) Nature’s Law: The Secret of the Universe [new edition in: Prechter R.J.
         (ed.) (1994) Elliott’s Masterworks: The Deﬁnitive Collection, Lambert-Gann, Gainesville,
         Georgia].
      Elsgolts L. (1977) Differential Equations and the Calculus of Variations, Mir, Moscow.
      Enriques F., de Santillana G. (1936) Compendio di storia del pensiero scientiﬁco, Zanichelli,
         Bologna.
      Epstein I.R. (1989) Chemical Oscillators and Nonlinear Chemical Dynamics, in Jen E. (ed.)
         1989 Lectures in Complex Systems, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complex-
         ity, Lectures Volume 2, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, California, 213–269.
      Epstein J.M. (1997) Nonlinear Dynamics, Mathematical Biology, and Social Science, Addi-
         son Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
      Eubank S., Farmer J.D. (1989) An Introduction to Chaos and Randomness, in Jen E. (ed.)
         1989 Lectures in Complex Systems, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complex-
         ity, Lectures Volume 2, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, California, 75–190.
      Falconer K.J. (1985) The Geometry of Fractal Sets, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
      Falconer K.J. (1990) Fractal Geometry: Mathematical Foundations and Applications, Wiley,
         New York.
      Fang F., Sanglier M. (eds.) (1997) Complexity and Self-Organization in Social and Economic
         Systems, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Farmer J.D., Ott E., Yorke J.A. (1983) The Dimension of Chaotic Attractors, Physica, 7D,
         153–170.
                                                                                  References    363

Feigenbaum M. (1978) Quantitative Universality for a Class of Nonlinear Transformation,
   Journal of Statistical Physics, 19, 25–52.
Feigenbaum M. (1980) Universal Behavior in Nonlinear Systems, Los Alamos Science,
   Summer, 4–27.
Fermi E., Pasta J., Ulam S. (1955) Studies on Nonlinear Problems, Document LA-1940, Los
   Alamos, May.
Fischer M.M. (1989) Innovation, Diffusion and Regions, in Andersson Å.E., Batten D.F.,
   Karlsson C. (eds.) Knowledge and Industrial Organization, Springer Verlag, Berlin,
   47–61.
Flood R.L., Carson E.R. (1986) Dealing with Complexity, Plenum Press, London.
Forrester J.W. (1969) Urban Dynamics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Forrester J.W. (1971) World Dynamics, Wight-Allen Press, New York.
Fotheringham A.S., O’Kelly M.E. (1989) Spatial Interaction Models: Formulations and
   Applications, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
Frankhauser P. (1994) La fractalité des structures urbaines, Anthropos, Paris.
Franses P.H., Van Dijk D. (2000) Non-Linear Time Series Models in Empirical Finance,
   Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Freiling Ch. (1986) Axioms of Symmetry: Throwing Darts at the Real Number Line, Journal
   of Symbolic Logic, 51, 1, 190–200.
Frenkel A., Shefer D. (1997) Technological Innovation and Diffusion Models: A Review, in
   Bertuglia C.S., Lombardo S., Nijkamp P. (eds.) Innovative Behaviour in Space and Time,
   Springer Verlag, Berlin, 41–63.
Frost A.J., Prechter R.J. (1990) Elliott Wave Principle: Key to Stock Market Proﬁts, Lambert-
   Gann, Gainesville, Georgia.
Fujita M., Krugman P., Venables A.J. (2000) The Spatial Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge,
   Massachusetts.
Gandolﬁ A. (1999) Formicai, imperi, cervelli, Bollati Boringhieri, Turin.
Gaudry M.J.I., Dagenais M.G. (1979) The Dogit Model, Transportation Research, 13B,
   105–111.
Gause G.F. (1934) The Struggle for Existence, Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland
   [available in Russian and in English on the website http://www.ggause.com].
Gause G.F. (1935) Experimental Demonstrations of Volterra’s Periodic Oscillations in the
   Number of Animals, British Journal of Experimental Biology, 12, 44–48.
Gell-Mann M. (1994) The Quark and the Jaguar, Little, Brown and Company, London.
Giusti E. (1999) Ipotesi sulla natura degli oggetti matematici, Bollati Boringhieri, Turin.
Glasko V.B., Mudretsova E.A., Strakhov V.N. (1987) Inverse Problems in Gravitometry and
   Magnetometry, in Tikhonov A.N., Goncharsky A.V. (eds.) Ill-Posed Problems in the
   Natural Sciences, Mir, Moscow, 21–52.
Gleick J. (1987) Chaos, Penguin, New York [Italian edition: (1989) Caos, Rizzoli, Milan].
Gödel K. (1931) Über Formal Unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und Ver-
   wandter Systeme, Monatschefte der Mathematik und Physik, 38, 173–198.
Gödel K (1986) Collected Works, Volume 1, Publications 1929–1936, edited by Feferman S.,
   Dawson J.W., Goldfarb W., Parsons Ch., Solovay R.N., Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Gödel K. (1990) Collected Works, Volume II, Publications 1938–1974, edited by Feferman S.,
   Dawson J.W., Goldfarb W., Parsons Ch., Solovay R.N., Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Gödel K. (1995) Collected Works, Volume III, Unpublished Essays and Lectures, edited by
   Feferman S., Dawson J.W., Goldfarb W., Parsons Ch., Solovay R.N., Oxford University
   Press, Oxford.
364   References

      Goldberg A.L., Rigney D.R., West B.J. (1994) Caos e frattali in ﬁsiologia umana, Quaderni di
        Le Scienze, 81, 45–50.
      Goldblatt R. (1998) An Introduction to Nonstandard Analysis, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
      Goncharsky A.V. (1987) Ill-Posed Problems and Their Solution Methods, in Tikhonov A.N.,
        Goncharsky A.V. (eds.) (1987) Ill-Posed Problems in the Natural Sciences, Mir, Moscow,
        21–52.
      Goodwin R.M. (1951) The Non-Linear Accelerator and the Persistence of Business Cycles,
        Econometrica, 19, 1–17.
      Goodwin R.M. (1991) Economic Evolution, Chaotic Dynamics and the Marx–Keynes–
        Schumpeter System, in Hodgson G.M., Screpanti E. (eds.) Rethinking Economics, Edward
        Elgar, Aldershot, 138–152.
      Gordon W.B. (1996) Period Three Trajectories of the Logistic Map, Mathematics Magazine,
        69, 118–120.
      Granger G.G. (1993) La science et les sciences, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris.
      Grassberger P. (1981) On the Hausdorff Dimension of Fractal Attractors, Journal of Statis-
        tical Physics, 26, 173–179.
      Grassberger P., Procaccia I. (1983a) Measuring the Strangeness of Strange Attractors, Phy-
        sica, 9D, 189–208.
      Grassberger P., Procaccia I. (1983b) Characterization of Strange Attractors, Physics Review
        Letters, 50, 346–349.
      Grebogi C., Ott E., Pelikan S., Yorke J.A. (1984) Strange Attractors that are not Chaotic,
        Physica, 13D, 261–268.
      Grebogi C., Ott E., Yorke J.A. (1987) Chaos, Strange Attractors and Fractal Basin Boundaries
        in Nonlinear Dynamics, Science, 238, 632–638.
      Guerrien B. (1999) La société, objet complexe et changeant, Pour la science, Dossier: Les
        mathématiques sociales, July, 20–21.
      Guerriero G. (2001) Kurt Gödel, paradossi logici e verità matematica, Le scienze, I grandi
        della scienza, 4, 19.
      Gullen M. (1995) Five Equations that Changed the World, Hyperion, New York.
      Haag G., Muntz M., Pumain D., Saint-Julien T., Sanders L. (1992) Interurban Migration and
        the Dynamics of a System of Cities, Environment and Planning A, 24, 181–198.
      Hadamard J. (1932) Le problème de Cauchy et les équations aux dérivées partielles linéaires
        hyperboliques, Hermann, Paris.
      Haken H. (1977) Synergetics: An Introduction, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Haken H. (1983) Advanced Synergetics, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Haken H. (1985) Complex Systems – Operational Approach, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Haken H. (1990) Synergetics of Cognition, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Hallett M. (1984) Cantorian Set Theory and Limitation of Size, Oxford University Press,
        Oxford.
      Hannon B., Ruth M. (1997a) Modelling Dynamic Biological Systems, Springer Verlag, New
        York.
      Hannon B., Ruth M. (1997b) Modelling Dynamic Economic Systems, Springer Verlag, New
        York.
      Hausdorff F. (1919) Dimension und äusseres Mass, Mathematische Annalen, 79, 157–179.
      Havel I. (1995) Scale Dimensions in Nature, International Journal of General Systems, 23, 2,
        303–332.
      Heisenberg W. (1927) Über den anschaulischen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Kinematik
        und Mechanik, Zeitschrift für Physik, 43, 172–198.
                                                                                      References    365

Hénon M.A. (1976) A Two-Dimensional Mapping with Strange Attractors, Communications
   in Mathematical Physics, 50, 69–70.
Hensher D.A., Johnson L.W. (1981) Applied Discrete Choice Modelling, Croom Helm,
   London.
Herken R. (ed.) (1983) The Universal Turing Machine: A Half-Century Survey, Oxford
   University Press, Oxford.
Herrmann H. (1998) From Sociobiology to Sociopolitics, Yale University Press, New Haven,
   Connecticut.
Hewings G.J.D., Sonis M., Madden M., Kimura Y. (eds.) (1999) Understanding and Inter-
   preting Economic Structure, Springer Verlag, New York.
Heylighen F. (1990) Relational Closure: A Mathematical Concept for Distinction-making
   and Complexity Analysis, in Trappl R. (ed.) Cybernetics and Systems ’90, World Science,
   Singapore, 335–342.
Heyting A. (1956) Intuitionism, an Introduction, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Hicks J.R. (1950) A Contribution to the Theory of the Trade Cycle, Oxford University Press,
   Oxford.
Higgs H. (1897) The Physiocrats, Langland Press, London [available on the website http://
   socserv2.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/].
Hirsch M., Smale S. (1974) Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems, and Linear Algebra,
   Academic Press, New York.
Hodgson G.M., Screpanti E. (eds.) Rethinking Economics, Edward Elgar, Aldershot.
Hofstadter D. (1979) Gödel, Escher, Bach, The Eternal Golden Braid, Harper and Row,
   New York.
Holland J. (1996) Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity, Perseus Books,
   New York.
Holland J. (1999) Emergence, from Chaos to Order, Perseus Books, New York.
Holden A.V., Muhamad M.A. (1986) A Graphical Zoo of Strange and Peculiar Attractors, in
   Holden A.V. (ed.) Chaos, Manchester University Press, Manchester, 15–35.
Holling C.S. (1959) Some Characteristics of Simple Types of Predation and Parasitism,
   Canadian Entomology, 91, 385–398.
Honig W.R. (1959) Nonstandard Logics and Nonstandard Metrics in Physics, World Scien-
   tiﬁc, Singapore .
Horgan P. (1995) From Complexity to Perplexity, Scientiﬁc American, June, 104–109.
Horrocks G. (1987) Generative Grammar, Longman, London.
Householder A.S. (1974) Principles of Numerical Analysis, Dover, New York.
Isard W. (1960) Methods of Regional Analysis, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Isard W. (1999) Regional Science: Parallels from Physics and Chemistry, Papers in Regional
   Science, 78, 5–20.
Israel G. (1986) Modelli matematici, Editori Riuniti, Rome.
Israel G. (1994) Immagini matematiche della realtà, Quaderni di Le Scienze, 81, 3–7.
Israel G. (1996) La mathématisation du réel. Essai sur la modélisation mathématique,
   Éditions du Seuil, Paris [Italian edition: (1997) La visione matematica della realtà. Intro-
   duzione ai temi e alla storia della modellistica matematica, Laterza, Rome].
Israel G. (1999) Scienza e storia: la convivenza difﬁcile, Di Renzo Editore, Rome.
Jones H. (1991) Fractals before Mandelbrot – A Selected History, in Crilly A.J., Earnshaw
   R.A., Jones H. (eds.) Fractals and Chaos, Springer Verlag, New York, 7–33.
Jordan D.W., Smith P. (1977) Nonlinear Ordinary Differential Equations, Oxford University
   Press, New York.
366   References

      Jost Ch., Arino O., Arditi R. (1999) About Deterministic Extinction in Ratio-dependent
        Predator Prey Models, Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 61, 19–32.
      Kalecki M. (1954) Theory of Economic Dynamics, Allen and Unwin, London.
      Katok A., Hasselblatt B. (1995) Introduction to the Modern Theory of Dynamical Systems,
        Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
      Kaufmann A. (1975) Introduction to the Theory of Fuzzy Subsets, Academic Press, New
        York.
      Kauffman S. (1986) Autocatalytic Sets of Proteins, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 119, 1–24.
      Kauffman S. (1994) Whispers from Carnot: The Origins of Order and Principles of Adapta-
        tion in Complex Nonequilibrium Systems, in Cowan G.A., Pines D., Meltzer D. (eds.)
        Complexity – Metaphors, Models and Reality, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of
        Complexity, Proceedings Volume 19, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 83–160.
      Kauffman S. (1995) At Home in the Universe, Oxford University Press, New York.
      Keisler H.J. (1986) Elementary Calculus: An Approach Using Inﬁnitesimals (2nd ed) Prindle,
        Weber and Schmidt, Boston, Massachusetts [available on the website http://www.math.
        wisc.edn/keisler/calc.html]
      Kline M. (1990) Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times, Oxford University
        Press, Oxford.
      Koyré A. (1961) La révolution astronomique, Herman, Paris.
      Kraft R.L. (1999) Chaos, Cantor Sets, and Hyperbolicity for the Logistic Maps, American
        Mathematical Monthly, 106, 400–408.
      Krugman P. (1996) The Self-Organizing Economy, Blackwell, Malden, Massachusetts.
      Lakatos I. (1978) Cauchy and the continuum: The Signiﬁcance of Non-Standard Analysis for
        the History and Philosophy of Mathematics. The Mathematical lutelligencer, 3, 151–161.
      Landau L.D., Lifshitz E.M. (1959) Fluid Mechanics, Mir, Moscow [2nd edition: (1987),
        reprinted (1989), Reed Educational and Professional Publishing, Oxford].
      Landau L.D., Lifshitz E.M. (1970) Field Theory, Mir, Moscow [4th edition: (1975), reprinted
        (1987), Reed Educational and Professional Publishing, Oxford].
      Langton C.G. (1990) Computation at the Edge of Chaos: Phase Transition and Emergent
        Computation, Physica, 42D, 12–37.
      Laplace P.S. (1814) Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Courcier, Paris.
      Laskar J. (1989) A Numerical Experiment on the Chaotic Behaviour of the Solar System,
        Nature, 338, 237–238.
      Le Bras H. (1999) Des modèles d’occupation de l’espace, Pour la science, Dossier, Les
        mathématiques sociales, July, 28–31.
      Lekachman R. (1959) A History of Economic Ideas, Harper & Row, New York [Italian
        edition: (1993) Storia del pensiero economico, Franco Angeli, Milan].
      Leonardi G. (1985) Equivalenza asintotica tra la teoria delle utilità casuali e la massimizza-
        zione dell’entropia, in Reggiani A. (ed.) Territorio e trasporti, Franco Angeli, Milan, 29–
        66.
      Leonardi G. (1987) The Choice-Theoretic Approach: Population Mobility as an Example, in
        Bertuglia C.S., Leonardi G., Occelli S., Rabino G.A., Tadei R., Wilson A.G. (eds.) Urban
        Systems: Contemporary Approach to Modelling, Croom Helm, London, 136–188.
      Leven R.W., Pompe B., Wilke C., Koch B.P. (1985) Experiments on Periodic and Chaotic
        Motions of a Parametrically Forced Pendulum, Physica, 16D, 371.
      Levy D. (1994) Chaos Theory and Strategy, Theory, Application and Managerial Implica-
        tions, Strategic Management Journal, 15, 167–178.
      Lewin R. (1992) Complexity, Life at the Edge of Chaos, Macmillan, New York.
                                                                                        References    367

Li T.Y., Yorke J.A. (1975) Period Three Implies Chaos, American Mathematical Monthly, 82,
   985–992.
Lloyd S. (1989) Physical Measures of Complexity, in Jen E. (ed.) 1989 Lectures in Complex
   Systems, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Lectures Volume 2,
   Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, California, 67–73.
Lorenz E.N. (1963) Deterministic Non-Periodic Flows, Journal of Atmospheric Science, 20,
   134–141.
Lotka A.J. (1925) Elements of Physical Biology, Williams and Wilkins Co., Baltimore,
   Maryland.
Lowry I.S. (1964) A Model of Metropolis, Memorandum RM-4035–RC, Rand Corporation,
   Santa Monica, California.
Lyapunov A.M. (1954) Collected Works, Akademia Nauk, Moscow.
Lyons J. (1968) Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics, Cambridge University Press, London.
Maddy P. (1988a) Believing the Axioms I, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 53, 2, 481–511.
Maddy P. (1988b) Believing the Axioms II, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 53, 3, 736–764.
Maddy P. (1990) Realism in Mathematics, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Majorana E. (1942) Il valore delle leggi statistiche nella ﬁsica e nelle scienze sociali, Scientia,
   36, 58–66.
Malthus Th.R. (1798) Essay on the Principle of Population as it Affects the Future Improve-
   ment of Society with Remarks on the Speculation of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and
   Other Writers, Johnson, London [available on line at the site http://socserv2.mcmaster.ca/
   ~econ/ugcm/3ll3/]
Mandelbrot B. (1975) Les objets fractals, Flammarion, Paris.
Mandelbrot B. (1986) Fractals and the Rebirth of Iteration Theory, in Peitgen H.O., Richter
   P.H. The Beauty of Fractals: Images of Complex Dynamical Systems, Springer-Verlag,
   Berlin, 151–160.
Mandelbrot B. (1997a) Fractales, hasard et ﬁnance, Flammarion, Paris.
Mandelbrot B. (1997b) Fractals and Scaling in Finance: Discontinuity, Concentration, Risk,
   Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Mandelbrot B. (1999a) Multifractals and 1/f Noise: Wild Self-afﬁnity in Physics, Springer
   Verlag, Berlin.
Mandelbrot B. (1999b) A Multifractal Walk Down Wall Street, Scientiﬁc American, Febru-
   ary, 50–53.
Manneville P., Pomeau Y. (1980) Different Ways to Turbulence in Dissipative Dynamical
   Systems, Physica, 1D, 219–226.
Mantegna R.N. (2001) Fisica e mercati ﬁnanziari, Le scienze, 394, June, 92–97.
Mantegna R.N., Stanley H.E. (2000) An Introduction to Econophysics: Correlations and
   Complexity in Finance, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Marshaal M. (ed.) (2000) Bourbaki, une société secrète de mathématiciens, Pour la science,
   Dossier, 2, Paris.
Martinet A. (1960) Éléments de linguistique générale, Librairie Armand Colin, Paris.
Marx K. (1864) Das Kapital, Verlag Otto Meissuer, Hamburg [English edition: (1942)
   Capital, Penguin, London; available in German on the website http://www.mlwerke.de/
   me/default.htm; available in English on the website http://www.marxists.org/archive/
   marx/works/1867-c1].
May R.M. (1973) Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems, Princeton University Press,
   Princeton, New Jersey.
368   References

      May R.M. (1976) Simple Mathematical Models with Complicated Dynamics, Nature, 261,
        459–467.
      May R.M., Leonard W.J. (1975) Nonlinear Aspects of Competition between Three Species,
        Siam Journal of Applied Mathematics, 29, 243–253.
      Medio A. (1992) Chaotic Dynamics. Theory and Applications to Economics, Cambridge
        University Press, Cambridge.
      Medio A., Lines M. (2001) Nonlinear Dynamics: A Primer, Cambridge University Press,
        Cambridge.
      Meyer-Spasche R. (1999) Pattern Formation in Viscous Flows: The Taylor Couette Problem
        and Rayleigh-Bénard Convection, International Series in Numerical Mathematics,
        Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
      Moon F.C. (1992) Chaotic and Fractal Dynamics, Wiley, New York.
      Mullin T. (1991) Chaos in Physical Systems, in Crilly A.J., Earnshaw R.A., Jones H. (eds.)
        Fractals and Chaos, Springer Verlag, New York, 237–245.
      Nagel E., Newman J.R. (1958) Gödel’s Proof, New York University Press, New York.
      Neftci S. (2000) Introduction to the Mathematics of Financial Derivatives, Academic Press,
        New York.
      Nelson E. (1977) Internal set theory: A New Approach to Nonstandard Analysis, Bulletin
        American Mathematical Society, 83, 1165–1198 [available on the website www.math.
        princeton.edu/nelson/books.html].
      Newton I. (1687) Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, Royal Society, London
        [reprinted in Latin: (1871) Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, Thomson Black-
        burn, Glasgow; English edition: (1968) The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philoso-
        phy, Dawson, London; English translation by Andrew Motte (1729), partly available on
        the website http://gravitee.tripod.com/PRINCIPIA.HTM].
      Nicolis G., Prigogine I. (1987) Exploring Complexity. An Introduction, Freeman, New York.
      Nijkamp P., Leitner H., Wrigley N. (eds.) (1985) Measuring the Unmeasurable. Analysis of
        Qualitative Spatial Data, Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague.
      Nijkamp P., Reggiani A. (1990) An Evolutionary Approach to the Analysis of Dynamic
        Systems with Special Reference to Spatial Interaction Model, Sistemi urbani, 12,
        95–112.
      Nijkamp P., Reggiani A. (1991) Chaos Theory and Spatial Dynamics, Journal of Transport
        Economics and Policy, 25, 81–96.
      Nijkamp P., Reggiani A. (1992a) Interaction, Evolution and Chaos in Space, Springer Verlag,
        Berlin.
      Nijkamp P., Reggiani A. (1992b) Spatial Competition and Ecologically Based Socio-Eco-
        nomic Models, Socio-Spatial Dynamics, 3, 89–109.
      Nijkamp P., Reggiani A. (eds.) (1993) Nonlinear Evolution of Spatial Economic Systems,
        Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Nijkamp P., Reggiani A. (1998) The Economics of Complex Spatial Systems, Elsevier,
        Amsterdam.
      Nijkamp P., Rietveld P., Voogd H. (1991) The Use of Multicriteria Analysis in Physical
        Planning, Elsevier, Amsterdam.
      Orishimo I. (1987) An Approach to Urban Dynamics, Geographical Analysis, 19, 200–210.
      Orléan A. (1999) À quoi servent les économistes?, Pour la science, Dossier: Les mathéma-
        tiques sociales, July, 4–6.
      Osborne A.R., Provenzale A. (1989) Finite Correlation Dimension for Stochastic Systems
        with Power-law Spectra, Physica, 35D, 357.
                                                                                       References    369

Ott E. (1993) Chaos in Dynamical Systems, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Overman E. (1996) The New Science of Management, Chaos and Quantum Theory and
   Method, Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 6, 75–89.
Paelinck J. (1992) De l’économétrie spatiale aux nouvelles dynamiques spatiales, in Derycke
   P.-H. (sous la direction de) Espace et dynamiques territoriales, Economica, Paris, 137–174.
Paelinck J. (1996) Économétrie urbaine dynamique, in Huriot J.-M., Pumain D. (sous la
   direction de) Penser la ville, Anthropos, Paris, 91–106.
Palmer R.G., Arthur W.B., Holland J.H., Le Baron B., Tayler P. (1994) Artiﬁcial Economic
   Life: A Simple Model of Stockmarket, Physica, 75D, 264–274.
Pareto V. (1896) Cours d’économie politique, Geneva.
Parisi G. (1998) Statistical Field Theory, Perseus Books, Reading, Massachusetts.
Parks P.C. (1992) A.M. Lyapunov Stability Theory – 100 years on, IMA Journal of Math-
   ematics Control Information, 9, 4, 275–303.
Pearl R. (1925) The Biology of Population Growth, Knopf, New York.
Pearl R., Reed L.J. (1920) On the Rate of Growth of the Population of the United States since
   1790 and its Mathematical Representation, Proceedings of the National Academy of
   Sciences, USA, 6, 275–288.
Peitgen H.O., Richter P.H. (1986) The Beauty of Fractals: Images of Complex Dynamical
   Systems, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Peitgen H.O., Saupe D., Jürgens H. (1992) Chaos and Fractals: New Frontiers of Science,
   Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
Penrose R. (1989) The Emperor’s New Mind, Oxford University Press, Oxford [Italian
   edition: (1992) La mente nuova dell’imperatore, Rizzoli, Milan].
Penrose R. (1994) Shadows of the Mind, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Perko L. (1991) Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, Springer Verlag, New York.
Pesenti Cambursano O. (ed.) (1967) Opere di Pierre Simon Laplace, UTET, Turin.
Peters E.E. (1994) Fractal Market Analysis, Wiley, New York.
Peters E.E. (1996) Chaos and Order in the Capital Markets, Wiley, New York.
Peterson I. (1993) Newton’s Clock, Freeman, New York.
Phillips A.W. (1954) Stabilisation Policy in a Closed Economy, Economic Journal, 64,
   290–323.
Phillips A.W. (1957) Stabilisation Policy and the Time-form of Lagged Responses, Economic
   Journal, 67, 265–277.
Pickover C. (1990) Computers, Chaos, Pattern and Beauty – Graphics from an Unseen
   World, St Martin’s Press, New York [new edition (2001) Dover, New York].
Pickover C. (1994) Chaos in Wonderland, St. Martin’s Press, New York.
Pitﬁeld D.E. (ed.) (1984) Discrete Choice Models in Regional Science, Pion, London.
Poincaré H. (1899) Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique céleste, Gauthier-Villars, Paris.
Poincaré H. (1908) Science et méthode, Flammarion, Paris.
Pomeau Y., Manneville P. (1980) Intermittent Transition to Turbulence in Dissipative Dy-
   namical Systems, Communications in Mathematical Physics, 74, 189–197.
Portugali J. (2000) Self-Organization and the City, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Prigogine I. (1962) Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Wiley, New York.
Prigogine I. (1980) From Being to Becoming, Freeman, S. Francisco.
Prigogine I. (1993) Le leggi del caos, Lezioni italiane, Laterza, Rome.
Prigogine I., Stengers I. (1979) La nouvelle alliance, Gallimard, Paris.
Prigogine I., Stengers I. (1984) Order out of Chaos, Bantam Books, New York.
Prigogine I., Stengers I. (1988) Entre le temps et l’éternité, Librairie Arthème Fayard, Paris.
370   References

      Pumain D. (1997) Ricerca urbana e complessità, in Bertuglia C.S., Vaio F. (eds.) La città e le
        sue scienze, Volume 2, Le scienze della città, Franco Angeli, Milan, 1–45 [English edition:
        (1998) Urban Research and Complexity, in Bertuglia C.S., Bianchi G., Mela A. (eds.) The
        City and its Sciences, Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg, 323–361].
      Pumain D., Sanders L., Saint-Julien Th. (1989) Villes et auto-organisation, Economica, Paris.
      Puu T. (1990) A Chaotic Model of the Business Cycle, Occasional Paper Series on Socio-
        Spatial Dynamics, 1, 1–19.
      Puu T. (2000) Attractors, Bifurcations and Chaos, Nonlinear Phenomena in Economics,
        Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Quetelet A. (1835) Sur l’homme et le développement de ses facultés, ou essai de physique
        sociale, Bachelier, Paris.
      Rabino G. (1991) Teoria e modelli di interazione spaziale, in Bertuglia C.S., La Bella A. (eds.)
        I sistemi urbani, Franco Angeli, Milan, 485–508.
      Rasband S.N. (1990) Chaotic Dynamics of Nonlinear Systems, Wiley, New York.
      Rasetti M. (1986) Modern Methods in Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics, World Scientiﬁc,
        Singapore.
      Ravenstein E.G. (1885) The Laws of Migration, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 48,
        167–235.
      Ray Th.S. (1991) An Approach to the Synthesis of Life, in Langton C.G., Taylor C., Farmer
        J.D., Rasmussen S. (eds.) Artiﬁcial Life II, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Science of
        Complexity, Volume 11, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, California, 371–408.
      Ray Th.S. (1994) Evolution and Complexity, in Cowan G.A., Pines D., Meltzer D. (eds.)
        Complexity – Metaphors, Models and Reality, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of
        Complexity, Proceedings Volume 19, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 161–176.
      Rayleigh, Lord (1902) Scientiﬁc Papers, Volume 3, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
        1–14.
      Regge T. (1999) L’universo senza ﬁne, Mondadori, Milan.
      Reggiani A. (1997) Verso la città complessa: approcci e sperimentazioni in economia spaziale,
        in Bertuglia C.S., Vaio F. (eds.) La città e le sue scienze, Volume 4, Le metodologie delle
        scienze della città, Franco Angeli, Milan, 129–162 [English edition: (1998) Towards the
        Complex City: Approaches and Experiments in Spatial Economics, in Bertuglia C.S.,
        Bianchi G., Mela A. (eds.) The City and its Sciences, Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg,
        797–824].
      Reggiani A. (ed.) (2000) Spatial Economic Science, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Reilly W.J. (1931) The Law of Retail Gravitation, G.P. Putnam and Sons, New York.
      Ricardo D. (1815) Essay on the Inﬂuence of a Low Price of Corn on the Proﬁts of Stock, John
        Murray, London. [available on several websites, e.g.: http://www.oswego.edu/kane/
        eco322.html].
      Riganti R. (2000) Biforcazioni e caos, Levrotto e Bella, Turin.
      Robbins P., Coulter M. (1998) Management, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
      Robert R. (2001) L’effet papillon n’existe plus!, Pour la science, 283, May, 28–35.
      Robinson A. (1966) Non-standard Analysis, North-Holland, Amsterdam [revised edition:
        (1996) Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey].
      Robinson C. (1999) Dynamical Systems: Stability, Symbolic Dynamics and Chaos, CRC
        Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
      Rössler O.E. (1976a) An Equation for Continuous Chaos, Physics Letters A, 57, 397.
      Rössler O.E. (1976b) Chemical Turbulence: Chaos in a Small Reaction-Diffusion System,
        Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, 31, 1168–1172.
                                                                                   References    371

Ruelle D. (1991) Hasard et chaos, Éditions Odile Jacob, Paris.
Ruelle D., Takens F. (1971) On the Nature of Turbulence, Communications in Mathematical
   Physics, 20, 167–192.
Russell B. (1903) The Principles of Mathematics, Norton, New York.
Saari D.G., Xia Zh. (1995) Off to Inﬁnity in Finite Time, Notices of American Mathematical
   Society, 42, 5, 538–546 [available on the website http://www.ams.org/notices/199505/
   saari-2.pdf].
Saha P., Strogatz S.H. (1995) The Birth of Period Three, Mathematics Magazine, 68, 42–47.
Samuelson P.A. (1939) Interactions Between the Multiplier Analysis and the Principle of
   Acceleration, Review of Economics and Statistics, 21, 75–78.
Samuelson P.A. (1947) Foundations of Economic Analysis, Harvard University Press, Cam-
   bridge, Massachusetts.
Sanders L. (1992) Systèmes de villes et synergétique, Anthropos, Paris.
Sangalli A. (1998) The Importance of Being Fuzzy, Princeton University Press, Princeton New
   Jersey.
Sharkovsky, A.N. (1964) Co-Existence of Cycles of a Continuous Mapping of a Line onto
   Itself, Ukrainian Mathematical Journal, 16, 61–71.
Schroeder M. (1991) Fractals, Chaos, Power Laws: Minutes from an Inﬁnite Paradise,
   Freeman, New York.
Schumpeter J.A. (1934) The Theory of Economic Development, Harvard University Press,
   Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Schumpeter J.A. (1939) Business Cycles, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Schuster H.G. (1984) Deterministic Chaos. An Introduction, Physik-Verlag, Weinheim.
Segrè E. (1971) Enrico Fermi, ﬁsico, Zanichelli, Bologna [English edition: (1995) Enico
   Fermi, Physicist, University of Chicago Press, Chicago].
Sen A., Smith T.E. (1995) Gravity Models of Spatial Interaction Behavior, Springer Verlag,
   Heidelberg.
Serra R., Zanarini G. (1986) Tra ordine e caos, CLUEB, Bologna.
Serra R., Zanarini G. (1990) Complex Systems and Cognitive Processes, Springer Verlag,
   Berlin.
Shapiro S. (2000) Thinking about Mathematics, Oxford University Press. Oxford.
Shishikura M. (1994) The Boundary of the Mandelbrot Set has Hausdorff Dimension Two,
   Astérisque, 7, 222, 389–405.
Siegler L.E. (2002) Fibonacci’s Liber Abaci. A Translation into Modern English of Leonardo
   Pisano’s Book of Calculation, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg.
Simmons G.F. (1963) Introduction to Topology and Modern Analysis, McGraw-Hill Inter-
   national Student Edition, Singapore.
Simó C. (2000) New Families of Solutions in N-Body Problems, Preprints 3rd European
   Congress of Mathematics, Barcelona, 10–14 July.
Smale S. (1967) Differentiable Dynamical Systems, Bulletin of the American Mathematical
   Society, 73, 747–817.
Smith D.E. (1958) History of Mathematics, Dover, New York.
Smith M.J. (1974) Models in Ecology, Cambridge University Press, London.
Smullyan R. (1992) Satan, Cantor, and Inﬁnity, and Other Mind-Boggling Puzzles, Alfred
   A. Knopf, New York.
Sokal A., Bricmont J. (1997) Impostures intellectuelles, Éditions Odile Jacob, Paris [English
   edition (1998): Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals’ Abuse of Science, Pica-
   dor, New York.
372   References

      Sonis M. (1983a) Competition and Environment: A Theory of Temporal Innovation Diffu-
         sion, in Grifﬁth D.A., Lea A.C. (eds.) Evolving Geographical Structures, Martinus Nijhoff,
         The Hague, 99–129.
      Sonis M. (1983b) Spatio-Temporal Spread of Competitive Innovations: An Ecological Ap-
         proach, Papers of the Regional Science Association, 52, 159–174.
      Sonis M. (1984) Dynamic Choice of Alternatives, Innovation Diffusion and Ecological
         Dynamics of the Volterra–Lotka Model, London Papers in Regional Science, 14, 29–43.
      Sonis M. (1988) Discrete Time Choice Models Arising from Innovation Diffusion Dynamics,
         Sistemi urbani, 10, 93–107.
      Sonis M. (1990a) From ‘Homo Economicus’ to ‘Homo Socialis’ in Innovative Diffusion and
         Dynamic Choice Processes, Horizons in Geography, 28–29, 19–27.
      Sonis, M. (1990b) Logistic Growth: Models and Applications to Multiregional Relative
         Dynamics and Competition of Socio-Economic Stocks, Sistemi urbani, 1, 17–46.
      Sonis M. (1991) A Territorial Socio-ecological Approach in Innovation Diffusion Theory:
         Socio-ecological and Economic Interventions of Active Environment into Territorial Dif-
         fusion of Competitive Innovation, Sistemi urbani, 13, 29–59.
      Sonis M. (1995) A Territorial Socio-ecological Approach to Innovation Diffusion, Schumpe-
         terian Competition and Dynamic Choice, in Bertuglia C.S., Fischer M.M., Preto G. (eds.)
         (1995) Technological Change, Economic Development and Space, Springer Verlag, Berlin,
         34–74.
      Sonis M., Dendrinos D. (1990) Multi-stock, Multi-location Relative Volterra–Lotka Dynam-
         ics Are Degenerate, Sistemi urbani, 12, 7–15.
      Sprott J.C. (1993) Strange Attractors: Creating Patterns in Chaos, Henry Holt, New York.
      Stacey R. (1996) Complexity and Creativity in Organizations, Berret Koehler, San Francisco,
         California.
      Staricco L., Vaio F. (2003) Cooperazione dalla competizione: l’approccio della complessità e
         l’emergenza dalla cooperazione tra gli attori urbani, in Fusco Girard L., Forte B., Cerreta
         M., De Toro P., Forte F. (eds.) L’uomo e la città, Verso uno sviluppo umano sostenibile,
         Proceedings of the International Congress ‘The Human Being and the City: Towards a
         Human and Sustainable Development’, Naples, 6–8 September 2000, Franco Angeli,
         Milan, 238–254.
      Stephenson J.W., Wang Y. (1990) Numerical Solution of Feigenbaum’s Equation, Applied
         Mathematics Notes, 15, 68–78.
      Stephenson J.W., Wang Y. (1991a) Relationships between Eigenfunctions Associated with
         Solutions of Feigenbaum’s Equation, Applied Mathematics Letters, 4, 53–56.
      Stephenson J.W., Wang Y. (1991b) Relationships between the Solutions of Feigenbaum’s
         Equation, Applied Mathematics Letters, 4, 37–39.
      Stewart I. (1981) Concepts of Modern Mathematics, Penguin, London.
      Stewart I. (1989) Does God Play Dice? The New Mathematics of Chaos, Penguin, London.
      Strogatz S.H. (1994) Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, Addison Wesley, Reading, Massachu-
         setts.
      Suber P. (1998) Inﬁnite Reﬂections, St John’s Review, 44, 2, 1–59.
      Swinney H.L. (1983) Observations of Order and Chaos in Nonlinear Systems, in Campbell
         D.K., Rose H.A. (eds.) Order and Chaos, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 3–15.
      Swinney H.L. (1985) Observations of Complex Dynamics and Chaos, in Cohen E.G.D. (ed.)
         Fundamental Problems in Statistical Mechanics, VI, Elsevier, New York, 253–289.
      Tabor M. (1989) Chaos and Integrability in Nonlinear Dynamics: An Introduction, Wiley,
         New York.
                                                                                   References    373

Tanner J.T. (1975) The Stability and the Intrinsic Growth Rates of Prey and Predator
  Populations, Ecology, 56, 855–867.
Tarski A. (1967) Truth and Proof, Scientiﬁc American, 220, 63–77.
Tarski A. (1975) Logic Semantics Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938, Clarendon
  Press, Oxford.
Taylor G.I. (1923) Stability of a Viscous Liquid Contained between Two Rotating Cylinders,
  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 223, 289.
Thiel D. (sous la direction de) (1998) La dynamique des systèmes, Hermès, Paris.
Thom R. (1972) Stabilité structurelle et morphogénèse, W.A. Benjamin Inc., Massachusetts
  [English edition: (1975) Structural Stability and Morphogenesis, Westview Press, Reading,
  Massachusetts].
Tikhonov A.N., Arsenin V.Ya. (1979) The Methods for Solving Ill-Posed Problems, Nauka,
  Moscow.
Tikhonov A.N., Goncharsky A.V. (eds.) (1987) Ill-Posed Problems in the Natural Sciences,
  Mir, Moscow.
Tricomi F.G. (1965) Lezioni di analisi matematica, Volume 1, CEDAM, Paduva.
Tuﬁllaro N.B., Reilly J., Abbott T. (1992) An Experimental Approach to Nonlinear Dynam-
  ics and Chaos, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts [available on the website http://
  www.drchaos.net/drchaos/Book/node2.html].
Turing A.M. (1937) On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungs-
  problem, Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 42, 230–265.
Van Dalen D. (1999) Mystic, Geometer and Intuitionist: the Life of L.E.J. Brouwer, Oxford
  University Press, Oxford.
Van den Bery I. (1990) Principles of Inﬁnitesimal Stochastic and Financial Analysis, Word
  Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
Van der Pol B.L. (1927) Forced Oscillations in a Circuit with Non-linear Resistance, Philo-
  sophical Magazine, 3, 65.
Van der Pol B.L., Van der Mark J. (1928) The Heartbeat Considered as a Relaxation
  Oscillation, and an Electrical Model of the Heart, The London, Edinburgh and Dublin
  Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 6, 763–775.
Van Sigt W.P. (1990) Brouwer’s Intuitionism, Elsevier-North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Verhulst P.F. (1838) Notice sur la loi que la population suit dans son accroissement, Corres-
  pondence Mathématique et Physique, 10, 113–121.
Verhulst P.F. (1850) À Quetelet, Pierre Francois Verhulst, Annuaire de l’Académie royale des
  science de Belgique, 16, 97–124.
Volterra V. (1926) Variazioni e ﬂuttuazioni del numero d’individui in specie animali convi-
  venti, Memorie della Regia Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Serie VI, Volume 2, 31–113.
Von Haeseler F., Peitgen H.O. (1988) Newton’s Method and Complex Dynamical Systems,
  Acta Applied Mathematics, 13, 3–58 [also in: Peitgen H.O. (ed.) (1989) Newton’s Method
  and Dynamical Systems, Kluwer, Dordrecht].
Vulpiani A. (1994) Determinismo e caos, La Nuova Italia Scientiﬁca, Rome.
Waldrop W.M. (1992) Complexity, The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos,
  Viking, London.
Walras L. (1874) Élements d’économie pure, L. Corbaz, Geneva.
Weick K. (1995) Sensemaking in Organizations, Sage, Thousand Oaks, California.
Weidlich W. (1991) Physics and Social Science, the Approach of Synergetics, Physics Reports,
  204, 1–163.
374   References

      Weidlich W., Haag G. (1983) Concepts and Models of a Quantitative Sociology, Springer
        Verlag, Berlin.
      Weidlich W., Haag G. (1988) Interregional Migration, Dynamic Theory and Comparative
        Results, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Weyl H. (1918) Kontinuum [edizione in English, trans. Pollard S., Bole Th. (1987): The
        Continuum, a Critical Examination of the Foundation of Analysis, The Thomas Jefferson
        University Press, Kirksville, Missouri; new edition: (1994) Dover, New York].
      Weyl H. (1949) Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science, Princeton University Press,
        Princeton, New Jersey.
      Wigner E.P. (1960) The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences,
        Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 13, 1–14 [available on several
        websites, e.g.: http://nedwww.ipac.caltech.edu/level5/March02/Wigner/Wigner.html].
      Wilder R.L. (1973) Evolution of Mathematical Concepts, Wiley, New York.
      Wilmott P., Howison S., Dewynne J. (1995) The Mathematics of Financial Derivatives,
        Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
      Wilson A.G. (1967) A Statistical Theory of Spatial Distribution Models, Transportation
        Research, 1, 253–269.
      Wilson A.G. (1970) Entropy in Urban and Regional Modelling, Pion, London.
      Wilson A.G. (1974) Urban and Regional Models in Geography and Planning, Wiley, London.
      Wilson A.G. (1981) Catastrophe Theory and Bifurcation, Croom Helm, London.
      Wolf A. (1984) Quantifying Chaos with Lyapunov Exponents, in Holden A.V. (ed.) Non-
        linear Scientiﬁc Theory and Applications, Manchester University Press, Manchester.
      Wolf A., Swift J.B., Swinney H.L., Vasano J.A. (1985) Determining Lyapunov Exponents
        from a Time Series, Physica, 16D, 285–317.
      Wolfram S. (1994) Cellular Automata and Complexity, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massa-
        chusetts.
      Zadeh L.A. (1965) Fuzzy Sets, Information and Control, 8, 338–356.
      Zanarini G. (1996) Complessità come modo di pensare il mondo, in Cerrato S. (ed.) Caos e
        complessità, CUEN, Naples, 7–29.
      Zeldovich Ya.B., Myškis A.D. (1976) Elements of Applied Mathematics, Mir, Moscow.
      Zermelo E. (1908) Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I, Mathematische
        Annalen, 65, 261–281 [English edition, in Van Heijenoort J. (1967) From Frege to Gödel:
        A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
        Massachusetts].
      Zhang W.-B. (1991) Synergetic Economics, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
      Zhang W.-B. (1997) The Complexity of Economic Evolution, in Fang F., Sanglier M. (eds.)
        Complexity and Self-Organization in Social and Economic Systems, Springer Verlag,
        Berlin, 57–75.
      Zurek W.H. (1989) Algorithmic Information Content, Church–Turing Thesis, Physical
        Entropy, and Maxwell’s Demon, in Jen E. (ed.) 1989 Lectures in Complex Systems,
        Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Lectures Volume 2, Addison-
        Wesley, Redwood City, California, 49–65.
Subject index


Age of Enlightenment; 4; 200; 203; 206;    cellular automata; 37; 195; 222
     208;                                  Charles Sturt University (CSU); 220
  classical science; 13–15; 203–209;       Complexity International; 220
       211                                 complex systems
  mechanism of; 200                          emergence in; 212; 221; 224; 226;
analysis                                           227; 277; 281
  non-standard; 279                          properties; 219–230
anthropic principle; 198                     self-organization in; 212; 215–227;
antimatter; 30                                     232; 237; 239; 240; 243; 244;
artiﬁcial stock market of Santa Fe; 249            277; 281
astronomy; 16; 110; 200; 202; 203;         control complexity; 227; 251
     204; 252                              Cours d’analyse de l’École
attractor(s)                                    Polytechnique (Cauchy); 318
  chaotic; 103; 112–122; 126; 128;         Cours d’économie politique
       147; 148; 150; 171; 240; 245             (Pareto); 62
  dimension; 147–150;                      cybernetics; 212
  Lorenz; 116; 117; 128; 147; 148
  Rössler; 118; 245                       Das Kapital (Marx); 322
  strange; 100; 111–119; 123; 126;         design complexity; 227; 251
       146; 245                            Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi del
  vs. chaotic; 112; 147; 179                    mondo, tolemaico e copernicano
autonomous equation/system/model                (Galilei); 263
  deﬁnition; 27; 37; 145                   dimension
average man; 4                               correlation; 148; 149
axiom of choice (Zermelo’s); 254                method of Grassberger and
                                                    Procaccia; 183
baker’s map; 119; 120; 121; 122              Hausdorff–Besicovich; 112;
Black and Scholes formula; 247                    147–148; 274
Bourbaki (les); 265; 272; 288; 296         double star system; 278
butterﬂy effect; 17; 103; 207; 281
                                           economics
Cambrian explosion; 233                      classical; 259–261; 302
capturing software; 234                      marginalist; 61
carrying capacity; 80; 81; 82; 87; 89;       mathematical; 60–64
     92; 94; 97; 154; 155; 156; 157; 159     neoclassical; 15; 62–64; 261
cat map (Arnold’s); 112; 113; 120          econophysics; 151; 248
376     Subject index

      Éléments de mathématique (Bourbaki);     homo oeconomicus; 244
            265                                   homo socialis; 244
      Elliott waves; 50                           human language; 233
      Encyclopédie; 208
      Entscheidungsproblem; 267; 301              independence of irrelevant alternatives;
      equation                                         184
         Dufﬁng; 79; 104                          inﬁnity
         Schrödinger; 214                           countable/uncountable; 125; 254;
         Van der Pol; 79; 301                             281; 282
         Verhulst; 102; 191–198                      actual inﬁnite; 253; 280
      Essay on the Inﬂuence of a Low Price of        potential inﬁnite; 253; 280
            Corn on the Proﬁt of Stock            inﬂation; 11; 12
            (Ricardo); 322                        Interjournal; 220
      Essay on the Principle of Population        invisible hand (A. Smith’s); 209; 210;
            (Malthus); 153                             240
      Essai philosophique sur les probabilités   iteration method; 162–164
            (Laplace); 203–204
      Essai sur l’application de l’analyse        Jupiter and Saturn (resonance between
            (Condorcet); 203                           the planets’ revolution periods);
                                                       137; 155
      feedback; 11; 12; 33; 74; 75; 87; 129;
           155; 156; 209–226; 239; 240; 247;      Kolmogorov–Sinai entropy; 140
           249;251; 253                           Kondratiev waves; 241
      Feigenbaum
        numbers (Feigenvalues); 177–178           La Monadologie (Leibniz); 206
        tree; 172–180                             Larsen effect; 129
      ﬁnancial instruments; 246; 247; 248         law(s) of
      ﬁrst integral; 41; 42                          gravitation of the moral world
      ﬁxed point(s)                                        (Durkheim); 7
        centre; 67                                   motion; 7; 19; 37; 39; 40; 41; 42;
        focal point                                        111
           stable; 70; 89                            Pearl: see logistic function
           unstable; 70; 89                          planets’ orbits (Kepler); 201
        nodal point                                  retail gravitation (Reilly); 5
           stable; 60; 70                            tendential fall in the proﬁt rate
           unstable; 62; 64; 70                            (Marx); 322
        of a function; 162–164                       universal gravitation (Newton); 4; 5;
        saddle point; 63; 64; 65; 85                       14; 16; 34; 182; 201; 277; 278
      functional response of the predator; 82;    Les méthodes nouvelles de la mécanique
           83; 85                                       céleste (Poincaré); 18; 131
      futures; 50; 246–248                        life appearance/evolution; 247; 262;
      fuzzy logic/sets; 260                             269; 270; 291; 295; 297; 298
                                                  limit cycle; 77; 78; 79; 82; 101; 102;
      holism; 15; 18; 218; 219; 225; 229; 241           103; 114; 140; 145
                                                                     Subject index    377

linear                                       ﬁnitism; 268
   approximation; 12; 29; 33; 44; 45;        formalism; 263; 265; 277
        127; 132; 139; 211                   intuitionism; 268
   causality; 210                            Platonism; 263; 269; 274; 280
   differential equation; 19–22              realism; 262; 269
   map; 104; 105; 106; 115; 121             mechanism; 200
   model of two interacting populations     metaphor of the world
      deﬁnition and qualitative              cosmic clock; 31; 200; 272
           properties; 54–57                 cosmic computer; 272; 273; 279; 280
      characteristic equation; 58; 60; 65    steam engine; 272
      solutions; 57–72                      model(s)
logistic                                     Allen (spatial self-organization); 244
   function (growth); 5; 8; 98; 100;         Arthur et al. (ﬁnancial markets);
        156–159; 186                              249
   map                                       Dendrinos (urban area of Madrid);
      deﬁnition and qualitative                   92
           characteristics; 12; 45; 48;      Dendrinos (urban areas of the United
           102; 126; 129; 145; 152; 278           States); 92
      dynamics of; 134; 135; 193–219         demographic of logistic growth; 196;
      example of application to                   197
           modelling in economics; 308;      diffusion of technological innovation;
           310                                    197–198; 307
      example of application to spatial      discrete choice; 183
           interaction modelling;            evolutionistic Tierra; 235
           224–230                           Goodwin; 245
      extended to the complex ﬁeld; 341      Goodwin–Kalecki–Phillips; 48
      Lyapunov exponent of; 176              harmonic oscillator; 24; 41–45; 48;
Lyapunov                                          51; 68; 79; 86; 114
   exponent(s); 137–145; 151; 178–180;       Holling (two interacting prey–
        187; 221                                  predator populations); 82–84;
   function; 134                                  294
   stability                                 Holling–Tanner (two interacting
      deﬁnition; 134                              prey–predator populations); 84
      ﬁrst criterion; 134                    joint population–income dynamics;
      second criterion; 134                       85
                                             two populations interacting linearly:
Mandelbrot set; 262; 271; 272; 274;               see linear model of two
    275                                           interacting populations
market indicators; 250                       logistic growth: see logistic function
mathematical truth; 196; 262–264; 268        logit; 184
mathematics (interpretation of)              Lowry (ﬂuxes in an urban system);
 computational; 273; 276; 282                     183
 constructivism; 268; 269; 273; 274;         May (two interacting prey–predator
      280; 282                                    populations); 82; 84
378     Subject index

      Malthus (exponential growth of a              hyperreal; 279
          population) 29; 30; 73; 162; 168–       numerical response of the predator; 82;
          171; 177; 190–192; 233; 367                 83
       niche formation; 121–122
       Puu (economic cycle); 245                  options; 246; 247
       pendulum
          linear; 23–25                           paradox (antinomy) of
          linear in presence of friction; 25–27     Achilles and the tortoise; 253
          nonlinear; 34–35                          Cantor; 270
       predictability horizon of; 135; 136;         Condorcet; 3
             159; 176–178                           Epimenides; 268; 269; 277
       Reilly (retail gravitation); 5               Russell; 267
       Samuelson and Hicks (economic                Zeno of Elea; 253
             cycle); 48; 245                      Permian extinction; 234
       Sanders (the system of French cities);     phase space
             244                                    deﬁnition; 37–45
       Sonis (diffusion of innovation); 244       Philosophiae naturalis principia
       spatial interaction; 183                        mathematica (Newton); 13; 14; 15;
       symmetrical competition between                 206; 292; 296
             two interacting populations; 94      physicalism; 3; 6; 46; 240
       Verhulst (population growth with           physiocracy; 208; 209
             limited carrying capacity); 102;     Poincaré
             191–198                                recurrence; 114
       Volterra–Lotka (prey–predator)               stability criterion; 130
          basic model; 73–76; 241                 political arithmetics; 6; 259
          variants applied to ecology; 80–85;     principle of
                96; 97; 101                         energy conservation; 28; 42; 47
          variants applied to urban and             Gause (competitive exclusion); 95
                regional science; 85–94; 186;       Heisenberg (quantum uncertainty);
      modelling                                           15; 107; 108; 205
       general properties; 7–10                     least action; 207
       linear hypothesis; 193                       second principle of dynamics; 24; 201
       role of mathematics in; 195–202              second principle of thermodynamics;
      Monash University; 275                              213; 214
      multicriteria analysis; 259                   sufﬁcient reason; 18; 206; 207; 211;
                                                          212; 222
      neodarwinism; 210                             superposition of states; 20; 205
      New England Complex System Institute        Principles of Social Science (Carey);
          (NECSI); 220                                 182
      non-countable inﬁnity; 282                  prisoner’s dilemma; 237
      numbers                                     problem
        computable; 266; 269                        direct in modelling; 8–10
        continuum; 252–254; 263; 266; 278;          ill-posed; 10
            281–283                                 inverse in modelling; 8–10
                                                                        Subject index   379

  many-body (three bodies); 15; 16; 18;       The Physiocrats (Higgs); 208
       199; 278                               The Principles of Mathematics
  well-posed; 10                                   (Russell); 336
                                              The Struggle for Existence (Gause); 120
reductio ad absurdum; 268                     The Unreasonable Effectiveness of
reductionism; 15; 18; 192; 193;                    Mathematics in the Natural Science
    222                                            (Wigner); 196
Regional Science Association                  theorem(s) of
    International (RSAI); 108; 226               Cantor; 254; 125
                                                 Cohen; 254
Santa Fe Institute (SFI); 219; 248               conservation of mechanical energy;
Science et méthode (Poincaré); 124                  42
social mathematics; 4; 255                       existence and uniqueness of the
spatial interaction; 5; 6; 9; 14; 182; 183;           solutions of a differential
      185; 186                                        equation; 27; 57; 114; 115; 156
stability of the solar system; 109–111;          Fourier; 193
      202                                        Gödel (incompleteness); 254; 264;
state variable                                        267; 269; 270; 275
   deﬁnition; 8; 36–45                           KAM; 110
synergetics; 304–307                             Li and Yorke (Period Three Implies
system                                                Chaos); 171
   autonomous; 27; 51; 115; 133                  Liouville; 101
   ergodic; 230                                  Poincaré–Bendixon; 114
   linear; 54–72                                 Sharkovsky; 171
                                                 Tarski; 264; 265
technological innovation; 87; 159; 160;       theory of random utility; 227
    199; 256                                  trading on line; 248
The Analyst; Or, A Discourse                  turbulence in ﬂuids; 32; 33; 111; 215;
    Addressed To An Inﬁdel                         240; 278
    Mathematician (Berkeley); 252             Turing machine; 267
The Laws of Migration (Ravenstein);
    225                                       undecidability; 264; 266; 269; 270;
The Law of Retail Gravitation (Reilly); 8         275; 277; 282
Name index


Abarbanel H.D.I.; 112; 141; 144; 285    Barrow-Green J.; 16; 286
Abbott T.; 171; 172; 301                Batten D.F.; 49; 192; 199; 239; 249;
Accardi L.; 251; 285                         286; 290; 291
Agnes C.; 277; 285                      Bayly B.; 32; 286
Albeverio S.; 279; 285                  Bechhoeffer J.; 171; 286
Albin P.S.; 220; 285                    Bellacicco A.; 172; 286
Allen P.M.; 159; 160; 216; 244; 285     Bellomo N.; 7; 10; 53; 54; 114; 128;
Allen R.G.D.; 48; 240; 285                   132; 190; 287
Alligood K.; 53; 285                    Beltrami E.; 53; 54; 74; 80; 81; 82; 114;
Alvesson M.; 223; 285                        132; 172; 287
Anderson C.D.; 30                       Beman W.W.; 289
Anderson Ph.W.; 245; 285; 290           Benacerraf P.; 262; 264; 287
Anderson R.M.; 279; 285                 Ben-Akiva M.; 184; 287
Andrecut M.; 179; 285                   Bender C.M.; 35; 54; 287
Anosov D.V.; 53; 54; 132; 285           Bendixon I.O.; 114
Arditi R.; 73; 85; 285; 294             Benhabib J.; 150; 239; 245; 287
Arino O.; 73; 85; 294                   Berkeley G.; 14; 252; 287
Aristotle; 201                          Bernoulli D.; 4; 32; 204
Arnold V.I.; 15; 37; 53; 54; 74; 110;   Bertuglia C.S.; 5; 96; 116; 183; 192;
     112; 113; 120; 132; 285; 286            199; 228; 244; 260; 271; 285; 286;
Arrow K.J.; 245; 285; 290                    287; 288; 290; 291; 295; 297; 298;
Arsenin V.Ya.; 9; 10; 286; 300               300
Arthur W.B.; 232; 233; 234; 245; 248;   Besicovich A.S.; 112; 147; 148; 274;
     249; 286; 297                           287
Ashby W.R.; 212; 286                    Bianchi G.; 244; 285; 287; 290; 297;
Atlan H.; 207; 286                           298
Axelrod R.; 216; 237; 286               Birkhoff G.D.; 15; 287
                                        Black F.; 247; 287
Bachgus R.; 87; 286                     Blair D.; 4; 287
Bailey D.; 177; 288                     Blum L.; 228; 287
Bak P.; 192; 286                        Bohm D.; 14; 210; 288
Barber C.L.; 233; 235; 286              Bohr N.; 15
Barkley Rosser J.; 33; 172; 239; 245;   Bole Th.; 301
     286                                Bollen J.; 291
Barrow J.D.; 197; 199; 255; 264; 265;   Boltzmann L.; 15; 213
     269; 270; 272; 286                 Boncinelli E.; 31; 128; 197; 276; 288
                                                                        Name index      381

Boole G.; 46                                 Clarke G.P.; 183; 287
Boon F.; 285                                 Clausius R.; 15; 213
Born M.; 282; 288                            Cohen E.G.D.; 300
Borwein J.; 177; 288                         Cohen I.B.; 2; 4; 14; 46; 47; 228; 289
Bottazzini U.; 16; 18; 31; 110; 128; 131;    Cohen J.; 192; 199; 211; 258; 271; 289
    132; 197; 276; 288                       Cohen P.; 254
Bourbaki N.; 265; 272; 288; 295              Collatz L.; 164; 289
Boyce D.E.; 183; 288                         Condorcet J.-A. de Caritat; 3; 4; 154;
Boyer C.B.; 20; 190; 255; 317; 329; 359           289
Bricmont J.; 6; 299                          Connes A.; 31; 197; 288
Briggs K.M.; 177; 288                        Couette M.; 32
Brock W.; 150; 239; 288                      Coulter M.; 210; 298
Brouwer L.E.J.; 268; 288                     Cournot A.A.; 4
Bruner J.S.; 192; 288                        Coveney P.; 192; 289
Bruschini Vincenzi L.; 248; 288              Cowan G.A.; 286; 294; 298
Burke Hubbard B.; 110; 288                   Craig J.; 14
Byrne D.; 223; 288                           Crépel P.; 3; 4; 208; 289
                                             Crilly A.J.; 112; 289; 294; 296
Cajori F.; 268; 288                          Crutchﬁeld J.P.; 114; 116; 122; 289
Camagni R.; 87; 288                          Curie P.; 188
Çambel A.B.; 74; 141; 148; 172; 180;        Cutland N.J.; 266; 289
     288                                     Czyz J.; 112; 289
Campbell D.K.; 300
Campisi D.; 9; 183; 185; 288                 D’Ancona U.; 73
Cantor G.; 125; 170; 253; 254; 266;          Daganzo C.; 184; 289
     268; 269; 270; 282; 288                 Dagenais M.G.; 184; 292
Carey H.C.; 182; 288                         Darwin Ch.; 132; 210; 211; 235; 237;
Carson E.R.; 226; 228; 291                        289
Carter B.; 198                               Darwin G.; 132
Casti J.L.; 7; 11; 37; 111; 148; 192; 227;   Davies P.C.W.; 222; 289
     271; 288                                Davies S.; 160; 289
Catherine of Russia; 208                     Dawson J.W.; 292
Cauchy A.L.; 253; 288                        de Finetti B.; 275; 289
Cavalieri B.; 252                            de Palma A.; 285
Cellucci C.; 262; 288                        de Santillana G.; 207; 291
Cerrato S.; 302                              De Toro P.; 300
Cerreta M.; 300                              Dedekind R.; 253; 268; 289
Ceruti M.; 286; 288                          Deledicq A.; 351; 361
Changeux J.-P.; 31; 197; 288                 Dendrinos D.; 6; 85; 87; 89; 90; 91; 92;
Chavel I.; 101; 289                               93; 95; 97; 200; 215; 231; 244;
Chiarella C.; 245; 289                            245; 247; 289; 290; 300
Chossat P.; 32; 289                          Deneubourg J.L.; 285
Christensen K.S.; 223; 289                   Derycke P.-H.; 296
Ciliberto S.; 290                            Descartes R.; 21; 317
382     Name index

      Devaney R.L.; 164; 171; 172; 271; 290     Fels R.; 299
      Devlin K.; 4; 254; 267; 290               Fenstad J.; 285
      Dewynne J.; 247; 301                      Fermat P. de; 207; 252
      Dicke R.; 198                             Fermi E.; 18; 31; 103; 291
      Diderot D.; 208                           Fibonacci (Leonardo Pisano); 153
      Diener F.; 351; 361                       Fischer M.M.; 159; 199; 287; 291; 300
      Diener M.; 351; 361                       Fisher I.; 45; 46; 47
      Dioguardi G.; 192; 208; 224; 228; 272;    Flood R.L.; 226; 228; 291
          290                                   Forrester J.W.; 223; 291
      Dirac P.A.M.; 15; 30; 198; 290            Forte B.; 300
      Ditto W.L.; 112; 290                      Forte F.; 300
      Dobb M.; 209; 290                         Fotheringham A.S.; 183; 291
      Dostoevsky F.M.; 99; 189                  Fourier J.-B.; 4; 10; 32; 110; 193
      Dow Ch.; 49                               Frankhauser P.; 112; 291
      Drazin P.S.; 172; 290                     Franses P.H.; 248; 291
      Dufﬁng G.; 79; 104; 290                   Frege G.; 267
      Durkheim E.; 4; 14                        Freiling Ch.; 281; 291
      Durlauf S.N.; 245; 286                    Frenkel A.; 159; 291
                                                Frost A.J.; 50; 291
      Earnshaw R.A.; 112; 289; 294; 296         Fujita M.; 183; 292
      Eckmann J.-P.; 140; 151; 290              Fusco Girard L.; 300
      Eco U.; 1
      Edmonds B.; 226; 227; 228; 290            Galilei G.; 1; 2; 24; 252; 263
      Einstein A.; 207; 214; 251; 291           Gandolﬁ A.; 192; 220; 229; 292
      Ekeland I.; 197; 203; 207; 291            Gaudry M.J.I.; 184; 292
      Elliott R.N.; 49; 50; 291                 Gause G.F.; 76; 85; 95; 292
      Elsgolts L.; 54; 132; 291                 Gell-Mann M.; 192; 228; 259; 292
      Enriques F.; 207; 291                     Gentile G. jr.; 5
      Epimenides the Cretan; 268; 269; 277      Gibbs J.W.; 46
      Epstein I.R.; 73; 291                     Ginzburg L.R.; 285
      Epstein J.M.; 54; 74; 291                 Giorello G.; 286; 288
      Eubank S.; 118; 141; 172; 291             Giusti E.; 31; 252; 263; 265; 292
      Euclid; 254; 269                          Glasko V.B.; 9; 292
      Euler L.; 15; 16; 29; 32; 66              Gleick J.; 18; 31; 128; 143; 172; 271;
                                                     272; 292
      Fabbri P.; 286; 288                       Gödel K.; 254; 264; 267; 269; 275; 279;
      Falconer K.J.; 112; 170; 172; 271; 291         292
      Fang F.; 245; 291; 302                    Godwin W.; 153
      Farmer J.D.; 118; 120; 141; 148; 172;     Goldberg A.L.; 79; 292
           289; 291; 298                        Goldblatt R.; 351; 364
      Feferman S.; 264; 292                     Goldfarb W.; 292
      Feigenbaum M.; 33; 161; 172; 174;         Goncharsky A.V.; 9; 10; 286; 292; 300
           175; 176; 177; 178; 179; 180; 181;   Goodwin R.M.; 48; 49; 241; 245; 246;
           187; 245; 271; 291                        289; 292
                                                                      Name index   383

Gordon W.B.; 171; 292                    Horrocks G.; 233; 294
Granger G.G.; 31; 292                    Householder A.S.; 164; 294
Grassberger P.; 147; 148; 149; 292       Howison S.; 247; 301
Grebogi C.; 112; 292; 293                Hsieh D.; 150; 239; 288
Grifﬁth D.A.; 299                        Hubbard J.; 110; 288
Guerrien B.; 256; 293                    Hume D.; 14
Guerriero G.; 264; 293                   Huriot J.-M.; 297
Gullen M.; 14; 293
                                         Iooss G.; 32; 289
Haag G.; 244; 293; 301                   Isard W.; 8; 108, 226; 365
Hadamard J.; 9; 10; 293                  Israel G.; 8; 21; 73; 74; 77; 79; 128;
Haken H.; 241; 243; 293                       197; 294; 326
Hallett M.; 253; 254; 293
Hamilton W.R.; 207                       Jeans J.; 132
Hannon B.; 8; 54; 293                    Jen E.; 287; 291; 295; 302
Hasselblatt B.; 141; 294                 Jevons W.S.; 45; 46; 47
Hausdorff F.; 112; 147; 148; 274; 293    Johnson L.W.; 183; 293
Havel I.; 293                            Jones H.; 112; 289; 294; 296
Heagy J.; 290                            Jordan D.W.; 35; 53; 54; 131; 132;
Heisenberg W.; 15; 32; 107; 205; 251;         294
    293                                  Jost Ch.; 73; 85; 294
Hénon M.A.; 181; 293                    Jourdain E.B.; 288
Hensher D.A.; 183; 287; 293              Jürgens H.; 112; 148; 297
Herken R.; 266; 293
Herrmann H.; 223; 293                    Kalecki M.; 48; 49; 294
Hewings G.J.D.; 245; 293                 Kant I.; 272
Heylighen F.; 231; 291; 293              Karlqvist A.; 288
Heyting A.; 268; 293                     Karlsson C.; 291
Hicks J.R.; 48; 245; 293                 Katok A.; 141; 294
Higgs H.; 208; 293                       Kauffman S.; 216; 226; 233; 234; 235;
Highﬁeld R.; 192; 289                         237; 238; 239; 294
Hilbert D.; 263; 264; 265; 267; 268;     Kaufmann A.; 260; 294
    269                                  Keisler J.; 351; 366
Hildenbrand W.; 285                      Kelvin, Lord (William Thomson); 15;
Hirsch M.; 114; 293                           213
Hodgson G.M.; 245; 292; 293              Kepler J.; 201
Hoegh-Krohn R.; 285                      Keynes J.M.; 240; 242; 245
Hofstadter D.; 264; 293                  Kimura Y.; 293
Holden A.V.; 112; 293; 301               Kline M.; 252; 262; 294
Holland J.H.; 216; 223; 237; 286; 293;   Koch B.P.; 295
    297                                  Kolmogorov A.N.; 110; 140; 172
Holling C.S.; 82; 83; 84; 294            Kondratiev N.D.; 241
Honig W.M.; 350; 365                     Koyré A.; 201; 294
Horgan P.; 228; 294                      Kraft R.L.; 179; 294
384     Name index

      Kronecker N.D.; 268                            142; 143; 144; 145; 151; 178; 179;
      Krugman P.; 183; 239; 245; 292; 294            180; 187; 221; 295
                                                 Lyons J.; 233; 295
      La Bella A.; 288; 298
      Lagrange L.; 15; 16; 109; 110              Madden M.; 293
      Lakatos I.; 351; 366                       Maddy P.; 262; 281; 295
      Landau L.D.; 31; 32; 207; 294              Majorana E.; 5; 295
      Lane D.A.; 245; 286                        Malthus Th. R.; 21; 22; 55; 129; 134;
      Langton C.G.; 216; 294; 298                    142; 153; 154; 155; 188; 295
      Laplace P.S.; 4; 13; 15; 18; 108; 109;     Mandelbrot B.; 33; 50; 112; 151; 181;
           110; 203; 204; 205; 206; 294              248; 262; 271; 272; 274; 275; 295
      Larsen S.; 129                             Manneville P.; 32; 172; 295; 297
      Laskar J.; 111; 202; 294                   Mantegna R.N.; 151; 248; 295
      Le Baron B.; 150; 239; 286; 288; 297       Marshaal M.; 265; 295
      Le Bras H.; 157; 158; 294                  Martellato D.; 286; 290
      Lea A.C.; 299                              Martinet A.; 233; 295
      Leibniz G.W.; 15; 18; 206; 207; 211;       Marx K.; 240; 242; 245; 256; 367
           222; 252; 283                         Maupertuis P.L.M. de; 207
      Leitner H.; 259; 296                       May R.; 33; 81; 82; 84; 97; 154; 160;
      Lekachman R.; 208; 209; 294                    171; 172; 295; 296
      Leonard W.J.; 97; 296                      Medio A.; 141; 296
      Leonardi G.; 183; 184; 185; 287; 294;      Mela A.; 244; 285; 287; 290; 297; 298
           295                                   Meltzer D.; 286; 294; 298
      Lerman S.R.; 184; 287                      Mendel G.; 196; 197
      Leven R.W.; 52; 295                        Menger C.; 47
      Levy D.; 223; 224; 295                     Menten M.; 83
      Lewin R.; 216; 295                         Mercier de la Rivière P.-P.; 208
      Li T.Y.; 171; 178; 295                     Meyer-Spasche R.; 32; 296
      Lifshitz E.M.; 32; 207; 294                Michaelis L.; 83
      Lindstrøm T.; 285                          Monge G.; 4
      Lines M.; 141; 296                         Moon F.C.; 18; 53; 54; 109; 120; 122;
      Liouville J.; 101                              132; 141; 148; 172; 201; 296
      Lloyd S.; 228; 295                         Moser J.; 110
      Lolli G.; 31; 262; 265; 275                Mudretsova E.A.; 9; 292
      Lombardo S.; 199; 287; 291                 Muhamad M.A.; 112; 293
      Lorenz E.N.; 15; 18; 103; 116; 117;        Mullally H.; 85; 290
           128; 143; 147; 148; 194; 295          Mullin T.; 32; 296
      Lotka A.; 6; 72; 73; 76; 80; 81; 82; 84;   Muntz M.; 293
           85; 87; 88; 89; 90; 92; 94; 96; 97;   Myškis A.D.; 54; 164; 302
           101; 152; 158; 186; 236; 241; 295
      Lowry I.S.; 183; 295                       Nadel L.; 286
      Luxemburg W.A.J.; 350; 356                 Nagel E.; 264; 275; 296
      Lyapunov A.M.; 127; 132; 133; 134;         Napier J.; 252
           135; 136; 137; 138; 139; 140; 141;    Neftci S.; 247; 296
                                                                        Name index      385

Nelson E.; 351; 368                        Peterson I.; 110; 297
Newman J.R.; 264; 275; 296                 Phillips A.W.; 48; 49; 297
Newton I.; 4; 5; 13; 14; 15; 16; 18; 24;   Pickover C.; 112; 172; 177; 271; 297
    25; 26; 27; 34; 47; 111; 128; 182;     Pines D.; 245; 285; 286; 290; 294; 298
    200; 201; 202; 203; 208; 209; 210;     Pitﬁeld D.E.; 183; 297
    211; 213; 214; 252; 272; 283; 288;     Planck M.; 199; 282
    296                                    Plato; 262
Nicolis G.; 30; 120; 122; 146; 150; 191;   Podolsky B.; 251; 291
    216; 296                               Poincaré H.; 15; 18; 30; 32; 103; 110;
Nijkamp P.; 87; 94; 97; 172; 182; 183;          111; 114; 124; 127; 130; 131; 132;
    185; 186; 199; 239; 244; 245; 259;          133; 134; 265; 297
    287; 288; 291; 296                     Poisson S.D.; 130
                                           Pollack R.; 4; 287
Occelli S.; 286; 287; 290; 295             Pollard S.; 301
O’Kelly M.E.; 183; 291                     Pomeau Y.; 32; 172; 295; 297
Oliffson Kamphorst S.; 290                 Pompe B.; 295
Orishimo I.; 87; 296                       Portugali J.; 244; 297
Orléan A.; 255; 256; 296                  Prechter R.J.; 50; 291
Orszag S.; 35; 54; 287                     Preta L.; 286; 288
Osborne A.R.; 149; 296                     Preto G.; 199; 287; 300
Oscar II, king of Sweden and Norway;       Preziosi L.; 7; 10; 53; 54; 114; 128; 132;
     18; 110                                    287
Ott E.; 112; 120; 148; 172; 290; 291;      Prigogine I.; 15; 30; 120; 122; 146; 150;
     292; 293; 296                              191; 216; 296; 297
Overman E.; 224; 296                       Procaccia I.; 148; 149; 292
                                           Provenzale A.; 149; 296
Packard N.H.; 289                          Pumain D.; 73; 89; 95; 243; 293; 297
Paelinck J.; 86; 296; 297                  Putnam H.; 262; 287
Palmer R.G.; 249; 286; 297                 Puu T.; 132; 141; 172; 245; 271; 297;
Pareto V.; 45; 46; 47; 297                      298
Parisi G.; 230; 297                        Pythagoras; 261
Parks P.C.; 132; 297
Parsons Ch.; 292                           Quesnay F.; 208; 209
Pasta J.; 18; 291                          Quetelet A.; 4; 298
Peano G.; 116; 267                         Quispel G.R.W.; 288
Pearl R.; 158; 159; 297
Peitgen H.O.; 112; 148; 164; 271; 295;     Rabino G.; 5; 9; 183; 185; 260; 287;
     297; 301                                  295; 298
Pelikan S.; 292                            Rasband S.N.; 141; 148; 172; 177; 298
Penrose R.; 199; 262; 264; 266; 271;       Rasetti M.; 207; 277; 285; 298
     274; 297                              Rasmussen S.; 298
Perko L.; 53; 54; 297                      Rauseo S.N.; 290
Pesenti Cambursano O.; 204; 297            Ravenstein E.G.; 183; 298
Peters E.E.; 248; 297                      Ray Th.S.; 235; 298
386     Name index

      Rayleigh, Lord (John William Strutt);      Schrödinger E.; 15; 214; 251
           52; 298                               Schroeder M.; 112; 116; 120; 148; 170;
      Reed L.J.; 158; 297                             172; 175; 271; 299
      Regge T.; 199; 298                         Schumpeter J.A.; 47; 48; 240; 241; 242;
      Reggiani A.; 87; 94; 97; 172; 182; 183;         245; 299
           185; 186; 239; 244; 245; 295; 296;    Schuster H.G.; 172; 179; 299
           298                                   Screpanti E.; 245; 292; 293
      Reilly J.; 171; 172; 301                   Segrè E.; 18; 299
      Reilly W.J.; 5; 183; 298                   Sen A.; 14; 183; 299
      Ricardo D.; 256; 370                       Serra R.; 172; 299
      Richter P.H.; 112; 271; 295; 297           Shapiro S.; 262; 299
      Riegler A.; 291                            Sharkovsky O.M.; 171; 299
      Rietveld P.; 259; 296                      Shaw R.S.; 289
      Riganti R.; 54; 132; 141; 148; 172; 298    Shefer D.; 159; 183; 288; 291
      Rigney D.R.; 79; 292                       Shishikura M.; 274; 299
      Robbins P.; 210; 298                       Siegler L.E.; 190; 371
      Robert R.; 203; 298                        Simmons G.F.; 116; 299
      Robinson A.; 279; 298                      Simò C.; 16; 17; 299
      Robinson C.; 141; 298                      Sinai Ya.G.; 140
      Rose H.A.; 300                             Smale S.; 15; 103; 114; 293; 299
      Rosen N.; 251; 291                         Smith A.; 154; 208; 209; 210; 240
      Rössler O.E.; 118; 245; 298               Smith D.E.; 153; 299
      Ruelle D.; 32; 103; 111; 140; 172; 240;    Smith M.J.; 95; 299
           290; 298                              Smith P.; 35; 53; 54; 131; 132; 294
      Russell B.; 254; 267; 268; 269; 270;       Smith T.E.; 14; 183; 299
           275; 277; 298                         Smullyan R.; 263; 270; 299
      Ruth M.; 8; 54; 293                        Sokal A.; 6; 299
                                                 Solomon A.I.; 285
      Saari D.G.; 278; 298                       Solovay R.N.; 292
      Saha P.; 171; 298                          Sonis M.; 87; 95; 159; 244; 245; 290;
      Saint-Exupéry A. de; 191; 270                  293; 299; 300
      Saint-Julien Th.; 73; 95; 293; 297         Sonnenschein H.; 285
      Samuelson P.A.; 3; 47; 48; 49; 240; 245;   Spano M.L.; 290
           298; 299                              Sprott J.C.; 116; 300
      Sanders L.; 73; 95; 243; 244; 293; 297;    St. Paul; 268
           299                                   Stacey R.; 224; 300
      Sangalli A.; 260; 299                      Stanley H.E.; 46; 151; 248; 295
      Sanglier M.; 245; 285; 291; 302            Staricco L.; 96; 192; 216; 228; 244;
      Sauer T.; 53; 285                               287; 300
      Saunders P.; 289                           Stein D.L.; 286
      Saupe D.; 112; 148; 297                    Stengers I.; 30; 216; 297
      Savage H.T.; 290                           Stephenson J.W.; 177; 300
      Scheinkman J.; 290                         Stewart I.; 31; 192; 199; 211; 258; 262;
      Scholes M.; 247; 287                            271; 289; 300
                                                                       Name index      387

Stopher P.R.; 287                        Verhulst P.-F.; 5; 21; 33; 80; 154; 155;
Strakhov V.N.; 9; 292                          157; 158; 160; 301
Strogatz S.H.; 167; 171; 172; 298; 300   Viète F.; 252
Suber P.; 281; 300                       Volterra V.; 6; 72; 73; 76; 80; 81; 82; 84;
Swift J.B.; 302                                85; 87; 88; 89; 90; 92; 94; 96; 97;
Swinney H.L.; 32; 148; 300; 302                101; 152; 186; 236; 241; 301
                                         Von Haeseler F.; 164; 301
Tabor M.; 172; 177; 300                  Von Neumann J.; 179
Tadei R.; 287; 295                       Voogd H.; 259; 296
Takens F.; 32; 103; 111; 172; 298        Vulpiani A.; 112; 116; 146; 172; 194;
Taletes; 261                                   198; 301
Tanner J.T.; 84; 300
Tarski A.; 264; 300                      Waldrop W.M.; 192; 216; 301
Tayler P.; 286; 297                      Walras L.; 3; 14; 46; 301
Taylor B.; 34; 44                        Wang Y.; 177; 300
Taylor C.; 298                           Weick K.; 224; 301
Taylor G.I.; 32; 300                     Weidlich W.; 3; 243; 244; 301
Thiel D.; 224; 239; 300                  Weierstrass K.; 110; 124; 253
Thom R.; 221; 300                        West B.J.; 79; 292
Thompson C.J.; 288                       Weyl H.; 254; 262; 268; 281; 301
Tikhonov A.N.; 9; 10; 286; 292; 300      Wigner E.P.; 196; 301
Tipler F.J.; 199; 286                    Wilder R.L.; 262; 301
Torricelli E.; 252                       Wilke C.; 295
Trappl R.; 293                           Wilmott P.; 247; 301
Tricomi F.G.; 164; 301                   Wilson A.G.; 5; 159; 183; 287; 295; 301
Tuﬁllaro N.B.; 171; 172; 301             Wolf A.; 141; 144; 301; 302
Turing A.M.; 266; 267; 269; 301          Wolff R.P.H.; 350; 356
                                         Wolfram S.; 37; 302
Ulam S.; 18; 291                         Wrigley N.; 259; 296

Vaio F.; 116; 216; 244; 271; 285; 287;   Xia Zh.; 278; 298
    290; 297; 298; 300
Van Dalen D.; 269; 301                   Yorke J.A.; 15; 53; 112; 120; 148; 171;
Van den Berg I.; 350; 373                    178; 285; 291; 292; 293; 295
Van der Mark J.; 79; 301
Van der Pol B.L.; 79; 301                Zadeh L.A.; 260; 302
Van der Zaan A.; 87; 286                 Zanarini G.; 172; 188; 299; 302
Van Dijk D.; 248; 291                    Zeldovich Ya.B.; 54; 164; 302
Van Heijenoort J.; 302                   Zeno of Elea; 253
Van Nes P.; 87; 286                      Zermelo E.; 254; 302
Van Sigt W.P.; 268; 301                  Zhang W.-B.; 3; 241; 242; 243; 245;
Vasano J.A.; 302                             302
Venables A.J.; 183; 292                  Zurek W.H.; 228; 302
