RESILIENCE ENGINEERING
This page intentionally left blank
Resilience Engineering
     Concepts and Precepts




                 Edited by
        ERIK HOLLNAGEL
      Linköping University, Sweden
        DAVID D. WOODS
       Ohio State University, USA
        NANCY LEVESON
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
© Erik Hollnagel, David D. Woods and Nancy Leveson 2006

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
Erik Hollnagel, David D. Woods and Nancy Leveson have asserted their right under
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be identified as the editors of this
work.
Published by
Ashgate Publishing Limited          Ashgate Publishing Company
Gower House                         Suite 420
Croft Road                          101 Cherry Street
Aldershot                           Burlington, VT 05401-4405
Hampshire GU11 3HR                  USA
England

 Ashgate website: http://www.ashgate.com


British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Resilience engineering : concepts and precepts
  1.Reliability (Engineering) - Congresses 2.Industrial
  safety - Congresses
  I.Hollnagel, Erik, 1941- II.Woods, David D. III.Leveson,
  Nancy
  620'.00452

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Resilience engineering : concepts and precepts / edited by Erik Hollnagel, David D.
Woods and Nancy Leveson.
         p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 0-7546-4641-6
 1. Reliability (Engineering). 2. System analysis. 3. Decision making. I.
Hollnagel, Erik, 1941- II. Woods, David D., 1952- III. Leveson, Nancy.

  TS173.R47 2006
  620'.00452--dc22
2005024896


ISBN-10: 0 7546 4641 6

Printed and bound in Great Britain by TJ International Ltd, Padstow, Cornwall
Contents
PREFACE                                              xi
PROLOGUE: RESILIENCE ENGINEERING CONCEPTS             1
  David D. Woods & Erik Hollnagel
  Hindsight and Safety                                1
  From Reactive to Proactive Safety                   3
  Resilience                                          6
PART I: EMERGENCE
1   RESILIENCE: THE CHALLENGE OF THE
    UNSTABLE                                          9
    Erik Hollnagel
    Understanding Accidents                           9
    Anticipating Risks                               14
    SYSTEMS ARE EVER-CHANGING                        19
    Yushi Fujita
2   ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF RESILIENCE          21
    David D. Woods
    Avoiding the Error of the Third Kind             21
    Dynamic Balancing Acts                           29
    Acknowledgements                                 33
3   DEFINING RESILIENCE                              35
    Andrew Hale & Tom Heijer
    Pictures of Resilience                           35
    How Do We Recognise Resilience When We See It?   37
    Is Road Traffic Resilient?                       38
    Conclusion                                       40
    NATURE OF CHANGES IN SYSTEMS                     41
    Yushi Fujita
4   COMPLEXITY, EMERGENCE, RESILIENCE …              43
    Jean Pariès
    Introduction                                     43
    Emergence and Systems                            44
    From Emergence to Resilience                     47
vi                                                          Resilience Engineering

     Conclusion                                                               53
5    A TYPOLOGY OF RESILIENCE SITUATIONS                                      55
     Ron Westrum
     Resilience against What?                                                 55
     Situation I. The Regular Threat                                          56
     Situation II. The Irregular Threat                                       57
     Situation III. The Unexampled Event                                      57
     Time: Foresight, Coping, and Recovery                                    59
     Foresee and Avoid                                                        59
     Coping with Ongoing Trouble                                              61
     Repairing after Catastrophe                                              64
     Conclusion                                                               65
     Acknowledgement                                                          65
     RESILIENT SYSTEMS                                                        67
     Yushi Fujita
6    INCIDENTS – MARKERS OF RESILIENCE OR
     BRITTLENESS?                                                             69
     David D. Woods & Richard I. Cook
     Incidents are Ambiguous                                                  69
     ‘Decompensation:’ A Pattern in Adaptive Response                         72
     Acknowledgements                                                         76
7    RESILIENCE ENGINEERING: CHRONICLING
     THE EMERGENCE OF CONFUSED CONSENSUS                                      77
     Sidney Dekker
     Resilience Engineering and Getting Smarter at Predicting the
     Next Accident                                                            79
     Modelling the Drift into Failure                                         82
     Work as Imagined versus Work as Actually Done                            86
     Towards Broader Markers of Resilience                                    90
PART II: CASES AND PROCESSES
8    ENGINEERING RESILIENCE INTO SAFETY-
     CRITICAL SYSTEMS                                                      95
     Nancy Leveson, Nicolas Dulac, David Zipkin, Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld,
     John Carroll & Betty Barrett
     Resilience and Safety                                                 95
     STAMP                                                                 96
Contents                                                           vii

     The Models                                                   107
     Principal Findings and Anticipated Outcomes/Benefits         118
     Implications for Designing and Operating Resilient Systems   122
9    IS RESILIENCE REALLY NECESSARY? THE CASE
     OF RAILWAYS                                                  125
     Andrew Hale & Tom Heijer
     Introduction                                                 125
     Observations on Safety Management in Railway Track
     Maintenance                                                  129
     Assessing Resilience                                         136
     Discussion and Conclusions                                   146
     SYSTEMS ARE NEVER PERFECT                                    149
     Yushi Fujita
10 STRUCTURE FOR MANAGEMENT OF WEAK AND
   DIFFUSE SIGNALS                                                151
   Lars Axelsson
   Problem Awareness                                              151
   Forum for Consultation                                         152
   Strengthening the Forum                                        153
   Other Fora                                                     153
   A Bundle of Arrows                                             154
11 ORGANIZATIONAL RESILIENCE AND
   INDUSTRIAL RISK                                                155
   Nick McDonald
   Introduction                                                   155
   What is the Nature of Resilience?                              155
   Planning and Flexibility in Operational Systems                160
   The Role of Quality and Safety in Achieving Resilience         169
   The Problem of Organizational Change                           174
   Change in Technology                                           177
   Conclusions – the Focus on Resilience                          179
     AN EVIL CHAIN MECHANISM LEADING TO
     FAILURES                                                     181
     Yushi Fujita
12 SAFETY MANAGEMENT IN AIRLINES                                  183
   Arthur Dijkstra
viii                                               Resilience Engineering

       Introduction                                                183
       How Safe is Flying?                                         184
       Current Practices in Safety Management                      185
       Models of Risk and Safety                                   197
       What Next? From Safety to Resilience                        201
13 TAKING THINGS IN ONE’S STRIDE: COGNITIVE
   FEATURES OF TWO RESILIENT PERFORMANCES 205
   Richard I. Cook & Christopher Nemeth
   Introduction                             205
   Example 1: Handling a ‘Soft’ Emergency   206
   Example 2: Response to a Bus Bombing     210
   Analysis                                 216
   Conclusion                               220
14 EROSION OF MANAGERIAL RESILIENCE: FROM
   VASA TO NASA                                                    223
   Rhona Flin
   Vasa to Columbia                                                224
   Managerial Resilience                                           227
   Safety Culture and Managerial Resilience                        229
   Measuring Managerial Resilience                                 230
   Training Managerial Resilience                                  232
   Conclusion                                                      233
15 LEARNING HOW TO CREATE RESILIENCE IN
   BUSINESS SYSTEMS                                                235
   Gunilla Sundström & Erik Hollnagel
   The System View: Implications for Business Systems              236
   The Barings plc Case                                            245
   What would have made Barings more Resilient?                    248
   Concluding Remarks                                              252
16 OPTIMUM SYSTEM SAFETY AND OPTIMUM
   SYSTEM RESILIENCE: AGONISTIC OR
   ANTAGONISTIC CONCEPTS?                                      253
   René Amalberti
   Introduction: Why are Human Activities Sometimes Unsafe? 253
   Mapping the Types of Resilience                             258
   Understanding the Transition from One Type of Resilience to
   Another                                                     264
Contents                                                          ix

     Conclusion: Adapt the Resilience – and Safety – to the
     Requirements and Age of Systems                             270
PART III: CHALLENGES FOR A PRACTICE OF
   RESILIENCE ENGINEERING
17 PROPERTIES OF RESILIENT ORGANIZATIONS:
   AN INITIAL VIEW                                               275
   John Wreathall
   Concept of Resilience                                         275
   Approach of Resilience Engineering                            276
   Summary                                                       283
   Example: Adaptation of Leading Indicators of Organizational
   Performance to Resilience Engineering Processes               284
   Acknowledgments                                               285
     REMEDIES                                                    287
     Yushi Fujita
18 AUDITING RESILIENCE IN RISK CONTROL AND
   SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS                      289
   Andrew Hale, Frank Guldenmund & Louis Goossens
   Introduction                                   289
   Structure of the ARAMIS Audit Model            291
   Does the Model Encompass Resilience?           297
   Conclusions and General Issues                 312
19 HOW TO DESIGN A SAFETY ORGANIZATION:
   TEST CASE FOR RESILIENCE ENGINEERING                          315
   David D. Woods
   Dilemmas of Safety Organizations                              317
   The 4 ‘I’s of Safety Organizations: Independent, Involved,
   Informed, and Informative                                     319
   Safety as Analogous to Polycentric Management of Common
   Pool Resources                                                322
   Summary                                                       324
   Acknowledgements                                              324
     RULES AND PROCEDURES                                        327
     Yushi Fujita
x                                           Resilience Engineering

20 DISTANCING THROUGH DIFFERENCING: AN
   OBSTACLE TO ORGANIZATIONAL LEARNING
   FOLLOWING ACCIDENTS                                      329
   Richard I. Cook & David D. Woods
   Introduction                                             329
   Barriers to Learning                                     330
   An Incident                                              331
   Organizational Learning in this Case                     333
   Extending or Enhancing the Learning Opportunity          338
21 STATES OF RESILIENCE                                     339
   Erik Hollnagel & Gunilla Sundström
   Introduction                                             339
   Resilience and State-space Transitions                   340
   Conclusions                                              344
    EPILOGUE: RESILIENCE ENGINEERING
    PRECEPTS                                                347
    Erik Hollnagel & David D. Woods
    Safety is Not a System Property                         347
    Resilience as a Form of Control                         348
    Readiness for Action                                    351
    Why Things Go Wrong                                     352
    A Constant Sense of Unease                              355
    Precepts                                                356
    The Way Ahead                                           357

APPENDIX
Symposium Participants                                      359
Contributing Authors                                        367
BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                371
AUTHOR INDEX                                                389
SUBJECT INDEX                                               393
Preface

Decades of efforts aimed at understanding what safety is and why
accidents happen have led to several significant insights. One is that
untoward events more often are due to an unfortunate combination of
a number of conditions, than to the failure of a single function or
component. Another is that failures are the flip side of successes,
meaning that there is no need to evoke special failure mechanisms to
explain the former. Instead, they both have their origin in performance
variability on the individual and systemic levels, the difference being
how well the system was controlled.
     It follows that successes, rather than being the result of careful
planning, also owe their occurrence to a combination of a number of
conditions. While we like to think of successes as the result of skills and
competence rather than of luck, this view is just as partial as the view of
failures as due to incompetence or error. Even successes are not always
planned to happen exactly as they do, although they of course usually
are desired – just as the untoward events are dreaded.
     A case in point is the symposium behind this book. As several of
the chapters make clear, the notion of resilience had gradually emerged
as the logical way to overcome the limitations of existing approaches to
risk assessment and system safety. Ideas about resilience had been
circulated more or less formally among several of the participants and
the need of a more concerted effort was becoming obvious.
Concurrently, a number of individuals and groups in the international
community had begun to focus on a similar class of problems,
sometimes talking directly about resilience and sometimes using related
terms. In the USA, the Santa Fe Institute had begun programmes on
robustness in natural and engineering systems and on robustness in
social processes. Within the school of high-reliability organizations, the
term resilience appeared in paper titles, e.g., Sutcliffe & Vogus (2003). A
related concept was the proposal of a conceptual framework, named
Highly Optimised Tolerance (HOT), to study fundamental aspects of
complexity, including robust behaviour (e.g., Carlson & Doyle, 2000 &
2002). In Europe, a research organization of scientists and practitioners
from many disciplines collaborated to explore the dynamics of social-
xii                                                       Resilience Engineering

ecological systems under the name of the Resilience Alliance, while
another group was called the Information Systems for Crisis Response
and Management or ISCRAM community.
     The intention of getting a group of international experts together
for an extended period of time to discuss resilience was, however, just
one component. Some of the others were that one of the protagonists
(David D. Woods) was going to spend some time in Europe, that initial
inquiries indicated that the basic funding would be available, and that
most of the people whom we had in mind were able and willing to
interrupt their otherwise busy schedules to attend the symposium.
     The symposium itself was organized as a loosely structured set of
discussions with a common theme, best characterized as long
discussions interrupted by short presentations – prepared as well as ad
hoc. The objective of the symposium was to provide an opportunity for
experts to meet and debate the present and future of Resilience
Engineering as well as to provide a tentative definition of organizational
resilience. Readers are invited to judge for themselves whether these
goals were achieved and whether the result is, indeed, a success. If so,
the credit goes to the participants both for their willingness to take part
in a process of creative chaos during one October week in
Söderköping, and for their discipline in producing the written
contributions afterwards.
     We would also like to thank the two main sponsors, the Swedish
Nuclear Power Inspectorate (SKI) and the Swedish Civil Aviation
Administration (LFV), who were willing to support something that is
not yet an established discipline. Thanks are also due to Kyla Steele and
Rogier Woltjer for practical and invaluable assistance both during the
symposium and the editing process.

Linköping, July 2005



Erik Hollnagel         David D. Woods          Nancy G. Leveson
Prologue: Resilience
Engineering Concepts
David D. Woods
Erik Hollnagel




Hindsight and Safety

Efforts to improve the safety of systems have often – some might say
always – been dominated by hindsight. This is so both in research and
in practice, perhaps more surprising in the former than in the latter.
The practical concern for safety is usually driven by events that have
happened, either in one’s own company or in the industry as such.
There is a natural motivation to prevent such events from happening
again, in concrete cases because they may incur severe losses – of
equipment and/or of life – and in general cases because they may lead
to new demands for safety from regulatory bodies, such as national and
international administrations and agencies. New demands are invariably
seen as translating into increased costs for companies and are for that
reason alone undesirable. (This is, however, not an inevitable
consequence, especially if the company takes a longer time perspective.
Indeed, for some businesses it makes sense to invest proactively in
safety, although cases of that are uncommon. The reason for this is that
sacrificing decisions usually are considered over a short time horizon, in
terms of months rather than years or in terms of years rather than
decades.)
     In the case of research, i.e., activities that take place at academic
institutions rather than in industries and are driven by intellectual rather
than economic motives, the effects of hindsight ought to be less
marked. Research should by its very nature be looking to problems that
go beyond the immediate practical needs, and hence address issues that
are of a more principal nature. Yet even research – or perhaps one
2                                                         Resilience Engineering

should say: researchers – are prone to the effects of hindsight, as
pointed out by Fischhoff (1975). It is practically a characteristic of
human nature – and an inescapable one at that – to try to make sense
of what has happened, to try to make the perceived world
comprehensible. We are consequently constrained to look at the future
in the light of the past. In this way our experience or understanding of
what has happened inevitably colours our anticipation and preparation
for what could go wrong and thereby holds back the requisite
imagination that is so essential for safety (Adamski & Westrum, 2003).
Approaches to safety and risk prediction furthermore develop in an
incremental manner, i.e., the tried and trusted approaches are only
changed when they fail and then usually by adding one more factor or
element to account for the unexplained variability. Examples are easy to
find such as ‘human error’, ‘organisational failures’, ‘safety culture’,
‘complacency’, etc. The general principle seems to be that we add or
change just enough to be able to explain that which defies the
established framework of explanations. In contrast, resilience
engineering tries to take a major step forward, not by adding one more
concept to the existing vocabulary, but by proposing a completely new
vocabulary, and therefore also a completely new way of thinking about
safety. With the risk of appearing overly pretentious, it may be
compared to a paradigm shift in the Kuhnian sense (Kuhn, 1970).
     When research escapes from hindsight and from trying merely to
explain what has happened, studies reveal the sources of resilience that
usually allow people to produce success when failure threatens.
Methods to understand the basis for technical work shows how
workers are struggling to anticipate paths that may lead to failure,
actively creating and sustaining failure-sensitive strategies, and working
to maintain margins in the face of pressures to do more and to do it
faster (Woods & Cook, 2002). In other words, doing things safely
always has been and always will be part of operational practices – on
the individual as well as the organisational level. It is, indeed, almost a
biological law that organisms or systems (including organisations) that
spend all efforts at the task at hand and thereby neglect to look out for
the unexpected, run a high risk of being obliterated, of meeting a
speedy and unpleasant demise. (To realise that, you only need to look at
how wild birds strike a balance between head-down and head-up time
when eating.) People in their different roles within an organisation are
aware of potential paths to failure and therefore develop failure-
Prologue: Resilience Engineering Concepts                                3

sensitive strategies to forestall these possibilities. Failing to do that
brings them into a reactive mode, a condition of constant fire-fighting.
But fires, whether real or metaphorical, can only be effectively quelled if
the fire-fighters are proactive and able to make the necessary sacrifices
(McLennan et al., 2005).
     Against this background, failures occur when multiple contributors
– each necessary but only jointly sufficient – combine. Work processes
or people do not choose failure, but the likelihood of failures grow
when production pressures do not allow sufficient time – and effort –
to develop and maintain the precautions that normally keep failure at
bay. Prime among these precautions is to check all necessary conditions
and to take nothing important for granted. Being thorough as well as
efficient is the hallmark of success. Being efficient without being
thorough may gradually or abruptly create conditions where even small
variations can have serious consequences. Being thorough without
being efficient rarely lasts long, as organisations are pressured to meet
new demands on resources. To understand how failure sometimes
happens one must first understand how success is obtained – how
people learn and adapt to create safety in a world fraught with gaps,
hazards, trade-offs, and multiple goals (Cook et al., 2000).
     The thesis that leaps out from these results is that failure, as
individual failure or performance failure on the system level, represents
the temporary inability to cope effectively with complexity. Success
belongs to organisations, groups and individuals who are resilient in the
sense that they recognise, adapt to and absorb variations, changes,
disturbances, disruptions, and surprises – especially disruptions that fall
outside of the set of disturbances the system is designed to handle
(Rasmussen, 1990; Rochlin, 1999; Weick et al., 1999; Sutcliffe & Vogus,
2003).


From Reactive to Proactive Safety

This book marks the maturation of a new approach to safety
management. In a world of finite resources, of irreducible uncertainty,
and of multiple conflicting goals, safety is created through proactive
resilient processes rather than through reactive barriers and defences.
The chapters in this book explore different facets of resilience as the
4                                                       Resilience Engineering

ability of systems to anticipate and adapt to the potential for surprise
and failure.
     Until recently, the dominant safety paradigm was based on
searching for ways in which limited or erratic human performance
could degrade an otherwise well designed and ‘safe system’. Techniques
from many areas such as reliability engineering and management theory
were used to develop ‘demonstrably safe’ systems. The assumption
seemed to be that safety, once established, could be maintained by
requiring that human performance stayed within prescribed boundaries
or norms. Since ‘safe’ systems needed to include mechanisms that
guarded against people as unreliable components, understanding how
human performance could stray outside these boundaries became
important.
     According to this paradigm, ‘error’ was something that could be
categorised and counted. This led to numerous proposals for
taxonomies, estimation procedures, and ways to provide the much
needed data for error tabulation and extrapolation. Studies of human
limits became important to guide the creation of remedial or prosthetic
systems that would make up for the deficiencies of people. Since
humans, as unreliable and limited system components, were assumed to
degrade what would otherwise be flawless system performance, this
paradigm often prescribed automation as a means to safeguard the
system from the people in it. In other words, in the ‘error counting’
paradigm, work on safety comprised protecting the system from
unreliable, erratic, and limited human components (or, more clearly,
protecting the people at the blunt end – in their roles as managers,
regulators and consumers of systems – from unreliable ‘other’ people at
the sharp end – who operate and maintain those systems).
     When researchers in the early 1980s began to re-examine human
error and collect data on how complex systems had failed, it soon
became apparent that people actually provided a positive contribution
to safety through their ability to adapt to changes, gaps in system
design, and unplanned for situations. Hollnagel (1983), for instance,
argued for the need of a theory of action, including an account of
performance variability, rather than a theory of ‘error’, while Rasmussen
(1983) noted that ‘the operator’s role is to make up for holes in
designers’ work.’ Many studies of how complex systems succeeded and
sometimes failed found that the formal descriptions of work embodied
in policies, regulations, procedures, and automation were incomplete as
Prologue: Resilience Engineering Concepts                                5

models of expertise and success. Analyses of the gap between formal
work prescriptions and actual work practices revealed how people in
their various roles throughout systems always struggled to anticipate
paths toward failure, to create and sustain failure-sensitive strategies,
and to maintain margins in the face of pressures to increase efficiency
(e.g., Cook et al, 2000). Overall, analysis of such ‘second stories’ taught
us that failures represented breakdowns in adaptations directed at
coping with complexity while success was usually obtained as people
learned and adapted to create safety in a world fraught with hazards,
trade-offs, and multiple goals (Rasmussen, 1997). In summary, these
studies revealed:

•    How workers and organisations continually revise their approach to
     work in an effort to remain sensitive to the possibility for failure.
•    How distant observers of work, and the workers themselves, are
     only partially aware of the current potential for failure.
•    How ‘improvements’ and changes create new paths to failure and
     new demands on workers, despite or because of new capabilities.
•    How the strategies for coping with these potential paths can be
     either strong and resilient or weak and mistaken.
•    How missing the side effects of change is the most common form
     of failure for organisations and individuals.
•    How a culture of safety depends on remaining dynamically engaged
     in new assessments and avoiding stale, narrow, or static
     representations of the changing paths (revising or reframing the
     understanding of paths toward failure over time).
•    How overconfident people can be that they have already
     anticipated the types and mechanisms of failure, and that the
     strategies they have devised are effective and will remain so.
•    How continual effort after success in a world of changing pressures
     and hazards is fundamental to creating safety.

    In the final analysis, safety is not a commodity that can be
tabulated. It is rather a chronic value ‘under our feet’ that infuses all
aspects of practice. Safety is, in the words of Karl Weick, a dynamic
non-event. Progress on safety therefore ultimately depends on
providing workers and managers with information about changing
vulnerabilities and the ability to develop new means for meeting these.
6                                                         Resilience Engineering

Resilience

Resilience engineering is a paradigm for safety management that
focuses on how to help people cope with complexity under pressure to
achieve success. It strongly contrasts with what is typical today – a
paradigm of tabulating error as if it were a thing, followed by
interventions to reduce this count. A resilient organisation treats safety
as a core value, not a commodity that can be counted. Indeed, safety
shows itself only by the events that do not happen! Rather than view
past success as a reason to ramp down investments, such organisations
continue to invest in anticipating the changing potential for failure
because they appreciate that their knowledge of the gaps is imperfect
and that their environment constantly changes. One measure of
resilience is therefore the ability to create foresight – to anticipate the
changing shape of risk, before failure and harm occurs (Woods, 2005a).
     The initial steps in developing a practice of Resilience Engineering
have focused on methods and tools:

•   to analyse, measure and monitor the resilience of organisations in
    their operating environment.
•   to improve an organisation’s resilience vis-à-vis the environment.
•   to model and predict the short- and long-term effects of change
    and line management decisions on resilience and therefore on risk.

    This book charts the efforts being made by researchers,
practitioners and safety managers to enhance resilience by looking for
ways to understand the changing vulnerabilities and pathways to failure.
These efforts begin with studies of how people cope with complexity –
usually successfully. Analyses of successes, incidents, and breakdowns
reveal the normal sources of resilience that allow systems to produce
success when failure threatens. These events and other measures
indicate the level and kinds of brittleness/resilience the system in
question exhibits. Such indicators will allow organisations to develop
the mechanisms to create foresight, to recognise, anticipate, and defend
against paths to failure that arise as organisations and technology
change.
Part I: Emergence
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 1
Resilience – the Challenge of the
Unstable
Erik Hollnagel


    Safety is the sum of the accidents that do not occur. While accident research has focused on
    accidents that occurred and tried to understand why, safety research should focus on the
    accidents that did not occur and try to understand why.


Understanding Accidents

Research into system safety is faced with the conundrum that while
there have been significant developments in the understanding of how
accidents occur, there has been no comparable developments in the
understanding of how we can adequately assess and reduce risks. A
system is safe if it is impervious and resilient to perturbations and the
identification and assessment of possible risks is therefore an essential
prerequisite for system safety. Since accidents and risk assessment
furthermore are two sides of the same coin, so to speak, and since both
are constrained in equal measure by the underlying models and theories,
it would be reasonable to assume that developments in system safety
had matched developments in accident analysis. Just as we need to have
an aetiology of accidents, a study of possible causes or origins of
accidents, we also need to have an aetiology of safety – more
specifically of what safety is and of how it may be endangered. This is
essential for work on system safety in general and for resilience
engineering in particular. Yet for reasons that are not entirely clear, such
a development has been lacking.
     The value or, indeed, the necessity of having an accident model has
been recognised for many years, such as when Benner (1978) noted
that:
10                                                         Resilience Engineering

     Practical difficulties arise during the investigation and reporting
     of most accidents. These difficulties include the determination
     of the scope of the phenomenon to investigate, the
     identification of the data required, documentation of the
     findings, development of recommendations based on the
     accident findings, and preparation of the deliverables at the end
     of the investigation. These difficulties reflect differences in the
     purposes for the investigations, which in turn reflect different
     perceptions of the accident phenomenon.

    The ‘different perceptions of the accident phenomenon’ are what
in present day terminology are called the accident models. Accident
models seem to have started by relatively uncomplicated single-factor
models of, e.g., accident proneness (Greenwood & Woods, 1919) and
developed via simple and complex linear causation models to present-
day systemic or functional models (for a recent overview of accident
models, see Hollnagel, 2004.)
    The archetype of a simple linear model is Heinrich’s (1931)
Domino model, which explains accidents as the linear propagation of a
chain of causes and effects (Figure 1.1). This model was associated with
one of the earliest attempts of formulating a complete theory of safety,
expressed in terms of ten axioms of industrial safety (Heinrich et al.,
1980, p. 21). The first of these axioms reads as follows:

     The occurrence of an injury invariably results from a
     completed sequence of factors – the last one of these being the
     accident itself. The accident in turn is invariably caused or
     permitted directly by the unsafe act of a person and/or a
     mechanical or physical hazard.

     According to this view, an accident is basically a disturbance
inflicted on an otherwise stable system. Although the domino model
has been highly useful by providing a concrete approach to
understanding accidents, it has unfortunately also reinforced the
misunderstanding that accidents have a root cause and that this root
cause can be found by searching backwards from the event through the
chain of causes that preceded it. More importantly, the domino model
suggests that system safety can be enhanced by disrupting the linear
sequence, either by ‘removing’ a ‘domino’ or by ‘spacing’ the ‘dominos’
Challenge of the Unstable                                                  11

further apart. (The problems in providing a translation from model
components to the world of practice are discussed further in Chapter
17.)

                   Ancestry                Hazards                      Injury




                            Person                  Accident
Figure 1.1: Simple linear accident model (Domino model)

      The comparable archetype of a complex linear model is the well-
known Swiss cheese model first proposed by Reason (1990). According
to this, accidents can be seen as the result of interrelations between real
time ‘unsafe acts’ by front-line operators and latent conditions such as
weakened barriers and defences, represented by the holes in the slices
of ‘cheese’, cf. Figure 1.2. (Models that describe accidents as a result of
interactions among agents, defences and hosts are also known as
epidemiological accident models.) Although this model is technically
more complex than the domino model, the focus remains on structures
or components and the functions associated with these, rather than on
the functions of the overall system as such. The Swiss cheese model
comprises a number of identifiable components where failures (and
risks) are seen as due to failures of the components, most
conspicuously as the breakdown of defences. Although causality is no
longer a single linear propagation of effects, an accident is still the result
of a relatively clean combination of events, and the failure of a barrier is
still the failure of an individual component. While the whole idea of a
12                                                       Resilience Engineering

complex linear model such as this is to describe how coincidences
occur, it cannot detach itself from a structural perspective involving the
fixed relations between agents, hosts, barriers and environments.

                                                     Hazards




         Losses
Figure 1.2: Complex linear accident model (Swiss cheese model)

     Since some accidents defy the explanatory power of even complex
linear models, alternative explanations are needed. Many authors have
pointed out that accidents can be seen as due to an unexpected
combination or aggregation of conditions or events (e.g., Perrow,
1984). A practical term for this is concurrence, meaning the temporal
property of two (or more) things happening at the same time and
thereby affecting each other. This has led to the view of accidents as
non-linear phenomena that emerge in a complex system, and the
models are therefore often called systemic accident models, cf., Chapter
4.
     This view recognises that complex system performance always is
variable, both because of the variability of the environment and the
variability of the constituent subsystems. The former may appropriately
be called exogenous variability, and the latter endogenous variability.
The endogenous variability is to a large extent attributable to the people
in the system, as individuals and/or groups. This should nevertheless
not be taken to imply that human performance is wrong or erroneous
Challenge of the Unstable                                               13

in any way. On the contrary, performance variability is necessary if a
joint cognitive system, meaning a human-machine system or a socio-
technical system, is successfully to cope with the complexity of the real
world (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005). The essence of the systemic view
can be expressed by the following four points:

•    Normal performance and as well as failures are emergent
     phenomena. Neither can therefore be attributed to or explained by
     referring to the (mal)functions of specific components or parts.
     Normal performance furthermore differs from normative
     performance: it is not what is prescribed by rules and regulation but
     rather what takes place as a result of the adjustments required by a
     partly unpredictable environment. Technically speaking, normal
     performance represents the equilibrium that reflects the regularity
     of the work environment.
•    The outcomes of actions may sometimes differ from what was
     intended, expected or required. When this happens it is more often
     due to variability of context and conditions than to the failures of
     actions (or the failure of components or functions). On the level of
     individual human performance, local optimisation or adjustment is
     the norm rather than the exception as shown by the numerous
     shortcuts and heuristics that people rely on in their work.
•    The adaptability and flexibility of human work is the reason for its
     efficiency. Normal actions are successful because people adjust to
     local conditions, to shortcomings or quirks of technology, and to
     predictable changes in resources and demands. In particular, people
     quickly learn correctly to anticipate recurring variations; this
     enables them to be proactive, hence to save the time otherwise
     needed to assess a situation.
•    The adaptability and flexibility of human work is, however, also the
     reason for the failures that occur, although it is rarely the cause of
     such failures. Actions and responses are almost always based on a
     limited rather than complete analysis of the current conditions, i.e.,
     a trade-off of thoroughness for efficiency. Yet since this is the
     normal mode of acting, normal actions can, by definition, not be
     wrong. Failures occur when this adjustment goes awry, but both
     the actions and the principles of adjustment are technically correct.
14                                                         Resilience Engineering

     Accepting a specific model does not only have consequences for
how accidents are understood, but also for how resilience is seen. In a
simple linear model, resilience is the same as being impervious to
specific causes; using the domino analogy, the pieces either cannot fall
or are so far apart that the fall of one cannot affect its neighbours. In a
complex linear model, resilience is the ability to maintain effective
barriers that can withstand the impact of harmful agents and the
erosion that is a result of latent conditions. In both cases the transition
from a safe to an unsafe state is tantamount to the failure of some
component or subsystem and resilience is the ability to endure harmful
influences. In contrast to that, a systemic model adopts a functional
point of view in which resilience is an organisation’s ability efficiently to
adjust to harmful influences rather than to shun or resist them. An
unsafe state may arise because system adjustments are insufficient or
inappropriate rather than because something fails. In this view failure is
the flip side of success, and therefore a normal phenomenon.


Anticipating Risks

Going from accident analysis to risk assessment, i.e., from
understanding what has happened to the identification of events or
conditions that in the future may endanger system safety, it is also
possible to find a number of different models of risks, although the
development has been less noticeable. Just as there are single-factor
accident models, there are risk assessment models that consider the
failure of individual components, such as Failure Mode and Effects
Analysis. Going one step further, the basic model to describe a
sequence of actions is the event tree, corresponding to the simple linear
accident model. The event tree represents a future accident as a result
of possible failures in a pre-determined sequence of events organised as
a binary branching tree. The ‘root’ is the initiating event and the ‘leaves’
are the set of possible outcomes – either successes or failures. In a
similar manner, a fault tree corresponds to a complex linear model or
an epidemiological model. The fault tree describes the accident as the
result of a series of logical combinations of conditions, which are
necessary and sufficient to produce the top event, i.e., the accident (cf.
Figure 1.3).
Challenge of the Unstable                                               15


         ACCIDENT                                     RISK
         ANALYSIS                                  ASSESSMENT


    Simple linear models                       Linear prediction (event
        (domino model)                         tree)


 Complex linear models                         Conditional prediction
  (Swiss cheese model)                         (fault tree)


  Non-linear or systemic                       Concurrence (functional
                 models                        resonance)

Figure 1.3: Models for accident analysis and risk assessment

     Event trees and fault trees may be adequate for risk assessment
when the outcomes range from incidents to smaller accidents, since
these often need less elaborate explanations and may be due to
relatively simple combinations of factors. Most major accidents,
however, are due to complex concurrences of multiple factors, some of
which have no apparent a priori relations. Event and fault trees are
therefore unable fully to describe them – although this does not prevent
event trees from being the favourite tool for Probabilistic Safety
Assessment methods in general. It is, indeed, a consequence of the
systemic view that the potential for (complex) accidents cannot be
described by a fixed structure such as a tree, graph or network, but
must invoke some way of representing dynamic bindings or couplings,
for instance as in the functional resonance accident model (Hollnagel,
2004). Indeed, the problems of risk assessment may to a large degree
arise from a reliance on graphical representations, which – as long as
they focus on descriptions of links between parts – are unable
adequately to account for concurrence and for how a stable system
slowly or abruptly may become unstable.
     The real challenge for system safety, and therefore also for
resilience engineering, is to recognise that complex systems are dynamic
and that a state of dynamic stability sometimes may change into a state
of dynamic instability. This change may be either abrupt, as in an
16                                                        Resilience Engineering

accident, or slow, as in a gradual erosion of safety margins. Complex
systems must perforce be dynamic since they must be able to adjust
their performance to the conditions, cf. the four points listed above.
These adjustments cannot be pre-programmed or built into the system,
because they cannot be anticipated at the time of design – and
sometimes not even later. It is practically impossible to design for every
little detail or every situation that may arise, something that procedure
writers have learned to their dismay. Complex systems must, however,
be dynamically stable, or constrained, in the sense that the adjustments
do not get out of hand but at all times remain under control.
Technically this can be expressed by the concept of damping, which
denotes the progressive reduction or suppression of deviations or
oscillation in a device or system (over time). A system must obviously
be able to respond to changes and challenges, but the responses must
not lead the system to lose control. The essence of resilience is
therefore the intrinsic ability of an organisation (system) to maintain or
regain a dynamically stable state, which allows it to continue operations
after a major mishap and/or in the presence of a continuous stress.
      Dictionaries commonly define resilience as the ability to ‘recover
quickly from illness, change, or misfortune’, one suggestive synonym
being buoyancy or a bouncing quality. Using this definition, it stands to
reason that it is easier to recover from a potentially destabilising
disturbance if it is detected early. The earlier an adjustment is made, the
smaller the resulting adjustments are likely to be. This has another
beneficial effect, which is a corollary of the substitution myth.
According to this, artefacts are value neutral in the sense that the
introduction of an artefact into a system only has the intended and no
unintended effects (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005, p. 101). Making a
response to or recovering from a disturbance requires an adjustment,
hence a change to the system. Any such change may have consequences
that go beyond the local and intended effects. If the consequences from
the recovery are small, i.e., if they can effectively be confined to a
subsystem, then the likelihood of negative side-effects is reduced and
the resilience is therefore higher. As a result of this, the definition of
resilience can be modified to be the ability of a system or an
organisation to react to and recover from disturbances at an early stage,
with minimal effect on the dynamic stability. The challenges to system
safety come from instability, and resilience engineering is an expression
of the methods and principles that prevent this from taking place.
Challenge of the Unstable                                              17

     For the analytical part, resilience engineering amounts to a systemic
accident model as outlined above. Rather than looking for causes we
should look for concurrences, and rather than seeing concurrences as
exceptions we should see them as normal and therefore also as
inevitable. This may at times lead to the conclusion that even though an
accident happened nothing really went wrong, in the sense that nothing
happened that was out of the ordinary. Instead it is the concurrence of
a number of events, just on the border of the ordinary, that constitutes
an explanation of the accident or event.
     For the predictive part, resilience engineering can be addressed,
e.g., by means of a functional risk identification method, such as
proposed by the functional resonance accident model (Hollnagel, 2004).
To make progress on resilience engineering we have to go beyond
failure modes of component (subsystem, human) to concurrences. This
underlines the functional view since concurrences take place among
events and functions rather than among components. The challenge is
understand when a system may lose its dynamic stability and become
unstable. To do so requires powerful methods combined with plenty of
imagination (Adamski & Westrum, 2003).
This page intentionally left blank
Systems are Ever-Changing
Yushi Fujita




    No system (i.e., combination of artifact and humans) can avoid
    changes. Changes occur continuously throughout a system’s
    lifetime. This should be regarded as a destiny. The
    incompleteness of a system is partly attributable to this ever-
    changing nature. Changes take place because of external drivers
    (e.g., economic pressure). But changes also take place because
    of internal drivers. For instance, humans are always motivated
    to make changes that they think will improve system
    administration; humans often find unintended ways of utilizing
    the artifact; leaders are encouraged to introduce new visions in
    order to stimulate and lead people; … Like these, the system is
    always subject to changes, hence metamorphosing itself like a
    living matter. This floating nature often causes mismatches
    between administrative frameworks and the ways in which the
    system is actually utilized.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 2
Essential Characteristics of
Resilience
David D. Woods




Avoiding the Error of the Third Kind

When one uses the label ‘resilience,’ the first reaction is to think of
resilience as if it were adaptability, i.e., as the ability to absorb or adapt
to disturbance, disruption and change. But all systems adapt (though
sometimes these processes can be quite slow and difficult to discern) so
resilience cannot simply be the adaptive capacity of a system. I want to
reserve resilience to refer to the broader capability – how well can a
system handle disruptions and variations that fall outside of the base
mechanisms/model for being adaptive as defined in that system.
     This depends on a distinction between understanding how a system
is competent at designed-for-uncertainties, which defines a ‘textbook’
performance envelope and how a system recognizes when situations
challenge or fall outside that envelope – unanticipated variability or
perturbations (see parallel analyses in Woods et al., 1990 and Carlson &
Doyle, 2000; Csete & Doyle, 2002). Most discussions of definitions of
‘robustness’ in adaptive systems debate whether resilience refers to first
or second order adaptability (Jen, 2003). In the end, the debates tend to
settle on emphasizing the system’s ability to handle events that fall
outside its design envelope and debate what is a design envelope, what
events challenge or fall outside that envelope, and how does a system
see what it has failed to build into its design (e.g., see url:
http://discuss.santafe.edu/robustness/).
     The area of textbook competence is in effect a model of
variability/uncertainty and a model of how the strategies/plans
22                                                       Resilience Engineering

/countermeasures in play handle these, mostly successfully.
Unanticipated perturbations arise (a) because the model implicit and
explicit in the competence envelope is incomplete, limited or wrong
and (b) because the environment changes so that new demands,
pressures, and vulnerabilities arise that undermine the effectiveness of
the competence measures in play.
     Resilience then concerns the ability to recognize and adapt to
handle unanticipated perturbations that call into question the model of
competence, and demand a shift of processes, strategies and
coordination. When evidence of holes in the organization’s model
builds up, the risk is what Ian Mitroff called many years ago, the error
of the third kind, or solving the wrong problem (Mitroff, 1974). This is
a kind of under-adaptation failure where people persist in applying
textbook plans and activities in the face of evidence of changing
circumstances that demand a qualitative shift in assessment, priorities,
or response strategy.
     This means resilience is concerned with monitoring the boundary
conditions of the current model for competence (how strategies are
matched to demands) and adjusting or expanding that model to better
accommodate changing demands. The focus is on assessing the
organization’s adaptive capacity relative to challenges to that capacity –
what sustains or erodes the organization’s adaptive capacities? Is it
degrading or lower than the changing demands of its environment?
What dynamics challenge or go beyond the boundaries of the
competence envelope? Is the organization as well adapted as it thinks it
is? Note that boundaries are properties of the model that defines the
textbook competence envelope relative to the uncertainties and
perturbations it is designed for (Rasmussen, 1990a). Hence, resilience
engineering devotes effort to make observable the organization’s model
of how it creates safety, in order to see when the model is in need of
revision.
     To do this, Resilience Engineering must monitor organizational
decision-making to assess the risk that the organization is operating
nearer to safety boundaries than it realizes (Woods, 2005a). Monitoring
resilience should lead to interventions to manage and adjust the
adaptive capacity as the system faces new forms of variation and
challenges.
Essential Characteristics of Resilience                                       23

    Monitoring and managing resilience, or its absence, brittleness, is
concerned with understanding how the system adapts and to what
kinds of disturbances in the environment, including properties such as:

•     buffering capacity: the size or kinds of disruptions the system can
      absorb or adapt to without a fundamental breakdown in
      performance or in the system’s structure;
•     flexibility versus stiffness: the system’s ability to restructure itself in
      response to external changes or pressures;
•     margin: how closely or how precarious the system is currently
      operating relative to one or another kind of performance boundary;
•     tolerance: how a system behaves near a boundary – whether the
      system gracefully degrades as stress/pressure increase or collapses
      quickly when pressure exceeds adaptive capacity.

     In addition, cross-scale interactions are critical, as the resilience of a
system defined at one scale depends on influences from scales above
and below:

•     Downward, resilience is affected by how organizational context
      creates    or     facilitates   resolution    of    pressures/goal
      conflicts/dilemmas, for example, mismanaging goal conflicts or
      poor automation design can create authority-responsibility double
      binds for operational personnel (Woods et al., 1994; Woods,
      2005b).
•     Upward, resilience is affected by how adaptations by local actors in
      the form of workarounds or innovative tactics reverberate and
      influence more strategic goals and interactions (e.g., workload
      bottlenecks at the operational scale can lead to practitioner
      workarounds that make management’s attempts to command
      compliance with broad standards unworkable; Cook et al., 2000).

    As illustrated in the cases of resilience or brittleness described or
referred to in this book, all systems have some degree of resilience and
sources for resilience. Even cases with negative outcomes, when seen as
breakdowns in adaptation, reveal the complicating dynamics that stress
the textbook envelope and the often hidden sources of resilience used
to cope with these complexities.
24                                                         Resilience Engineering

     Accidents have been noted by many analysts as ‘fundamentally
surprising’ events because they call into question the organization’s
model of the risks they face and the effectiveness of the
countermeasure deployed (Lanir, 1986; Woods et al., 1994, chapter 5;
Rochlin, 1999; Woods, 2005b). In other words, the organization is
unable to recognize or interpret evidence of new vulnerabilities or
ineffective countermeasures until a visible accident occurs. At this stage
the organization can engage in fundamental learning but this window of
opportunity comes at a high price and is fragile given the consequences
of the harm and losses. The shift demanded following an accident is a
reframing process. In reframing one notices initial signs that call into
question ongoing models, plans and routines, and begins processes of
inquiry to test if revision is warranted (Klein et al., 2005). Resilience
Engineering aims to provide support for the cognitive processes of
reframing an organization’s model of how safety is created before
accidents occur by developing measures and indicators of contributors
to resilience such as the properties of buffers, flexibility, precariousness,
and tolerance and patterns of interactions across scales such as
responsibility-authority double binds.
     Monitoring resilience is monitoring for the changing boundary
conditions of the textbook competence envelope – how a system is
competent at handling designed-for-uncertainties – to recognize forms
of unanticipated perturbations – dynamics that challenge or go beyond
the envelope. This is a kind of broadening check that identifies when
the organization needs to learn and change. Resilience engineering
needs to identify the classes of dynamics that undermine resilience and
result in organizations that act riskier than they realize. This chapter
focuses on dynamics related to safety-production goal conflicts.

Coping with Pressure to be Faster, Better, Cheaper

Consider recent NASA experience, in particular, the consequences of
NASA’s adoption of a policy called ‘faster, better, cheaper’ (FBC).
Several years later a series of mishaps in space science missions rocked
the organization and called into question that policy. In a remarkable
‘organizational accident’ report, an independent team investigated the
organizational factors that spawned the set of mishaps (Spear, 2000).
    The investigation realized that FBC was not a policy choice, but the
acknowledgement that the organization was under fundamental
Essential Characteristics of Resilience                                 25

pressure from stakeholders. The report and the follow-up, but short-
lived, ‘Design for Safety’ program noted that NASA had to cope with a
changing environment with increasing performance demands combined
with reduced resources: drive down the cost of launches, meet shorter,
more aggressive mission schedules, do work in a new organizational
structure that required people to shift roles and coordinate with new
partners, eroding levels of personnel experience and skills. Plus, all of
these changes were occurring against a backdrop of heightened public
and congressional interest that threatened the viability of the space
program. The MCO investigation board concluded: NASA, which had
a history of ‘successfully carrying out some of the most challenging and
complex engineering tasks ever faced by this nation,’ was being asked to
‘sustain this level of success while continually cutting costs, personnel
and development time … these demands have stressed the system to
the limit’ due to ‘insufficient time to reflect on unintended
consequences of day-to-day decisions, insufficient time and workforce
available to provide the levels of checks and balances normally found,
breakdowns in inter-group communications, too much emphasis on
cost and schedule reduction.’ The MCO Board diagnosed the mishaps
as indicators of an increasingly brittle system as production pressure
eroded sources of resilience and led to decisions that were riskier than
anyone wanted or realized. Given this diagnosis, the Board went on to
re-conceptualize the issue as how to provide tools for proactively
monitoring and managing project risk throughout a project life-cycle
and how to use these tools to balance safety with the pressure to be
faster, better, cheaper.
     The experience of NASA under FBC is an example of the law of
stretched systems: every system is stretched to operate at its capacity; as
soon as there is some improvement, for example in the form of new
technology, it will be exploited to achieve a new intensity and tempo of
activity (Woods, 2003). Under pressure from performance and
efficiency demands (FBC pressure), advances are consumed to ask
operational personnel ‘to do more, do it faster or do it in more complex
ways’, as the Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap Investigation Board report
determined. With or without cheerleading from prestigious groups,
pressures to be ‘faster, better, cheaper’ increase. Furthermore, pressures
to be ‘faster, better, cheaper’ introduce changes, some of which are new
capabilities (the term does include ‘better’), and these changes modify
the vulnerabilities or paths toward failure. How conflicts and trade-offs
26                                                                  Resilience Engineering

like these are recognized and handled in the context of vectors of
change is an important aspect of managing resilience.

Balancing Acute and Chronic Goals

Problems in the US healthcare delivery system provide another
informative case where faster, better, cheaper pressures conflict with
safety and other chronic goals. The Institute of Medicine in a calculated
strategy to guide national improvements in health care delivery
conducted a series of assessments. One of these, Crossing the Quality
Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st Century (IOM, 2001), stated
six goals needed to be achieved simultaneously: the national health care
system should be – Safe, Effective, Patient-centered, Timely, Efficient,
Equitable.1 Each goal is worthy and generates thunderous agreement.
The next step seems quite direct and obvious – how to identify and
implement quick steps to advance each goal (the classic search for so-
called ‘low hanging fruit’). But as in the NASA case, this set of goals is
not a new policy direction but rather an acknowledgement of
demanding pressures already operating on health care practitioners and
organizations. Even more difficult, the six goals represent a set of
interacting and often conflicting pressures so that in adapting to reach




1
       The IOM states the quality goals as –
‘Health Care Should Be:
•      Safe – avoiding injuries to patients from the care that is intended to help them.
•      Effective – providing services based on scientific knowledge to all who could
       benefit and refraining from providing services to those not likely to benefit
       (avoiding underuse and overuse, respectively).
•      Patient-centered – providing care that is respectful of and responsive to
       individual patient preferences, needs, and values and ensuring that patient
       values guide all clinical decisions.
•      Timely – reducing waits and sometimes harmful delays for both those who
       receive and those who give care.
•      Efficient – avoiding waste, including waste of equipment, supplies, ideas, and
       energy.
•      Equitable – providing care that does not vary in quality because of personal
       characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, geographic location, and
       socioeconomic status.’
Essential Characteristics of Resilience                                   27

for one of these goals it is very easy to undermine or squeeze others. To
improve on all simultaneously is quite tricky.
     As I have worked on safety in health care, I hear many highly
placed voices for change express a basic belief that these six goals can
be synergistic. Their agenda is to energize a search for and adoption of
specific mechanisms that simultaneously advance multiple goals within
the six and that do not conflict with others – ‘silver bullets’. For
example, much of the patient safety discussion in US health care
continues to be a search for specific mechanisms that appear to
simultaneously save money and reduce injuries as a result of care.
Similarly, NASA senior leaders thought that including ‘better’ along
with faster and cheaper meant that techniques were available to achieve
progress on being faster, better, and cheaper together (for almost comic
rationalizations of ‘faster, better, cheaper’ following the series of Mars
science mission mishaps and an attempt to protect the reputation of the
NASA administrator at the time, see Spear, 2000). The IOM and NASA
senior management believed that quality improvements began with the
search for these ‘silver bullet’ mechanisms (sometimes called ‘best
practices’ in health care). Once such practices are identified, the
question becomes how to get practitioners and organizations to adopt
these practices. Other fields can help provide the means to develop and
document new best practices by describing successes from other
industries (health care frequently uses aviation and space efforts to
justify similar programs in health care organizations). The IOM in
particular has had a public strategy to generate this set of silver bullet
practices and accompanying justifications (like creating a quality
catalog) and then pressure health care delivery decision makers to adopt
them all in the firm belief that, as a result, all six goals will be advanced
simultaneously and all stakeholders and participants will benefit (one
example is computerized physician order entry).
     However, the findings of the Columbia accident investigation
board (CAIB) report should reveal to all that the silver bullet strategy is
a mirage. The heart of the matter is not silver bullets that eliminate
conflicts across goals, but developing new mechanisms that balance the
inherent tensions and trade-offs across these goals (Woods et al., 1994).
The general trade-off occurs between the family of acute goals – timely,
efficient, effective (or after NASA’s policy, the Faster, Better, Cheaper
or FBC goals) and the family of chronic goals, for the health care case
consisting of safety, patient-centeredness, and equitable access.
28                                                        Resilience Engineering

     The tension between acute production goals and chronic safety
risks is seen dramatically in the Columbia accident which the
investigation board found was the result of pressure on acute goals
eroding attention, energy and investments on chronic goals related to
controlling safety risks (Gehman, 2003). Hollnagel (2004, p. 160)
compactly captured the tension between the two sets of goals with the
comment that:

     If anything is unreasonable, it is the requirement to be both
     efficient and thorough at the same time – or rather to be
     thorough when with hindsight it was wrong to be efficient.

     The FBC goal set is acute in the sense that they happen in the short
term and can be assessed through pointed data collection that
aggregates element counts (shorter hospitals stays, delay times). Note
that ‘better’ is in this set, though better in this family means increasing
capabilities in a focused or narrow way, e.g., cardiac patients are treated
more consistently with a standard protocol. The development of new
therapies and diagnostic capabilities belongs in the acute sense of
‘better.’
     Safety, access, patient-centeredness are chronic goals in the sense
that they are system properties that emerge from the interaction of
elements in the system and play out over longer time frames. For
example, safety is an emergent system property, arising in the
interactions across components, subsystems, software, organizations,
and human behavior.
     By focusing on the tensions across the two sets, we can better see
the current situation in health care. It seems to be lurching from crisis
to crisis as efforts to improve or respond in one area are accompanied
by new tensions at the intersections of other goals (or the tensions are
there all along and the visible crisis point shifts as stakeholders and the
press shift their attention to different manifestations of the underlying
conflicts). The tensions and trade-offs are seen when improvements or
investments in one area contribute to greater squeezes in another area.
The conflicts are stirred by the changing background of capabilities and
economic pressure. The shifting points of crisis can be seen first in
1995-6 as dramatic well publicized deaths due to care helped create the
patient safety crisis (ultimately documented in Kohn et al., 1999). The
patient safety movement was energized by patients feeling vulnerable as
Essential Characteristics of Resilience                                 29

health care changed to meet cost control pressures. Today attention has
shifted to an access crisis as malpractice rates and prescription drug
costs undermine patients’ access to physicians in high risk specialties
and challenge seniors’ ability to balance medication costs with limited
personal budgets.


Dynamic Balancing Acts

If the tension view is correct, then progress revolves around how to
dynamically balance the potential trade-offs so that all six goals can
advance (as opposed to the current situation where improvements or
investments in one area create greater squeezes in another area). It is
important to remember that trade-offs are defined by two parameters,
one that captures discrimination power or how well one can make the
underlying judgement, and a second that defines where to place a
criterion for making a decision or taking an action along the trade-off
curve, criterion placement or movement. The parameters of a trade-off
cannot be estimated by a single case, but require integration over
behavior in sets of cases and over time.
      One aspect of the difficulty of goal conflicts is that the default or
typical ways to advance the acute goals often make it harder to achieve
chronic goals simultaneously. For example, increasing therapeutic
capabilities can easily appear as new silos of care that do not redress
and can even exacerbate fragmentation of care (undermining the
patient-centeredness goal). To advance all of the goals, ironically, the
chronic set of goals of patient centered, safety and access must be put
first, with secondary concern for efficient and timely methods. To do
otherwise will fall prey to the natural tendency to value the more
immediate and direct consequences (which, by the way, are easier to
measure) of the acute set over the chronic and produce an
unintentional sacrifice on the chronic set. Effective balance seems to
arise when organizations shift from seeing safety as one of a set of goals
to be measured (is it going up or down?) to considering safety as a basic
value. The point is that for chronic goals to be given enough weight in
the interaction with acute goals, the chronic needs to be approached
much more like establishing a core cultural value.
      For example, valuing the chronic set in health care puts patient
centeredness first with its fellow travelers safety and access. The central
30                                                        Resilience Engineering

issue under patient centeredness is emergent continuity of care, as the
patient makes different encounters with the health care system and as
disease processes develop over time. The opposite of continuity is
fragmentation. Many of the tensions across goals exacerbate
fragmentation, e.g., ironically, new capabilities on specific aspects of
health care can lead to more specialization and more silos of care.
Placing priority on continuity of care vs. fragmentation focuses
attention (a) on health care issues related to chronic diseases which
require continuity and which are inherently difficult in a fragmented
system of care and (b) on cognitive system issues which address
coordination over time, over practitioners, over organizations, and over
specialized knowledge sources. Consider the different ways new
technology can have an effect on patient care. Depending on how
computer systems are built and adapted over time, more
computerization can lead to less contact with patients and more contact
with the image of the patient in the database. This is a likely outcome
when FBC pressure leads acute goals to dominate chronic ones (the
benefits of the advance in information technology will tend to be
consumed to meet pressures for productivity or efficiency). When a
chronic goal such as continuity of care, functions as the leading value,
the emphasis shifts to finding uses of computer capabilities that
increase attention and tailoring of general standards to a specific patient
over time (increasing the effective continuity) and only then developing
these capabilities to meet cost considerations.
     The tension diagnosis is part of the more general diagnosis that
past success has led to increasingly complex systems with new forms of
problems and failure risks. The basic issue for organizational design is
how large-scale systems can cope with complexity, especially the pace
of change and coupling across parts that accompany the methods that
advance the acute goals. To miss the complexity diagnosis will make
otherwise well-intentioned efforts fail as each attempt to advance goals
simultaneously through silver bullets will rebound as new crises where
goal trade-offs create new dissatisfactions and tensions.

Sacrifice Judgements

To illustrate a safety culture, leaders tell stories about an individual
making tough decisions when goals conflict. The stories always have
the same basic form even though the details may come from a personal
Essential Characteristics of Resilience                                    31

experience or from re-telling of a story gathered from another domain
with a high reputation for safety (e.g., health care leaders often use
aerospace stories):

      Someone noticed there might be a problem developing, but the
      evidence is subtle or ambiguous. This person has the courage
      to speak up and stop the production process underway. After
      the aircraft gets back on the ground or after the system is
      dismantled or after the hint is chased down with additional
      data, then all discover the courageous voice was correct. There
      was a problem that would otherwise have been missed and to
      have continued would have resulted in failure, losses, and
      injuries. The story closes with an image of accolades for the
      courageous voice.

      When the speaker finishes the story, the audience sighs with
      appreciation – that was an admirable voice and it illustrates
      how a great organization encourages people to speak up about
      potential safety problems. You can almost see people in the
      audience thinking, ‘I wish my organization had a culture that
      helped people act this way.’

      But this common story line has the wrong ending. It is a quite
      different ending that provides the true test for a high resilience
      organization.

      When they go look, after the landing or after dismantling the
      device or after the extra tests were run, everything turns out to
      be OK. The evidence of a problem isn’t there or may be
      ambiguous; production apparently did not need to be stopped.
      Now, how does the organization’s management react? How do
      the courageous voice’s peers react?

      For there to be high resilience, the organization has to
      recognize the voice as courageous and valuable even though
      the result was apparently an unnecessary sacrifice on
      production and efficiency goals. Otherwise, people balancing
      multiple goals will tend to act riskier than we want them to, or
      riskier than they themselves really want to.
32                                                        Resilience Engineering

     These contrasting story lines illustrate the difficulties of balancing
acute goals with chronic ones. Given a backdrop of schedule pressure,
how should an organization react to potential ‘warning’ signs and seek
to handle the issues the signs point to? If organizations never sacrifice
production pressure to follow up warning signs, they are acting much
too risky. On the other hand, if uncertain ‘warning’ signs always lead to
sacrifices on acute goals, can the organization operate within reasonable
parameters or stakeholder demands? It is easy for organizations that are
working hard to advance the acute goal set to see such warning signs as
risking inefficiencies or as low probability of concern as they point to a
record of apparent success and improvement. Ironically, these same
signs after-the-fact of an accident appear to all as clear cut undeniable
warning signs of imminent dangers.
     To proactively manage risk prior to outcome requires ways to know
when to relax the pressure on throughput and efficiency goals, i.e.,
making a sacrifice judgement. Resilience engineering needs to provide
organizations with help on how to decide when to relax production
pressure to reduce risk (Woods, 2000). I refer to these trade-off
decisions as sacrifice judgements because acute production or efficiency
related goals are temporarily sacrificed, or the pressure to achieve these
goals is relaxed, in order to reduce the risks of approaching too near
safety boundaries. Sacrifice judgements occur in many settings: when to
convert from laparoscopic surgery to an open procedure (Dominguez
et al., 2004 and the discussion in Cook et al., 1998), when to break off
an approach to an airport during weather that increases the risks of
wind shear, and when to have a local slowdown in production
operations to avoid risks as complications build up.
     New research is needed to understand this judgement process in
individuals and in organizations. Previous research on such decisions
(e.g., production/safety trade-off decisions in laparoscopic surgery)
indicates that the decision to value production over safety is implicit
and unrecognized. The result is that individuals and organizations act
much riskier than they would ever desire. A sacrifice judgement is
especially difficult because the hindsight view will indicate that the
sacrifice or relaxation may have been unnecessary since ‘nothing
happened.’ This means that it is important to assess how peers and
superiors react to such decisions.
     The goal is to develop explicit guidance on how to help people
make the relaxation/sacrifice judgement under uncertainty, to maintain
Essential Characteristics of Resilience                                33

a desired level of risk acceptance/risk averseness, and to recognize
changing levels of risk acceptance/risk averseness. For example, what
indicators reveal a safety/production trade-off sliding out of balance as
pressure rises to achieve acute production and efficiency goals?
Ironically, it is these very times of higher organizational tempo and
focus on acute goals that require extra investments in sources of
resilience to keep production/safety trade-offs in balance – valuing
thoroughness despite the potential for sacrifices on efficiency required
to meet stakeholder demands.
     Note how the recommendation to aid sacrifice judgements is a
specialization of general methods for aiding any system confronting a
trade-off: (a) improve the discrimination power of the system
confronting the trade-off, and (b) help the system dynamically match its
placement of a decision criterion with the assessment of changing risk
and uncertainty.
     Resilience Engineering should provide the means for dynamically
adjusting the balance across the sets of acute and chronic goals. The
dilemma of production pressure/safety trade-offs is that we need to pay
the most attention to, and devote scarce resources to, potential future
safety risks when they are least affordable due to increasing pressures to
produce or economize. As a result, organizations unknowingly act
riskier than they would normally accept. The first step is tools to
monitor the boundary between competence at designed-for-
uncertainties and unanticipated perturbations that challenge or fall
outside that envelope. Recognizing signs of unanticipated perturbations
consuming or stretching the sources of resilience in the system can lead
actions to re-charge a system’s resilience. How can we increase,
maintain, or re-establish resilience when buffers are being depleted,
margins are precarious, processes become stiff, and squeezes become
tighter?


Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by grant NNA04CK45A from NASA
Ames Research Center to develop resilience engineering concepts for
managing organizational risk. The ideas presented benefited from
discussions in the NASA’s Design for Safety workshop and Workshop
34                                                    Resilience Engineering

on organizational risk. Discussions with John Wreathall helped develop
the model of trade-offs across acute and chronic goals.
Chapter 3
Defining Resilience
Andrew Hale
Tom Heijer




Pictures of Resilience

Resilience first conjures up in the mind pictures of bouncing back from
adversity: the boxer dancing courageously out of his corner despite the
battering in the previous round; the kidnap victim, like Terry Waite,
emerging from months of privation as a prisoner of terrorist
organisations, smiling and talking rationally about his experiences; the
victim of a severe handicap, like Stephen Hawkins or Christopher
Reeve, still managing to make a major contribution to society or a
chosen cause. If we were to apply this image to organisations, the
emphasis would come to fall on responding to disaster: rapid recovery
from a disastrous fire by reopening production in a temporary building;
restoring confidence among local residents after a major chemical leak
by full openness over the investigation and involvement in decisions
about improved prevention measures; or restoring power on the
network after a major outage by drafting in extra staff to work around
the clock. This captures some of the essentials, with an emphasis on
flexibility, coping with unexpected and unplanned situations and
responding rapidly to events, with excellent communication and
mobilisation of resources to intervene at the critical points. However,
we would argue that we should extend the definition a little more
broadly, in order to encompass also the ability to avert the disaster or
major upset, using these same characteristics. Resilience then describes
also the characteristic of managing the organisation’s activities to
anticipate and circumvent threats to its existence and primary goals.
36                                                                                      Resilience Engineering

This is shown in particular in an ability to manage severe pressures and
conflicts between safety and the primary production or performance
goals of the organisation.
    This definition can be projected easily onto the model which
Rasmussen proposed to understand the drift to danger (Figure 3.1,
adapted from Rasmussen & Svedung, 2000).
       Migration
     to maximum
       individual
        benefits

                                MARGINS
                                        Area of violations &
                                        deviances
                                                                                     Commercial
                                                                   Resulting
                                                                                     market forces
                              Safety     Operational self-
                                                                   direction of
                                                                   migration
                               nets      stabilised space of
                                          action, with better
                                          performance, more
                                            individual benefits,              Safe space of action
                                            and still acceptable              as defined by risk
      INDIVIDUAL BENEFITS




                                              level of safety                 analysis techniques
                                                                              (during design)
                                        Incidents

                                                                       Safety regulations
                                                                       and procedures       Individual
                            Accidents
                                                                                            concerns
                                                                                            Life quality, etc.
     PERFORMANCE                                                      Migration to maximum performance

Figure 3.1: Rasmussen’s drift to danger model

     This aspect of resilience concentrates on the prevention of loss of
control over risk, rather than recovery from that loss of control. If we
use the representation of the bowtie model of accident scenarios
(Figure 3.2 adapted from Visser, 1998), we are locating resilience not
only on the right-hand side of the centre event, but also on the left.
     Reverting to Rasmussen’s model, resilience is the ability to steer the
activities of the organisation so that it may sail close to the area where
accidents will happen, but always stays out of that dangerous area. This
implies a very sensitive awareness of where the organisation is in
relation to that danger area and a very rapid and an effective response
Defining Resilience                                                             37

when signals of approaching or actual danger are detected, even
unexpected or unknown ones. The picture this conjures up is of a
medieval ship with wakeful lookouts, taking constant soundings as it
sails in the unknown and misty waters of the far north or west, alert for
icebergs, terrible beasts or the possibility of falling off the edge of the
flat earth. We cannot talk of resilience unless the organisation achieves
this feat consistently over a long period of time. As the metaphor of the
ship implies, resilience is a dynamic process of steering and not a static
state of an organisation. It has to be worked at continuously and, like
the voyage of the Flying Dutchman, the task is never ended and the
resilience can always disappear or be proven ineffective in the face of
particular threats.
   Events and                                       Harm to people and
 circumstances                                       damage to assets
                            BARRIERS                  or environment




                                                                         CONSEQUENCES
  HAZARDS




                           Undesirable event
                            with potential for
                            harm or damage

                           Engineering activities
                           Maintenance activities
                           Operations activities

Figure 3.2: Bowtie model



How Do We Recognise Resilience When We See It?

These characteristics of resilience are worked out in more detail
elsewhere in this book. However, we wish to add one more aspect of a
definition at this point. This is something we need to consider when
38                                                      Resilience Engineering

asking the question: ‘how do we recognise a resilient organisation?’ One
answer to this is to rely on measuring the sort of characteristics which
have been set out above. Are they present in the organisation or
system? However, this still leaves us with the dilemma as to whether
these characteristics are indeed the ones that are crucial in achieving
that dynamic avoidance of accidents and disasters. We would really like
to have confirmation with an outcome measure over a long period. The
obvious one is the safety performance of the organisation or activity
over a long period, coupled with its survival (and preferably prosperity)
on the basis of other performance measures such as production,
service, productivity and quality. The question then arises whether a
safe organisation is by definition a resilient one and whether one which
has accidents is by definition not resilient. We shall explore the first
question in Chapter 9 by looking at railways, but suffice it here to say
that the answer is ‘no’. Organisations can be safe without being
resilient. A few observations about the second question are given
below.


Is Road Traffic Resilient?

Let us take the road system and ask whether it is resilient. It
undoubtedly has many accidents. It is high up on the list of worldwide
killers compiled by the World Health Organisation. In the Netherlands
it kills more than ten times as many people as die from work accidents.
So it does not look good for its credentials as a resilient system.
However, let us look at it in terms of risk. In setting up a study into
interaction behaviour between traffic participants (Houtenbos et al.,
2004) we made some rough estimates of risk for the road system in the
Netherlands. We took ‘back of the envelope’ figures such as the
following:

•    1.3 × 1011 vehicle kilometres per year (cf., www.swov.nl)
•    An estimated average of 5 encounters/km with other road users;
     encounters being meetings with other traffic at road junctions or
     during overtaking manoeuvres, pedestrians or cyclists crossing the
     road, etc., where we can consider that a potential for accident
     exists. (We have taken a range from 1 encounter/km for
     motorways on which 38% of Dutch vehicle kilometres are driven,
Defining Resilience                                                     39

     up to 20/km on 50kph roads in urban areas, on which 26% of the
     kilometres are driven (www.swov.nl), with intervening numbers for
     80 and 100kph roads. These are figures we estimated ourselves and
     have no empirical basis.)

     This means that there are some 6.5 × 1011 encounters/year for a
death toll of a little over 1000/year. The vast majority of these are the
result of an encounter between at least two traffic participants. In a
more accurate analysis we would need to subtract one-sided accidents
where the vehicle leaves the road due to excessive speed, loss of
adhesion, etc. This gives us a risk of death of 1.5 × 10-9/encounter. We
know that there are far more injury and damage accidents than deaths,
but even if this is a factor 10,000 more, the accident rate per encounter
is still only 1.5 × 10-5. This is extremely low, particularly when we
consider that typical figures used in quantitative risk assessment to
estimate the probability of human error in even simple tasks are never
below 10-4. Is the road system resilient on the basis of this argument?
Given the exposure to situations which could lead to accidents, we
would argue that it is, despite the accident toll. This led us to conclude
that the participants manage these encounters very effectively using
local clues and local interactions, and to decide that we needed to study
much more thoroughly how the encounters are handled before jumping
to all sorts of conclusions about the need to introduce complex
information technology to improve the safety of these interactions in
the system.
     In the other direction, we can ask whether one of the reasons why
the aviation system has such a good safety performance – particularly in
the space between take-off and landing – is simply that airspace,
certainly compared with the roads in the Netherlands, is amazingly
empty and so encounters, even without air traffic management (ATM)
control, would be very rare? By this we do not mean to call into
question whether aviation is ultra-safe or not, but to put the question
whether safety performance alone can be seen as proof of resilience
without taking into account the issue of exposure to risk. We do this
particularly because we see some similar (potential) mechanisms in both
systems, which lead to high safety performance, and which we would
see as characteristic of resilience. Notable among these is the (potential)
presence of simple local rules governing interactions, without the need
for central controlling intervention. Hoekstra (2001) demonstrated with
40                                                          Resilience Engineering

simulations just how successful such local rules for governing
encounters under ‘free flight’ rules (with no ATM control) could be. We
see just such ‘rules’ being used by drivers on the road at intersections
(Houtenbos et al., 2004) and they also seem to work amazingly well
most of the time.


Conclusion

In this short note we are pleading for two things: what is interesting for
safety is preventing accidents and not just surviving them. If resilience
is used with its common meaning of survival in adversity, we do not see
it to be of interest to us. If its definition is extended to cover the ability
in difficult conditions to stay within the safe envelope and avoid
accidents it becomes a useful term. We would, however, ask whether
we do not have other terms already for that phenomenon, such as high
reliability organisations, or organisations with an excellent safety
culture.
     We would enter a plea that we should consider resilience against
the background of the size of the risk. You can be resilient in situations
of very high risk and still have a quite substantial number of accidents.
The significant thing is that there are not far more. You can also fail to
be resilient in conditions of low risk and have no accidents. We will
argue in Chapter 9 that you can also perform well in major risk
conditions without being resilient.
Nature of Changes in Systems
Yushi Fujita




    Humans in systems (e.g., operators, maintenance people) are
    essentially alike and are, in general, adaptive and proactive.
    These are admirable qualities, but of limited scope. Adaptive
    and proactive behaviors can change systems continuously, but
    humans at the front end alone may or may not be able to
    recognise the potential impact that the changes can have on the
    system, especially the impact when several changes are put into
    effect simultaneously. Humans at the back end (e.g.,
    administrators, regulators) tend to have sanguine ideas such as
    that the system is always operated as planned, and that rules
    and procedures can fix the system at an optimal state.
    Mismatches caused by these two tendencies constitute latent
    hazards, which may cause the system to drift to failures.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 4
Complexity, Emergence,
Resilience …
Jean Pariès


    Future is inevitable, but it may not happen
    Jorges Luis Borges


Introduction

If safety is simply taken as the ability to operate without killing (too
many) people, organizational resilience does not necessarily mean
safety. If resilience is be taken as the intrinsic capacity of an
organization to recover a stable state (the initial one or a new one)
allowing it to continue operations after a major mishap or in presence
of a continuous stress, then the ability of an organization to ensure its
own survival/operations against adverse circumstances may well imply
being momentarily unsafe for its members, or other stakeholders. A
good example of that is a country in war, defending itself against
military aggression. Resilience may imply accepting to lose some ‘lives’
among the people. However, from a different perspective, which is
widely developed in this book, safety can also be seen as a form of
resilience, i.e., as the result of the robustness of all the processes that
keep the system safe towards all kinds of stressors, pathogens, threats
and the like.
     A further strong contention of this book is that organizational
resilience is an emerging property of complex systems. The goal of this
short section is to elaborate on the notion of emergence. It will not
discuss the notion of resilience itself, extensively addressed elsewhere
throughout this book. The focus will rather be put on the relationship
between complexity and emergence. The issues that will be addressed
are questions such as what does it mean that resilience (or any other
44                                                       Resilience Engineering

property) is an emerging property, what the relationship is between
emergence and complexity, and whether a more complex system
necessarily is less resilient, as Perrow (1984) suggested. The goal is to
provide the reader of this book with a framework and some insight
(and hopefully some questions left) about these transverse notions, in
order to facilitate the comprehension of the discussions in the other
chapters about resilience and the challenge of engineering it into
organizations.


Emergence and Systems

In the Middle Age in the alchemists’ laboratories, persistent researchers
were seeking the long life elixir – the infallible remedy for all diseases
and the philosophers’ stone – able to trigger the transmutation of
common metal in gold (Figure 4.1). While they did not really succeed,
they did discover a lot of less ambitious properties of matter, and above
all, they realised that mixtures could have properties that components
had not. In other words, they discovered the power of interaction. And
progressively, alchemists became chemists.
      Since then, science has been reductionistic. Scientists have been
decomposing phenomena, systems and matter into interacting parts,
explaining properties at one level from laws describing the interaction
of component properties at a lower level of organization. And because
more and more components (e.g., atoms) are shared by all phenomena
as we go deeper into the decomposition, science has been able to
reduce complexity. A multitude of phenomena are explained by a few
laws and by the particular parameters of the case. Conversely, as in
chess where a small number of rules can generate a huge number of
board configurations, a few laws and parameters generate the diversity
of properties and phenomena. One could say that properties emerge
from the interaction of lower level components. As Holland (1998)
puts it, ‘emergence in rule-governed systems comes close to being the
obverse of reduction’.
      So there is a strong relationship between emergence and
complexity, as well as between complexity and explanation.
‘Emergence’ is what happens when we try to understand the properties
of a system that exceeds the level of size and complexity that our
intellect can grasp at once, so we decompose the system into interacting
Complexity, Emergence, Resilience …                                      45

component parts. But an obvious question immediately arises from
here: can we ‘explain’ all the properties of the world (physical,
biological, psychological, social, etc.) through such a reduction process?
Clearly, the least one can say is that the reductionistic strategy does not
have the same efficiency for all aspects of the world.




Figure 4.1: The alchemists’ laboratory

     If I try to explain the weight of my alarm clock from the weight of
its constituents, it works pretty well. When I try to explain the capability
of my alarm clock to wake me up at a specific time, it is clearly no
longer an issue of summing up individual components’ properties: ‘the
whole is greater than the sum of its parts’. But I can still figure out and
describe how components’ interactions complement each other to wake
me up.
     Now, if one tried to generate an explanation of my waking-up,
from the properties of the atoms composing my body, the challenge
might well be simply insuperable. Only a living being can wake up. No
atoms of my body are living, yet I am living (Morowitz, 2002). Life, but
also societies, economies, ecosystems, organizations, consciousness,
46                                                      Resilience Engineering

have properties that cannot be deducted from their component agents’
properties, and even have a rather high degree of autonomy from their
parts. Millions of cells of my body die and are replaced every day, but I
am still myself.
    So why is it that we cannot derive these properties from
components’ properties? It may be that we could in principle – that
every aspect, property, state of the world is entirely understandable in
the language of chemistry – notwithstanding our computing limitation,
which would make any mathematical and computational approach
overwhelmingly long and complex. The famous French mathematician
and astronomer Pierre Laplace nicely captured this vision, through his
‘demon’ metaphor:

     We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of
     its past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at any
     given moment knew all of the forces that animate nature and
     the mutual positions of the beings that compose it, if this
     intellect were vast enough to submit the data to analysis, could
     condense into a single formula the movement of the greatest
     bodies of the universe and that of the lightest atom; for such
     an intellect nothing could be uncertain and the future just like
     the past would be present before its eyes. (Laplace, 1814)

     The contention here is that the states of a deterministic macro
system, such as a collection of particles, are completely fixed once the
laws (e.g., Newtonian mechanics) and the initial/boundary conditions
are specified at the microscopic level, whether or not we poor Humans
can actually predict these states through computation. This is one form
of possible relationship between micro and macro phenomena, in
which the causal dynamics at one level are entirely determined by the
causal dynamics at lower levels of organization.
     The notion of emergence is then simply a broader form of
relationship between micro and macro levels, in which properties at a
higher level are both dependent on, and autonomous from, underlying
processes at lower levels. (Bedau, 1997, 2002) has categorized
emergence into three categories.

•    Nominal emergence when macro level properties, while
     meaningless at the micro level, can be derived from assembling
Complexity, Emergence, Resilience …                                                 47

     micro level properties. Innumerable illustrations of nominal
     emergence range from physics (e.g., from atomic structure to the
     physical properties of a metal) to all designed systems (e.g., see the
     alarm-clock example above);
•    Weak emergence when an ‘in principle’ microscopic account of
     macroscopic behaviour is still possible, but the detailed and
     comprehensive behaviour cannot be predicted without performing
     a one-to-one simulation, because there is no condensed
     explanation1 of the system’s causal dynamics. Illustrations of weak
     emergence are provided by insect swarms, neural networks, cellular
     automata, and the like.
•    Strong emergence when macro-level properties cannot be
     explained, and even less predicted, even in principle, by any micro-
     level causality. Strong emergence would defeat even Laplace’s
     unlimited computer demon. The existence of strong emergence is a
     contentious issue, as it is inconsistent with the common scientific
     dogma of upward causation, and introduces a presumption that
     holistic, downward causation binds the underlying laws of physics
     to impose organizing principles over components. For a very
     exciting contribution to this discussion, for cosmology as well as
     for biology, see Davies (2004). He makes the point that a system
     above a specific level of complexity (of which the order of
     magnitude can be computed) cannot be entirely controlled by
     upward causation, because of the existence of fundamental upper
     bounds on information content and the information processing
     rate.


From Emergence to Resilience

The above discussion about different types of emergence may provide
some insight into the notion of resilience. If, as discussed elsewhere in



1
       The complexity of an object can be expressed by the Kolmogorov measure,
       which is the length of the shortest algorithm capable of generating this object.
       In the case of weak emergence, the system dynamics are algorithmically
       incompressible in the Kolmogorov sense. In this case, the fastest simulator of
       the system is the system itself.
48                                                       Resilience Engineering

this book, organizational resilience is an emergent property of complex
organizations, one could build on the above-mentioned taxonomy of
emergence and define nominal, weak and strong organizational
resilience. Among others, an expected benefit of doing that could be to
get a broader perspective of the respective contributions of the ‘sharp
end’ and the ‘blunt end’ in the aetiology of accidents. A question is
whether the focus on ‘organizational psychopathology’ has been
overplayed during the last few years’ effort to go beyond the front-line
operators’ error perspective in the understanding of accidents, and
whether ‘we should redress some of our efforts back to the human at
the sharp end’ (Shorrock et al., 2005). In his book Managing the risks of
organizational accidents, J. Reason (1997) warned that ‘the pendulum may
have swung too far in our present attempts to track down possible
errors and accident contributions that are widely separated in both time
and place from the events themselves’. Differentiating the construction
of organizational resilience according to the nature of its underlying
emergence process may be a way to reconcile the sharp end and blunt
end perspectives into a better integrated vision.
     So what would ‘nominal’, ‘weak’, and ‘strong’ organizational
resilience stand for? Inspired by the discussion of the previous section,
one could suggest definitions as follows.

•    Nominally Emergent Resilience (NER) would refer to resilience
     features of an organization resulting from a ‘computable’
     combination of individual agent properties. These may well
     themselves be complex emergent properties, such as consciousness,
     risk awareness, etc. NER would include all what contributes to the
     reliability, and also to the resilience, of local couplings between
     individual agents and their environment. It would cover individual
     human features (e.g., individual cognition, error management,
     surprise management, stress management), as well as organizational
     measures capable of efficacy over these features (e.g., the design of
     error tolerant environments). It would also include the interactions
     between individual agents that can be rationally perceived as
     facilitating collective resilience at different scales, from small
     groups to large communities: role definition, shared procedures,
     communication, leadership, delegation, cross-monitoring, and the
     like. Finally, it would include most aspects of a Safety Management
     System.
Complexity, Emergence, Resilience …                                     49

•    Weakly Emergent Resilience (WER) would refer to the resilience
     features of an organization resulting from a combination of
     individual agent properties in such a way that, although in principle
     ‘computable’, the detailed and comprehensive resilient macroscopic
     behaviour cannot be predicted without performing a one-to-one
     simulation. This will happen with complex self-regulated systems in
     which feedback and feedforward loops interact to govern the
     behaviour of the system (Leveson, 2004). This will also typically
     happen for some, although not for all, large scale (large population)
     systems. Indeed, such systems can remain ‘simple’ if mutual
     relationships between basic components tend to annihilate
     individual deviations: individual variety is then submerged by
     statistical mean values, so that microscopic complexity disappears
     at macroscopic scales (e.g., Boltzmann’s statistical interpretation of
     entropy in physics). Large scale systems may also become ‘complex’
     when individual variety at microscopic levels is combined and
     amplified so that it creates new properties at macroscopic level.
     Simplified illustrations of these phenomena are provided by insect
     colonies (‘smart swarms’), (see box below, also Bonabeau et al.,
     1999, 2000), neural networks, collective robotics intelligence (Kube
     & Bonabeau, 2000), and the like. A key mechanism here is the
     indirect coupling between component agents through
     modifications that their individual behaviour introduces into the
     shared environment.

     Individual ants run random trips, and put down a chemical trace
(pheromone) on their way (Figure 4.2). Pheromone works as a
probabilistic guidance for ants: they tend to follow it, but often lose the
track. When one ant comes across a prey, it will automatically bite it
and follow its own trace, hence heading back to the nest. As it still puts
down pheromone, it will also reinforce the chemical track, increasing
the chances for another ant to follow the track to the prey. From a
small set of very simple individual behavioural rules (‘follow
pheromone’, ‘bite preys’), a self-organizing, auto-catalytic process is
thus triggered, amplifying guidance to the prey, while individual ‘errors’
of ants losing the track allow for new prey discovery. A memory of
positive past experience is literally written into the environment, leading
to an efficient and adaptive collective strategy to collect food. A
‘collective teleonomy’ seems to emerge, while no direct communication
50                                                     Resilience Engineering

has taken place, and no representation of the task whatsoever is
accessible to individuals (after Bonabeau et al., 1999; 2000).
     Ants have virtually no brains (about one hundred neurons, versus
about one hundred billion for humans). One could then dryly reject the
legitimacy of any comparison, even metaphoric, between insect swarms
and human societies. Nevertheless, humans do exhibit collective
behaviour based on the interaction of rather simple individual rules.
Group or crowd behaviour during aircraft, ship, tunnel or building
evacuation, or simply daily pedestrian flows or automobile traffic jams
can be and have been modelled using software simulators based on
low-level individual rules interaction (e.g., Galea, 2001). Similar, but
much more complex interactions are behind the notion of distributed
cognition (Hutchins, 1996). And from a more philosophical point of
view, the anthropologist René Girard (1961) has been able to build a
fascinating, although controversial, holistic theory of mankind
behaviour (including myths, religions, power, laws, war, and so on)
based on the mere idea that humans tend to imitate each other.




Figure 4.2: Ants and smart cooperation

     From a resilience perspective, this category of complex systems has
interesting properties. First, their operational efficiency is really an
emergence, and no ‘process representation’, no understanding of the
collective goal, no grasp on the conditions for collective efficiency is
Complexity, Emergence, Resilience …                                     51

needed at the individual agent level. The interaction of agent
components produces an aggregate entity that is more flexible and
adaptive than its component agents. Second, they develop and stabilise
‘on the edge of chaos’: they create order (invariants, rules, regularities,
structures) against chaos, but they need residual disorder to survive. If
no ant got lost while following the pheromone track to the prey, no
new prey would be discovered soon enough. Too much order leads to
crisis (e.g., epilepsy crises in the brain are due to a sudden
synchronization of neuronal electrical activity). This leads to a vision of
accidents as a resonance phenomenon (Hollnagel, 2004). So these
systems/processes are not optimised for a given environment: they do
not do the best possible job, but they do enough of the job. They are
‘sufficient’, to take René Amalberti’s words elsewhere in this book
(Chapter 16). They keep sub-optimal features as a trade-off against
efficiency and the ability to cope with variation in their environment.
Due to their auto-catalytic mechanisms, they have non-linear behaviour
and go through cycles of stability and instability (like the stock market),
but they are extremely stable (resilient) against aggressions, up to a
certain threshold at which point they collapse. More precisely, their
‘internal variables have been tuned to favour small losses in common
events, at the expense of large losses when subject to rare or
unexpected perturbations, even if the perturbations are infinitesimal’
(Carlson & Doyle, 2002).
     One of the variables that can be tuned is the topology of the
system, for example the topology of communication structures.
Barabási & Bonabeau (2003) have shown that scale-free
communication networks are more resistant to random threat
destruction than random networks, while they are more sensitive to
targeted (malicious) attacks.
     Scale-free (or scale-invariant) networks have a modular structure,
rather than an evenly distributed one. Some of their nodes are highly
connected, while others are poorly connected. Airlines ‘hubs’, and the
World Wide Web (Figure 4.3) are example of such networks.
     Recent work on network robustness has shown that scale-free
architectures are highly resistant to accidental (random) failures, but
very vulnerable to deliberate attacks. Indeed, highly connected nodes
provide more alternative tracks between any two nodes in the network,
but a deliberate attack against these nodes is obviously more disruptive.
52                                                       Resilience Engineering

     Finally, Strongly Emergent (organizational) Resilience (SER) would
refer to the (hypothetic) resilience features of an organization that
cannot be explained by any combination of individual agent properties,
even in principle. Although there is no evidence that such properties
exist, recent developments in complexity science tend to prove that
they are possible, provided a sufficient level of complexity is reached,
which is undoubtedly the case for living beings (Davies, 2004). A
candidate for this status may be the notion of culture, although it is
disputable whether culture is a binding behavioural frame above
individual behaviour, or merely a crystallised representation of actual
behaviour. Another good candidate for this status would certainly be all
the recursive self-reference phenomena, such as consciousness. Human
social behaviour is increasingly self-represented through the
development of mass media, hence partially recursive: anticipations
modify what is anticipated (e.g., polls before a vote). This leads to
circular causality and paradoxes (Dupuy & Teubner, 1990), and opens
the door to some form of downward causation, or more accurately, to a
kind of retroactive causation, so to speak: a representation of future can
change the present. The certainty that a risk is totally eradicated will
most probably trigger behaviours that will reintroduce the threat.




Figure 4.3: Scale-free networks
Complexity, Emergence, Resilience …                                     53

     A key notion to understand the stabilization of circular causal
dynamics is the notion of an attractor. An attractor is a fixed point in
the space of possible states, for example a state of public opinion that is
stable when opinion is informed of its current state. A particularly
interesting kind of attractor has been known as the ‘self-fulfilling
prophecy’, i.e., a representation of future that triggers, in the present
time, actions and reactions which make that future happen. From a risk
management perspective, the key question is how to keep concern for
risk alive when things look safe. What we need to do is to introduce
‘heuristics of fear’ in order to ‘build a vision of the future such that it
triggers in the present time a behaviour preventing that vision from
becoming real’ (Dupuy, 2002). In other words, a safety manager’s job is
to handle irony: the core of a good safety culture is a self-defeating
prophecy, and a whistle blower’s ultimate achievement is to be wrong.


Conclusion

We have seen that a hierarchy of complexity can be described, each
level corresponding to a specific notion of emergence. Human societies
and organizations exhibit an overwhelming degree of complexity, and
obviously cover the whole hierarchy. As an emerging property of these
complex systems, resilience should also be considered through a similar
taxonomy. Hence we have touched on differentiating nominal, weak
and strong organizational resilience and discussed what these notions
would cover. Standing back a little bit, it seems that most of the
methodological efforts devoted to improve the robustness of
organizations against safety threats, particularly within the industrial
domain, have focused on nominal resilience. Compared to the actual
complexity of the real world dynamics, the current approaches to safety
management systems look terribly static and linear. It may be time for
safety management thinkers and practitioners to look beyond the
Heinrich (1931) domino model, and seek inspiration from complexity
science and systems theory. This is, among other things, what this book
is modestly but bravely trying to initiate.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 5
A Typology of Resilience
Situations
Ron Westrum




‘Resilience’ involves many different matters covered by the same word.
None the less I believe we can see some commonalities in the threats
that resilience protects against and the modes in which it operates. The
aim of this paper will be to sort out these threats and modes, which I
believe provide different implications for developing resilient systems.


Resilience against What?

The first question to examine is the nature of the threats to the integrity
of the system that require it to be resilient. There are basically three
aspects to threats:

•   The predictability of the threat. Predictability does not mean that
    we can predict when the event will take place, but only that it takes
    place fairly often.
•   The threat’s potential to disrupt the system.
•   The origin of the threat (internal vs. external). If the origin is
    internal, we think of internal checks, safeguards or quality controls
    that would repair internal errors or pathogens and keep them from
    spreading. An external origin requires a response on the system’s
    part. (Protection against threats are usually covered under the
    rubric of ‘defenses’, but this word does not distinguish between the
    two origins.)
56                                                       Resilience Engineering

     With these basic aspects, let us see what we can do to develop a
classification of situations. The situations described here are merely
illustrative of the variety of scenarios likely to be met. Clearly, for
practical affairs there might be reasons to develop a more exhaustive
and complete set, thus a far more detailed tableau could be created.


Situation I. The Regular Threat

Regular threats are those that occur often enough for the system to
develop a standard response. Trouble comes in one of a number of
standard configurations, for which an algorithm of response can be
formulated. Clearly, the least scary threat is the predictable one from
inside the system, with low potential to disrupt the system as a whole.
Medication errors, of which Patterson et al. (2004a) have given an
excellent example, would fall into this category. This does not mean
that such errors cannot be fatal. As the case study shows, they often
have this potentiality. Nonetheless, they occur often, usually only
implicate a single patient in the hospital, and potentially can be brought
under control.
     A similar example would be the following story by chemistry
Professor Edgar F. Westrum, Jr, my father:

     About once a year, a chemistry student would go into one of
     the laboratories, start mixing chemicals at random, and
     eventually there would be a ka-whump! when one of the
     chemicals proved combustible when added to the others.
     People would dash to the lab to see what happened. The
     student would be taken to the hospital for repair, and the
     laboratory would be cleaned up.

    At the next level we have the predictable external threat. This is
more disturbing. In Israel bus bombings occur regularly enough to have
allowed one of the hospitals to provide a standard response. Richard
Cook, during the conference, described how the Kirkat Menachem
hospital was able to shift resources between services to provide an
effective response when a bus bombing occurred (Chapter 13). In
countries where earthquakes are common, programmed responses,
such as going outside, are also drummed into the local population.
Resilience Typology                                                   57

Situation II. The Irregular Threat

The more challenging situation is the one-off event, for which it is
virtually impossible to provide an algorithm, because there are so many
similar low-probability but devastating events that might take place; and
one cannot prepare for all of them. This kind of threat provides an
understood, but still challenging problem. The Apollo 13 moon mission
accident would be a good example here. When the event took place, it
was entirely unexpected, though hardly seen as impossible. The
spacecraft’s spontaneous explosion and venting, though it did not
destroy the whole structure, required the most drastic measures so that
the astronauts could survive and return to earth. Fortunately, the
Americans had a gifted team at NASA flight control, and so even
though the mission was abandoned, the astronauts were brought safety
back (Kranz, 2000).
     While Israeli bus bombings typically fall into Situation I, other
bombings, with far more casualties, belong in situation II. One such
case was the suicide bombing of an American mess tent in Forward
Operating Base Marez, in Iraq, on December 21, 2004. In 11 hours the
67th combat support hospital took in 91 casualties. There were 22
deaths. The halls were crowded, the parking lot overflowed with the
dead and the dying, the conference room was turned into a blood
donation center. Armored combat vehicles served as ambulances
ferrying patients. Nine surgeries were carried out in a small operating
theatre inside, while ten more had to be performed outside the
operating room. At one point, a doctor began marking the time of
death on the chests of the deceased with a felt-tip pen. They could
barely get the dead into body bags fast enough. Finally, the hospital
compound itself came under fire. The emergency was handled, but only
just. This kind of emergency clearly tests the organization’s ability to
self-organise and respond effectively to crisis (Hauser, 2004).


Situation III. The Unexampled Event

Situation III is marked by events that are so awesome or so unexpected
that they require more than the improvization of Situation II. They
require a shift in mental framework. It may appear impossible that
something like the event could happen. Whereas Situation II is basically
58                                                        Resilience Engineering

a scale-up of Situation I, Situation III pushes the responders outside of
their collective experience envelope. The 9/11 bombing of the World
Trade Center is a prime example of such an event. The explosion at
Chernobyl nuclear center is a similar example. An extreme example
would be an invasion from outer space (see Dwyer, 2002).
     Again unlike categories I and II, this level of threat cannot be
anticipated neatly enough to permit construction of a response
algorithm. Instead the basic qualities of the organization, its abilities to
self-organize, monitor and formulate a series of responses, will
determine whether it can react effectively. The response of both
developed and undeveloped countries to the AIDS pandemic in the
1980s shows the great differences in coping styles of different countries
(Institute of Medicine, 1995; Kennis & Marin, 1997).
     Especially in the developing world, Situation III events can be
devastating, because the level of resilience is so low. The third world
both seems to take greater risks, and has fewer resources to respond
when things go wrong. All this was horribly illustrated when the
overloaded ferry Le Joola sank off Senegal on the night of 26 October
2002; 1863 people died. This was a larger death toll than the sinking of
the Titanic, whose loss of life was 1500+. The ferry, which rolled over
in a storm, had been loaded to triple its design capacity, the result of
several unsafe bureaucratic practices, including a suicidal inability to
limit entry to the ship. Fishermen saved 64 people after the accident,
but there was no further rescue. Many of those who drowned were the
victims of the incredibly slow response to the disaster. The saving of
more survivors was imperilled by a corrupt bureaucracy. The radio
operators on shore were not at their stations overnight, so the sinking
was not noticed until the next day, when it was too late to rescue most
of those who might have been saved by an early response. And even
then help was further delayed (Fields, 2002). The approach of many
third world countries to safety could well be described by the phrase
‘risk-stacking,’ since several types of vulnerability are taken on at once.
Similarly, after the Bhopal fertilizer plant explosion in India, the
government’s response was so ineffective that many more people died
than would otherwise have been the case (Shrivastava, 1987).
Resilience Typology                                                     59

Time: Foresight, Coping, and Recovery

A second issue is: Where does the event lie on the organization’s time
horizon? Protecting the organization from trouble can occur
proactively, concurrently, or as a response to something that has already
happened. These are all part of resilience, but they are not the same.
Resilience thus has three major meanings.

•    Resilience is the ability to prevent something bad from happening,
•    Or the ability to prevent something bad from becoming worse,
•    Or the ability to recover from something bad once it has happened.

    It is not clear at this point that possession of one of these
capabilities automatically implies the others, or even that they form a
Guttman scale, but either of these might be possible.


Foresee and Avoid

The ability to anticipate when and how calamity might strike has been
called ‘requisite imagination’ (Adamski & Westrum, 2003). This ability,
often important for the designer of technology, is also important for
the operating organization. One might want to call this quality ‘the wily
organization.’ The kind of critical thinking involved here has been
studied in part by Irving Janis, famous for his analysis of the opposite
trait, groupthink (Janis, 1982).
     For the sake of analysis, let us examine two types of foresight. The
first comes from properly learning the lessons of experience. In this
case predictable threats are handled by programming the organization
to remember the lessons learned. A recent study of Veterans’
Administration physicians showed that they frequently forgot to use
known effective methods of dealing with cardiac and pneumonia
problems. The results were devastating; there have been thousands of
unnecessary deaths. After many of the simple methods forgotten were
reinstated, hospitals saw their relevant mortality rates drop by as much
as 40% (Kolata, 2004).
     The second type of foresight is that associated with the processing
of ‘faint signals.’ These can include symptomatic events, suspected
trends, gut feelings, and intelligent speculation. In another paper, I have
60                                                       Resilience Engineering

suggested that ‘latent pathogens’ are likely to be removed in
organizational cultures with high alignment, awareness, and
empowerment. These boost the organization’s capability to detect,
compile and integrate diverse information. This capability helps in
detecting ‘hidden events’ but also encourages proactive response to
dangers that have not yet materialized.
     Another striking example is the surreptitious repair of the Citicorp
Building in New York City. Its architectural consultant, William
LeMessurier, suspected and found that the structure had been built with
changes to his original plan, using rivets instead of welds. A student’s
question stimulated LeMessurier to check his building’s resistance to
‘quartering winds,’ those that attack a building at the corners instead of
the sides. When it was clear that the changes were fateful, the architect,
the contractor, and the police conspired to fix the building without
public knowledge, in the end creating a sound structure without inciting
a public panic or a serious financial loss for Citicorp (LeMessurier,
2005).
     One of the key decisions affecting the Battle of Britain was taken
by a private individual, Sidney Camm, head of the Hawker firm of
aircraft builders. Even before the war with the Axis had begun, Camm
realized that Britain would need fighters in the event of a German air
campaign against England. He expected soon to get an order to build
more Hurricane fighters. But rather than wait until the government
ordered them, Camm commenced building them without a contract,
the first production being in October 1937. In the Battle of Britain
every single aircraft proved indispensable, and Hurricanes were the
majority of those Britain used. Camm was knighted for this and other
services to England (Deighton, 1996; org. 1978).
     By contrast, organizations that indulge in groupthink and a ‘fortress
mentality’ often resist getting signals about real or potential anomalies.
This may take place in the context of faulty group discussion, as Irving
Janis has forcefully argued (Janis, 1982), or through the broader
organizational processes involving suppression, encapsulation, and
public relations that I have sketched in several papers (e.g., Westrum &
Adamski, 1999, pp. 97-98). During the time when the space shuttle
Columbia was flying on its last mission, structural engineers at the
Johnson Space Center tried to convince the Mission Management Team
that they could not assure the shuttle’s airworthiness. They wanted to
get the Air Force to seek photographs in space that would allow them
Resilience Typology                                                      61

to make a sound decision. In spite of several attempts to get the
photographs (which the Air Force was willing to provide), the Mission
Management Team and other parties slighted the engineers’ concerns
and refused to seek further images. Interestingly enough, the reason for
this refusal was often that ‘even if we knew that there is damage, there
is nothing we can do.’ This assertion may have been justified, but one
would certainly have liked to see more effort to save the crew (Cabbage
& Harwood, 2004). One wonders what might have happened if a
NASA flight director such as Gene Kranz had been in charge of this
process.
     It is tempting to contrast the striking individual actions of
LeMessurier and Camm with the unsatisfactory group processes of the
Columbia teams. However, the key point is the climate of operation, no
matter how large the group is. There are individuals who personally can
serve as major bottlenecks to decision processes and groups who
become the agents of rapid or thoughtful action. It all depends on
leadership, which shapes the climate and thus sets the priorities.


Coping with Ongoing Trouble

Coping with ongoing trouble immediately raises the questions of
defences and capabilities. A tank or a battleship is resilient because it
has armor. A football team is resilient because its players are tough and
its moves are well coordinated. But often organizations are resilient
because they can respond quickly or even redesign themselves in the
midst of trouble. They may use ‘slack resources’ or other devices that
help them cope with the struggle. The organization’s flexibility is often
a key factor in organizing to fight the problem. They are thus ‘adaptive’
rather than ‘tough.’ This is true, for instance, of learning during conflict
or protracted crisis. Many examples of such learning are apparent from
the history of warfare. There are many aspects to such learning. One
aspect is learning from experience.
    Such learning is the inverse of preconception. In the American
Civil War, union cavalry with repeating rifles typically won the battles in
which they were engaged. In spite of this experience, the repeating rifles
were confiscated from cavalry units after the war and the cavalry were
issued single-shot weapons. This was thought necessary to save
62                                                         Resilience Engineering

ammunition. It did not serve American soldiers very well (Hallahan,
1994, pp. 198-199). Preconception can survive many severe lessons.
    In World War II, British bureaucracy often got in the way of
carrying on the war. This apparently was the case with preconceptions
about the use of cannon. Gordon Welchman, in a book well worth
reading, comments on British inability to use weapons in World War II
for purposes other than their original one.

     In weaponry, too, the British thought at that time suffered
     from rigidity and departmentalization. The German 88-mm
     gun, designed as an anti-aircraft weapon, was so dangerous that
     four of them could stop an armored brigade. The British had a
     magnificent 3.7 inch anti-aircraft gun of even greater
     penetrative power, but it was not used as an antitank weapon
     in any of the desert battles. It was intended to shoot at aircraft.
     The army had been supplied with the two-pounder to shoot at
     tanks. And that was that!
         This is an example of the slow response of the British
     military authorities to new ideas. The Germans had used the
     88-mm anti-aircraft gun as an extremely effective weapon
     against the excellent British Matilda tanks during the battle of
     France, as I well remember from German messages decoded
     by Hut 6 at the time. (Welchman, 1982, p. 229)

    Another instance of inflexibility in World War II involved aircraft
parts. During the Battle of Britain the supply of aircraft lagged
disastrously. Some parts factories were slow in providing the Royal Air
Force with new parts; other facilities were slow in recycling old ones.
Lord Beaverbrook, as head of aircraft production, was assigned by
Winston Churchill to address the problem. Beaverbrook’s aggressive
approach operated on many fronts. He rounded up used engines,
staged illegal raids on parts factories, chloroformed guards, and got the
necessary parts. He corralled parts into special depots and guarded
them with a ‘private army’ that used special vehicles called ‘Beaverettes’
and ‘Beaverbugs’ to protect them. When Churchill received complaints
about Beaverbrook’s ruthless approach, he said he could do nothing.
Air power was crucial to England, whose survival hung in the balance
(Young, 1966, p. 143).
Resilience Typology                                                       63

     The ability to monitor what is happening in the organization is
crucial to success in coping, whether this monitoring is coming from
above or with the immediate group involved. The Report on 9/11
showed that coping with the attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade
Center was often defective because of poor organizational discipline,
previous unresolved police/fire department conflicts, and so forth
(National Commission on Terrorist Attacks, 2004). For instance, New
York’s inability to create a unified incident command system, to resolve
conflicts between police and fire department radio systems, and to
insure discipline in similar emergencies meant a large number of
unnecessary deaths. Fire-fighters who heard the distress calls often
went to the scene, without integrating themselves into the command
structure. This led to on-the-scene overload and confusion, and an
inability of the supervising officials to determine how many fire-fighters
were still in the structure. Similarly, after the failure of the south tower,
the police department failed to inform the fire fighters inside the north
tower that they knew that structure was also about to collapse (Baker,
2002).
     Another aspect of coping is rooting out underlying problems that
exist in the system. James Reason has called these problems ‘latent
pathogens’ (Reason, 1990). While the origins of these latent pathogens
are well known, less is known about the processes that lead to their
removal. In a paper by the author, I have speculated about the forces
that lead to pathogens being removed (Westrum, 2003). I have
suggested that organizations that create alignment, awareness, and
empowerment among the work force are likely to be better at removing
latent pathogens, and are therefore likely to have a lighter ‘pathogen
load.’ Organizations with fewer underlying problems will be better in
coping because their defences are less likely to be compromised.
     It is also worth noting that medical mix-ups such as the drug error
described by Patterson et al. (2004a) would probably be improved by
having a ‘culture of conscious inquiry,’ where all involved recognize the
potentialities of a dangerous situation, and compensate for the dangers
by added vigilance and additional checks (Westrum, 1991).
64                                                         Resilience Engineering

Repairing after Catastrophe

Resilience often seems to mean the ability to put things back together
once they have fallen apart. The ability to rebound after receiving a
surprise attack in war is a good measure of such resilience. When the
Yom Kippur War started on the night of 6 October 1973, the Israelis
had expected attack, but were still unprepared for the ferocity of the
joint Syrian and Egyptian assault that took place. The Israeli Air Force,
used to unopposed dominance of the skies, suddenly found itself
threatened by hundreds of Arab surface-to-air missiles, large and small.
The war would reveal that the Israel Air Force, often viewed as the best
in the world, had three problems that had not been addressed: 1) it was
poor at communicating with the ground forces, 2) it had inadequate
battlefield intelligence and 3) it had not properly addressed the issue of
ground support. Ehud Yonay comments that ‘So elemental were these
crises that, to pull its share in the war, the IAF not only had to switch
priorities but literally reinvent itself in mid-fighting to perform missions
it had ignored if not resisted for years’ (Yonay, 1993, p. 345).
Fortunately for the Israelis, they were able to do just that. Initiatives for
ground support that had stalled were suddenly put into place, the Air
Force was able to successfully coordinate its actions with the Israeli
ground forces. Israel was able to repel the attacks against it. The ability
to turn crisis into victory is seldom so clearly shown.
     Recovery after natural disasters is often a function of the scale of
the damage and the frequency of the type of disaster. Florida regularly
experiences hurricanes, so there are routines used for coping. On the
other hand, the Tsunami that recently engaged South East Asia was on
such a colossal scale that even assistance from other countries came
slowly and unevenly.
     Recovery is easier for a society or an organization if the decision-
making centers do not themselves come under attack. The 9/11 attack,
on the World Trade Center, on the other hand, removed a local
decision-making center in the United States. The attack would have
done more damage if the attacks on the Pentagon and the White House
had been more successful.
Resilience Typology                                                      65

Conclusion

I have found that putting together this typology has helped me see
some of the differences in the variety of situations and capabilities that
we lump together under the label ‘resilience.’ No question that
resilience is important. But what is it? Resilience is a family of related
ideas, not a single thing. The various situations that we have sketched
offer different levels of challenge, and may well be met by different
organizational mechanisms. A resilient organization under Situation I
will not necessarily be resilient under Situation III. Similarly, because an
organization is good at recovery, this does not mean that the
organization is good at foresight. These capabilities all deserve
systematic study. Presumably, previous disaster studies have given
coping and recovery much study. I regret that time did not permit me
to consult this literature.
     Organizational resilience obviously is supported by internal
processes. I have been forced here to concentrate on the organization’s
behaviour and its outcomes. But many of the other papers in this
volume (e.g., Chapter 14) look into the internal processes that allow
resilience. There is little doubt that we need to know these processes
better. In the past, the safety field as I know it has concentrated on
weaknesses. Now perhaps we need to concentrate on strengths.


Acknowledgement

Many of the ideas for this chapter were suggested by other participants
in the conference, and especially by John Wreathall.
This page intentionally left blank
Resilient Systems
Yushi Fujita




    Engineers endow artifacts with abilities to cope with expected
    anomalies. The abilities may make the system robust. They are,
    however, a designed feature, which by definition cannot make
    the system ‘resilient.’ Humans at the front end (e.g., operators,
    maintenance people) are inherently adaptive and proactive; that
    allows them to accomplish better performances and,
    sometimes, even allows them to exhibit astonishing abilities in
    unexpected anomalies. However, this admirable human
    characteristic is a double-edged sword. Normally it works well,
    but sometimes it may lead to a disastrous end. Hence, a system
    relying on such human characteristics in an uncontrolled
    manner should not be called ‘resilient.’ A system should only
    be called ‘resilient’ when it is tuned in such a way that it can
    utilize its potential abilities, whether engineered features or
    acquired adaptive abilities, to the utmost extent and in a
    controlled manner, both in expected and unexpected
    situations.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 6
Incidents – Markers of
Resilience or Brittleness?
David D. Woods
Richard I. Cook




Incidents are Ambiguous

The adaptive capacity of any system is usually assessed by observing
how it responds to disruptions or challenges. Adaptive capacity has
limits or boundary conditions, and disruptions provide information
about where those boundaries lie and how the system behaves when
events push it near or over those boundaries. Resilience in particular is
concerned with understanding how well the system adapts and to what
range or sources of variation. This allows one to detect undesirable
drops in adaptive capacity and to intervene to increase aspects of
adaptive capacity.
     Thus, monitoring or measuring the adaptiveness and resilience of a
system quickly leads to a basic ambiguity. Any given incident includes
the system adapting to attempt to handle the disrupting event or
variation on textbook situations. In an episode we observe the system
stretch nearly to failure or a fracture point. Hence, are cases that fall
short of breakdown success stories or anticipations of future failure
stories? And if the disruption pushes the system to a fracture point, do
the negative consequences always indicate a brittle system, since all
finite systems can be pushed eventually to a breaking point?
     Consider the cases in this book that provide images of resilience.
Cook & Nemeth (Chapter 13, example 2) analyzes how a system under
tremendous challenges has adapted to achieve high levels of
performance. The medical response to attacks via bus bombings in
70                                                       Resilience Engineering

Israel quickly became highly adapted to providing care, to identifying
victims, and to providing information and counselling to families
despite many kinds of uncertainty and difficulties. Yet in that analysis
one also sees potential limiting conditions should circumstances change.
     Patterson et al. (2004b) analyze a case where the normal cross-
checks broke down (one class of mechanisms for achieving resilience).
As a result, a miscommunication and resulting erroneous treatment plan
went forward with real, though not fatal, consequences for the patient
involved. The medication misadministration in this case represents a
breakdown in resilience of the system, yet in the analysis one also sees
how the system did have mechanisms for reducing errors in treatment
plans and cross-checks for detecting problems before they affected any
patient (based on particular individuals who always handled the
chemotherapy cases and thus had the knowledge and position in the
network to detect possible problems and challenge physician plans
effectively). In addition, the analysis of the case in terms of resilience
factors revealed many aspects of successful and unsuccessful cross
checks that could play out in other situations. By understanding the
processes of cross-checking as a contributor to system resilience (even
though they broke down in this episode), new system design concepts
and new criteria for assessing performance are generated.
     Cook & O’Connor (2005) provide a case that falls between the
‘success’ story of the Israeli medical response to bus bombings and the
‘failure’ story of the medication misadministration and the missed
opportunities to catch that error. Cook & O’Connor describe the ‘MAR
knockout’ (medication administration record) case where the pharmacy
computer system broke down in a way that provided inaccurate
medication plans hospital wide. The nurses did detect that medication
plans were inaccurate, and that this was not an isolated problem but
rather hospital wide. While no one knew why the medication
administration records were wrong, the situation required a quick
response to limit potential misadministrations to patients. Pharmacy,
nurses, and physicians improvised a manual system by finding the last
reliable medication records, updating these manually, and taking
advantage of the presence of fax machines on wards. Through their
efforts over 24 hours, no medication misadministrations occurred while
the software trouble was diagnosed and restored (a failed reload from
backup). The response to the computer infrastructure breakdown
revealed that ‘the resilience of this system resides in its people rather
Incidents – Markers of Resilience or Brittleness?                        71

than in its technology. It was people who detected the failure,
responded, planned a response, devised the workarounds needed to
keep the rest of the system working, and restored the pharmacy system.
There were a large cadre of experienced operations people … available
to assist in the recovery. … What kept the MAR knockout case from
being a catastrophe was the ability of workers to recover the system
from the brink of disaster’ (Cook & O’Conner, 2005).
     While no one was injured, the authors see the case as an indicator
of the increasing brittleness of the medication administration system.
Computer infrastructure is becoming ever more vital to the ability to
deliver care. Economic pressure is reducing the buffers, which operated
in the incident response, as ‘inefficiencies.’ The resource of
knowledgeable staff is tightening as managers misunderstand and
undervalue the human contribution to successful function. Alternative
modes of managing medications are becoming less viable as more
equipment disappears (the goal of the ‘paperless’ hospital); and as the
experience base for using alternative systems for managing medication
orders is eroding.
     Are cases of successful response to disruptions, stories of resilience
that indicate future success if disruptions occur? Are stories of
brittleness anticipations of future failures? Do the adaptations evident
in any case illustrate resilience – since there was successful adaptation to
handle the disrupting event, or do these cases reveal brittleness since
the episode revealed how close the system came to falling off the edge?
And the reverse questions can be posed as well for every case of failure:
do breakdowns indict the adaptiveness of the system given that there
are always finite resources, irreducible uncertainty, and basic dilemmas
behind every situation?
     These questions reveal that the value of incidents is in how they
mark boundary conditions on the mechanisms/model of adaptiveness
built into the system’s design. Incidents simultaneously show how the
system in question can stretch given disruptions and the limits on that
capacity to handle or buffer these challenges.
     Assessing resilience requires models of classes of adaptive
behavior. These models need to capture the processes that contribute
to adaptation when surprising disruptions occur. The descriptions of
processes are useful when they specify the limits on these processes
relative to challenges posed by external events. This allows resilience
managers to monitor the boundary conditions on the current system’s
72                                                        Resilience Engineering

adaptive capacity and to target specific points where investments are
valuable to preserve or expand that adaptive capacity given the vectors
of change being experienced by that field of practice.
    Patterson et al. (2004b) provide the start of one class of adaptive
behavior – cross-check processes. Here we provide another class of
adaptive behavior – the ‘decompensation’ event pattern.


‘Decompensation:’ A Pattern in Adaptive Response

One part of assessing a system’s resilience is whether that system knows
if it is operating near boundary conditions. Assessing the margin is not
a simple static state (the distance of an operating point to a definitive
boundary), but a more complex assessment of adaptive responses to
different kinds of disturbances. Incidents are valuable because they
provide information about what stretches the system and how well the
system can stretch.
      These complexities are illustrated by one kind of pattern in
adaptive response called ‘decompensation.’ Cases of ‘decompensation’
constitute a kind of incident and have been analyzed in highly
automated systems such as aircraft or cardiovascular physiology (Cook
et al., 1991; Woods, 1994; Sarter et al., 1997). The basic
decompensation pattern evolves across two phases. In the first phase,
automated loops compensate for a growing disturbance; the successful
compensation partially masks the presence and development of the
underlying disturbance. The second phase of a decompensation event
occurs because the automated response cannot compensate for the
disturbance indefinitely. After the response mechanism’s capacity is
exhausted, the controlled parameter suddenly collapses (the de-
compensation event that leads to the name).
      The question is: does the supervisory controller of such systems
detect the developing problem during the first phase of the event
pattern or do they miss the signs that the lower order or base controller
(automated loops in the typical system analysis) is working harder and
harder to compensate and getting nearer to its capacity limit as the
external challenge persists or grows?
      In these situations, the critical information for the outside monitor
is not the symptoms per se but the force with which they must be
resisted relative to the capabilities of the base control systems. For
Incidents – Markers of Resilience or Brittleness?                     73

example, when a human is acting as the base control system, as an
effective team member this operator would communicate to others the
fact that they need to exert unusual control effort (Norman, 1990).
Such information provides a diagnostic cue for the team and is a signal
that additional resources need to be injected to keep the process under
control. If there is no information about how hard the base control
system is working to maintain control in the face of disturbances, it is
quite difficult to recognize the seriousness of the situation during the
phase 1 portion and to respond early enough to avoid the
decompensation collapse that marks phase 2 of the event pattern.
     While this pattern has been noted in supervisory control of
automated processes, it also can be used as an analogy or test case for
the challenges of monitoring the resilience of organizations. In the
standard decompensation pattern, the base system adapts to handle
disruptions or faults. To determine if this adaptive behavior is a signal
of successful control or a sign of incipient failure requires an
assessment of the control capability of the base system in the face of
various kinds and sizes of disturbances.
     Consider the challenge for a person monitoring these kinds of
situations. When disturbances occur, the presence of adaptive capacity
produces counter-influences, which makes control appear adequate or
allows only slight signs of trouble over a period of time. Eventually, if
no changes are made or assistance injected, the capacity to compensate
becomes exhausted and control collapses in the form of a major
incident or accident. The apparent success during the first phase of the
event can mask or hide how adaptive mechanisms are being stretched
to work harder to compensate and how buffers are being exhausted.
This makes it difficult for monitors to understand what is occurring,
especially as the first phase may play out over relatively longer time
periods, and leads to great surprise when the second phase occurs.
     While detecting the slide toward decompensation is in principle
difficult, decompensation incidents reveal how human supervisory
controllers of automated systems normally develop the expertise
needed to anticipate the approach to boundaries of adaptive capacity
and intervene to provide additional capacity to cope with the
disturbances underway. For example, in intensive care units and in
anaesthesiology (Cook et al., 1991), physicians are able to make
judgements about the adaptive capacity of a patient’s physiological
systems. Precariously balanced heart patients have little capacity for
74                                                       Resilience Engineering

handling stressors or disrupting events – their control mechanisms are
‘run out.’ Anesthesiologists and intensivists try to avoid physiological
challenges in such cases and try to provide extra control capacity from
outside mechanisms with drips of various cardiovascular medications.
Note that adaptive behavior still occurs whether the patient is a young
adult with a single problem (possesses a large adaptive reservoir) or a
precariously balanced elderly patient with several longstanding
cardiovascular related problems (possessing very limited control
reserves). But there is something about the kinds of adaptations going
on or not going on that allows the experienced physician to recognize
the difference in adaptive capacities to project the cardiovascular
system’s ability to handle the next challenge (i.e., more than simple
demographics and previous medical history).
     There is information available to support the above kinds of
assessments. The information consists of relationships between the
state of the process being controlled, the disturbances the process has
been or could be subjected to, and the kinds of responses that have
been made to recent challenges. These relationships indicate whether
control loops are having trouble handling situations (working very hard
to maintain control), working at the extreme of their range, or moving
towards the extreme part of their capabilities. Picking up on these
relationships indicates to the observer whether or not there is limited
remaining capacity to compensate even though no direct indicators of
control failures will have occurred yet.
     It is also clear that expert judgements about adaptive capacities
come from tangible experience with the systems responses to variations
and disruptions. Seeing how the system responds to small perturbations
provides the feedback to the physician about the capacity to handle
other and larger disruptions or challenges (a feel for the dynamics of
disturbance and response often captured in terms like a ‘sluggish’
response). Such judgements require baseline information about normal
adaptive capabilities given typical disturbances. In monitoring patient
physiology, anesthesiologists may sometimes even inject small
challenges to observe the dynamic responses of the cardiovascular
system as a means to generate information about adaptive capacity.
     Our conjecture is that, inspired directly or indirectly by these very
detailed situations of judging adaptive capacity in supervisory control,
we can create mechanisms to monitor the adaptive capacity of
organizations and anticipate when its adaptive capacity is precarious.
Incidents – Markers of Resilience or Brittleness?                       75

     For example, in safety management, change and production
pressure are disturbances that erode or place new demands on adaptive
capacity. During the first phase of a decompensation pattern, it is
difficult for normal monitoring mechanisms to see or interpret the
subtle signs of reduced adaptive capacity. Eventually, failures occur if
adaptive capacity continues to erode and as new challenges combine.
These failures represent a sudden collapse in adaptive capacity as
demands continued to stretch the system. While a failure may be seen
as a message about specific vulnerabilities and proximal factors, they are
also signs of the general decompensation signature as a pattern of
change in the adaptive capacity of the organization, cf. Doyle’s ‘HOT’
analysis of systems with ‘highly optimized tolerance’ (Carlson & Doyle,
2000).
     Returning to the opening question of this chapter, cases are not
valuable based on whether adaptation was successful or unsuccessful.
Cases are valuable because they reveal patterns in how adaptive capacity
is used to meet challenges (Cook et al., 2000). Such cases need to be
analyzed to determine when challenges are falling outside or stressing
the competence envelope, how the system engages pools of adaptive
capacity to meet these challenges, and where the adaptive capacity is
being used up to handle these unanticipated perturbations. The
decompensation kind of incident reminds us that the basic unit of
analysis for assessing resilience is observations of a system’s response to
varying kinds of disturbances.
     Measures of brittleness and resilience will emerge when we abstract
general patterns from specific cases of challenge and response.
Resilience engineering needs to search out incidents because they reveal
boundary conditions and how the system behaves near these
boundaries. These cases will provide evidence of otherwise hidden
sources for adaptiveness and also illustrate the limits on a system’s
adaptive capabilities. General patterns in adaptive system behavior (as
illustrated by the decompensation event signature and in other patterns
taken from the cases of resilience/brittleness captured in this book) will
help measure an organization’s resilience and target interventions to
enhance an organization’s resilience.
76                                                 Resilience Engineering

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by grant NNA04CK45A from NASA
Ames Research Center to develop resilience engineering concepts for
managing organizational risk.
Chapter 7
Resilience Engineering:
Chronicling the Emergence of
Confused Consensus
Sidney Dekker


My contribution to this book on resilience engineering consists of a
chapter that attempts to capture the emergence and exchange of ideas
during the symposium (held in Söderköping, Sweden, during October
2004) – ideas that together seem to move towards a type of confused
consensus on resilience engineering (and sometimes towards a common
understand of what it is not). From the presentations, arguments,
claims, hypotheses, questions and suggestions, I have extracted themes
that seemed to animate many of the ideas that generated discussions,
and discussions that generated ideas. The themes, as organised below,
could represent at least some kind of logical flow; an order in which
one idea gives rise to the next, as the constraints of the previous one on
progress for resilience engineering become clear. I first present the
themes in summary, and then get into them in more detail:

•   We have to get smarter at predicting the next accident. The
    recombinant predictive logic that drives accident prediction today is
    insensitive to the pressures of normal work by normal people in
    normal organizations. We may not even need accident models, as
    the focus should be more on models of normal work. It is normal
    work (and the slow, incremental drift into safety margins and
    eventually across boundaries that is a side effect of normal work in
    resource-constrained, adaptive organizations) that seems to be an
    important engine behind complex system accidents.
•   Detecting drift into failure that happens to seemingly safe systems,
    before breakdowns occur is a major role for resilience engineering.
78                                                        Resilience Engineering

     While it is critical to capture the relational dynamics and longer-
     term socio-organizational trends behind system failure, ‘drift’ as
     such is ill-defined and not well-modelled. One important ingredient
     in drift is the sacrificing decision, where goals of safety and
     production/efficiency are weighed against one another, and
     managers make locally rational decisions based on criteria from
     inside their situated context. But establishing a connection between
     individual micro-level managerial trade-offs and macro-level drift is
     challenging both practically and theoretically. In addition, it is
     probably not easy to influence sacrificing decisions so that they do
     not put a system on the road towards failure. Should we really
     micro-adjust managers’ day-to-day cognitive calculus of reward?
•    Detecting drift is difficult and makes many assumptions about our
     ability to distinguish longitudinal trends, establish the existence of
     safety boundaries, and warn people of their movement towards
     them. Instead, a critical component in estimating an organization’s
     resilience could be a momentary charting of the distance between
     operations as they really go on, and operations as they are imagined
     in the minds of managers or rulemakers. This distance tells us
     something about the models of risk currently applied, and how well
     (or badly) calibrated organizational decision makers are. This,
     however, requires comparisons and perhaps a type of quantification
     (even if conceptual) that may be challenging to attain. Updating
     management about the real nature of work (and their deficient
     perception of it) also requires messengers to go beyond ‘reassuring’
     signals to management, which in turn demands a particular climate
     that allows the boss to hear such news.
•    Looking for additional markers of resilience, what was explored in
     the symposium? If charting the distance between operations as
     imagined and as they really occur is too difficult, then an even
     broader indicator of resilience could be the extent to which the
     organization succeeds in keeping discussions of risk alive even
     when everything looks safe. The requirement to keep discussions
     of risk alive invites us to think about the role and nature of a safety
     organization in novel ways. Another powerful indicator is how the
     organization responds to failure: can the organization rebound even
     when exposed to enormous pressure? This closes the circle as it
     brings us back to theme 1, whether resilience is about effectively
Chronicling the Emergence of Confused Consensus                        79

     predicting (and then preventing) the next accident. In terms of the
     cognitive challenge it represents, preventing the next accident could
     conceptually be close to managing the aftermath of one: doing both
     effectively involves rebounding from previous understandings of
     the system and interpretations of the risk it is exposed to, being
     forced to see the gap between work as imagined and work as done,
     updating beliefs about safety and brittleness, and recalibrating
     models of risk.


Resilience Engineering and Getting Smarter at Predicting the
Next Accident

The need for resilience engineering arises in part out of the inadequacy
of current models for understanding, and methods for predicting, safety
breakdowns in complex systems. In very safe systems, incident
reporting no longer works well, as it makes a number of questionable
assumptions that no longer seem to be valid.
     The first assumption of incident reporting is that we possess
enough computational capacity to perform meaningful recombinant
logic on the database of incidents, or that we have other working ways
of extracting intelligence from our incident data. This assumption is
already being outpaced by very successful incident reporting systems
(e.g., NASA’s Aviation Safety Reporting System) which indeed could be
said to be a victim of their own success. The number of reports
received can be overwhelming, which makes meaningful extraction of
risk factors and prediction of how they will recombine extremely
difficult. In fact, a main criterion of success of incident reporting
systems across industries (the number of reports received) could do
with a reconsideration: celebrating a large count of negatives (instances
of system problems, errors, or failures) misses the point since the real
purpose of incident reporting is not the gathering of data but the
analysis, anticipation and reduction of risk.
     The second assumption is that incident reports actually contain the
ingredients of the next accident. This may not always be true, as
accidents in very safe systems seem to emerge from (what looks to
everybody like) normal people doing normal work in normal
organizations. In the time leading up to an accident there may be few
reportworthy failures or noteworthy organizational deficiencies that
80                                                        Resilience Engineering

would end up as recombinable factors in an incident reporting system.
Even if we had the computational capacity to predict how factors may
recombine to produce an accident, this is going to be of no help if the
relevant ‘factors’ are not in the incident database in the first place (as
they were never judged to be ‘abnormal’ enough to warrant reporting).
The focus on human errors and failure events may mean that incident
reporting systems are not as useful when it comes to predicting
accidents in safe systems. This is because in safe systems, it is not
human errors or failure events that lead to accidents. Normal work
does.
     The third assumption is that the decomposition principles used in
incident reporting systems and the failure models that underlie them
have something to do with the way in which factors actually recombine
to create an accident. Most fundamentally, the metaphors that inspire
and justify incident reporting (e.g., the ‘iceberg’, the ‘Swiss cheese’),
assume that there is a linear progress of breakdowns (a domino effect)
that either gets stopped somewhere (constituting an incident) or not
(creating an accident). Neither the presumed substantive similarity
between incident and accident, nor the linear, chain-like breakdown
scenarios enjoy much empirical support in safe systems. Instead, safety
and risk in safe systems are emergent properties that arise from a much
more complex interaction of all factors that constitute normal work.
     As a result, linear extensions of current safety efforts (incident
reporting, safety and quality management, proficiency checking,
standardization and proceduralization, more rules and regulations) seem
of little use in breaking the asymptote, even if they could be necessary
to sustain the high safety levels already attained.

Do We Need Accident Models at All?

The problem with the third assumption calls another fundamental idea
into question: what kinds of accident models are useful for resilience
engineering? People use models of accidents the whole time. Most
accident models, especially naïve or folk ones, appeal to a kind of
exclusivity of factors and activities (or how they interact) that lead up to
an accident. The idea is that organizational work (or the organizational
structure that exists) preceding an accident is somehow fundamentally
or at least identifiably different from that which is not followed by an
accident. Thus, accidents require their own set of models if people want
Chronicling the Emergence of Confused Consensus                           81

to gain predictive leverage. Accident models are about understanding
accidents, and about presumably predicting them before they happen.
But if success and failure stem from the same source, then accident
models are either useless, or as useless (or useful) as equally good
models of success would be. The problem is that we do not have many
good models of operational success, or even of normal work that does
not lead to trouble. More than once, symposium participants remarked
(in multifarious language) that we need better models of normal work,
including better operationalised models of the effects of ‘safety culture’
(or lack thereof) on people’s everyday decision-making.
     Resilience engineering wants to differ from safety practices that
have evolved differently in various industries. The nuclear industry, for
example, relies to a large extent on barriers and defences in depth.
Whatever goes on behind all the barriers and how risk may change or
shift out there, the system is insulated from it. Aviation seems forever
rooted in a ‘fly-fix-fly’ model, where (presumably or hopefully) fail-safe
designs are introduced into operation. Subsequently, huge transnational,
partially overlapping webs of failure monitoring (from event reporting
to formal accident investigation) are relied upon largely ‘bottom-up’ to
have the industry make adjustments where necessary. Aviation system
safety thus seems to run relatively open-loop and represents a partially
reactive control of risk. Military systems, having to deal with active
adversaries, emphasise hazards, hazard analysis and hazard control,
relying in large part on top-down approaches to making safer systems.
In contrast with aviation, this represents a more proactive control of
risk. But how do these systems control (or are even aware of) their own
adaptive processes that enable them to update and adjust their
management of risk?
     There is a complex dynamic underneath the processes through
which organizations decide how to control risk. One critical aspect is
that doing things safely is ongoing. Consistent with the challenge to the
use of accident models, doing things safely is perhaps not separable
from doing things at all. Individuals as well as entire industries
continually develop and refine strategies that are sensitive to known or
likely pathways to failure, they continually apply these strategies as they
go about their normal work, and they adapt these strategies as they see
new evidence on risk come in. Leverage for change and improvement,
then, lies in the interpretation of what constitutes such risk; leverage lies
in helping individuals and systems adapt effectively to a constantly
82                                                       Resilience Engineering

changing world, calibrating them to newly emerging threats, identifying
obsolete models of risk, and helping them avoid overconfidence in the
continued effectiveness of their strategies. This, as said above, could be
central to resilience engineering: helping organizations not with better
control of risk per se, but helping them better manage the processes by
which they decide how to control such risk.
     This obviously lies beyond the prediction of accidents. This lies
beyond the mere controlling of risk, instead taking resilience
engineering to a new level. It is about attaining better control of the
control of risk. Rather than just helping organizations, or people,
become sensitive to pathways to failure, resilience engineering is about
helping them become sensitive about the models of risk that they apply
to their search and control of pathways to failure.


Modelling the Drift into Failure

One way to think about the greatest risk to today’s safe socio-technical
systems is the drift into failure, and a potential contribution from
resilience engineering could be to help organizations detect this drift.
‘Drifting into failure’ is a metaphor for the slow, incremental movement
of systems operations toward (and eventually across) the boundaries of
their safety envelope. Pressures of scarcity and competition typically
fuel such movement and uncertain technology and incomplete
knowledge about where the boundaries actually are, result in people not
stopping the movement or even seeing it. Recognising that a system is
drifting into failure is difficult because the entire protective structure
(including suppliers, regulators, managerial hierarchies, etc.) seems to
slide along with the operational core toward the boundary. Even if an
operational system is ‘borrowing more from safety’ than it was
previously or than it is elsewhere by operating with smaller failure
margins, this may be considered ‘normal’, as the regulator approved it.
Almost everybody inside the system does it, goes along, and agrees,
implicitly or not, with what is defined as risky or safe. Also, the
departures from previous practice are seldom quick or large or shocking
(and thus difficult to detect): rather, there is a slow succession of tiny
incremental deviations from what previously was the ‘norm’. Each
departure in itself is hardly noteworthy. In fact, such ‘departures’ are
part and parcel of normal adaptive system behaviour, as organizations
Chronicling the Emergence of Confused Consensus                        83

(and their regulators) continually realign themselves and their
operations with current interpretations of the balance between
profitability and risk (and have to do so in environments of resource
scarcity and competition). As a result, large system accidents of the past
few decades have revealed that what is considered ‘normal’, or
acceptable risk is highly negotiable and subject to all kinds of local
pressures and interpretations.

Do We Need (and Can We Attain) a Better Model of Drift?

The intuitive appeal of ‘drift into failure’ is not matched by specific,
working models of it. In fact, drift into failure is an unsatisfactory
explanation so far because it is not a model, just like the ‘Swiss cheese’
(or defences in depth) idea is not a model. It may be a good metaphor
for how complex systems slowly move towards the edges of
breakdown, but it lacks all kinds of underlying dynamic relationships
and potentials for operationalization that could make it into a model.
     One important ingredient for such a model would be the
‘sacrificing decision’. To make risk a proactive part of management
decision-making requires ways to know when to relax the pressure on
throughput and efficiency goals, i.e., making a sacrifice decision, and
resilience engineering could be working on ways to help organizations
decide when to relax production pressure to reduce risk. Symposium
participants agree on the need to better understand this judgement
process in organizations, and how micro-level decisions are linked to
macro-level ‘drift’. The decision to value production over safety is often
implicit, and any larger or broader side effects that echo through an
organization go unrecognised. So far, the result is individuals and
organizations acting much riskier than they would ever desire, or than
they would have in retrospect. The problem with sacrificing decisions is
that they are often very sound when set against local judgement criteria;
given the time and budget pressures and short-term incentives that
shape decision-making behaviour in those contexts. In other words,
given the decision makers’ knowledge, goals, focus of attention, and the
nature of the data available to them at the time, it made sense. Another
problem with the sacrifice judgement is related to hindsight. The
retrospective view will indicate that the sacrifice or relaxation may have
been unnecessary since ‘nothing happened.’ A substitute measure for
the ‘soundness’ of a sacrificing decision, then, could be to assess how
84                                                          Resilience Engineering

peers and superiors react to it. Indeed, for the lack of such ersatz
criteria, aggregate organizational behaviour is likely to move closer to
safety margins, the final evidence of which could be an accident.
     Of course, it could be argued that ‘sacrifice decisions’ are not really
special at all. In fact, all decisions are sacrifices of one kind or another,
as the choosing of one option almost always excludes other options. All
decisions, in that sense, could be seen as trade-offs, where issues of
sensitivity and decision criterion enter into consideration (whether
consciously or not).
     The metaphor of drift, suggests that it is in these normal, day-to-
day processes of organizational management and decision-making that
we can find the seeds of organizational failure and success, and a role of
resilience engineering could be to find leverage for making further
progress on safety by better understanding and influencing these
processes. One large operationalization problem lies in the reciprocal
macro-micro connection: how do micro-level decisions and trade-offs
not only represent and reproduce macro-structural pressures (of
production, resource scarcity, competition) and the associated
organizational priorities and preferences, but how are micro-level
decisions related to eventual macro-level organizational drift? These
links, from macro-structural forces down to micro-level decisions, and
in turn from micro-level decisions up to macro-level organizational
drift, are widely open for future investigation.
     Yet even if we conduct such research, is a model of drift desirable?
The complexity of the organizational, political, psychological and
sociological phenomena involved would make it a serious challenge, but
that may not even be the main problem. It would seem, as has been
suggested before, that safety and risk in complex organizations are
emergent, not resultant, properties: safety and risk cannot be predicted
or modelled on the basis of constituent components and their
interactions. So why try to build a model of drift as an emergent
phenomenon, or why even apply modelling criteria to the way in which
you want to capture it? One way to approach the way in which complex
systems fail or succeed, then, is through a simile (like ‘drift into failure’)
rather than through a model. A simile (just like the Swiss cheese) can
guide, direct attention, take us to interesting places for research and
progress on safety. It may not ‘explain’ as a traditional model would.
But, again, this is the whole point of emergent processes – they call for
Chronicling the Emergence of Confused Consensus                        85

different kinds of approaches (e.g., system dynamics) and different
kinds of accident models.

Where are the Safety Boundaries that You can Drift Across?

Detecting how an organization is drifting into failure before breakdowns
occur is difficult. One reason is that we lack a good, operationalised
model of drift that could focus us on the tell-tale signs. And, as
mentioned previously, a true model of drift may be out of reach
altogether since it may be fundamentally immeasurable. Another issue is
that of boundaries: drifting would not be risky if it were not for the
existence of safety boundaries across which you actually can drift into
breakdown. Other than shedding light on the adaptive life of
organizations (a key aspect of resilience engineering), perhaps there is
even no point in understanding drift if we cannot chart it relative to
safety boundaries. But if so, what are these boundaries, and where are
they?
      The idea of safety boundaries appeals to intuitive sense: it can
appear quite clear when boundaries are crossed (e.g., in an accident).
Yet this is not the same as trying to plot them before an accident.
There, the notion of hard, identifiable boundaries is very difficult to
develop further in any meaningful way. With safety (and accidents) as
emergent phenomena, deterministic efforts to nail down borders of safe
practice seems rather hopeless. The number of variables involved, and
their interaction, makes the idea of safety boundaries as probability
patterns more appealing: probability patterns that vary in an
indeterministic fashion with a huge complex of operational and
organizational factors.
      Going even further, it seems that safety boundaries, and where they
lie, are a projection or an expression of our current models of risk. This
idea moves away from earlier, implied realist interpretations of safety
margins and boundaries, and denies their independent existence. They
are not present themselves, but are reflections of how we think about
safety and risk at that time and in that organization and operation. The
notion of boundaries as probability patterns that arise out of our own
projections and models of risk is as profoundly informative as it is
unsettling. It does not mean that organizations cannot adapt in order to
stay away from those boundaries, indeed, they can. People and
organizations routinely act on their current beliefs of what makes them
86                                                     Resilience Engineering

safe or unsafe. But it does mean that the work necessary to identify
boundaries must shift from the engineering-inspired calculative to the
ethnographically or sociologically interpretive. We want to learn
something meaningful about insider interpretations, about people’s
changing (or fixed) beliefs and how they do or do not act on them.


Work as Imagined versus Work as Actually Done

One marker of resilience that comes out of converging lines of
evidence, is the distance between operations as management imagines
they go on and how they actually go on. A large distance indicates that
organizational leadership may be ill-calibrated to the challenges and
risks encountered in real operations.
      Commercial aircraft line maintenance is emblematic: A job-
perception gap exists where supervisors are convinced that safety and
success result from mechanics following procedures – a sign-off means
that applicable procedures were followed. But mechanics may
encounter problems for which the right tools or parts are not at hand;
the aircraft may be parked far away from base. Or there may be too
little time: Aircraft with a considerable number of problems may have
to be turned around for the next flight within half an hour. Mechanics,
consequently, see success as the result of their evolved skills at
adapting, inventing, compromising, and improvising in the face of local
pressures and challenges on the line – a sign-off means the job was
accomplished in spite of resource limitations, organizational dilemmas,
and pressures. Those mechanics that are most adept are valued for their
productive capacity even by higher organizational levels.
Unacknowledged by those levels, though, are the vast informal work
systems that develop so mechanics can get work done, advance their
skills at improvising and satisficing, impart them to one another, and
condense them in unofficial, self-made documentation (McDonald et
al., 2002). Seen from the outside, a defining characteristic of such
informal work systems would be routine violations of procedures
(which, in aviation, is commonly thought to be ‘unsafe’). But from the
inside, the same behaviour is a mark of expertise, fuelled by
professional and interpeer pride. And of course, informal work systems
emerge and thrive in the first place because procedures are inadequate
to cope with local challenges and surprises, and because procedures’
Chronicling the Emergence of Confused Consensus                          87

(and management’s) conception of work collides with the scarcity,
pressure and multiple goals of real work.
      International disaster relief work similarly features widely diverging
images of work. The formal understanding of relief work, which needs
to be coordinated across various agencies and nations, includes an
allegiance to distant supervisors (e.g., in the head office in some other
country) and their higher-order goals. These include a sensitivity to the
political concerns and bureaucratic accountability that form an
inevitable part of cross-national relief work. Plans and organizational
structures are often overspecified, and new recruits to disaster work are
persuaded to adhere to procedure and protocol and defer to hierarchy.
Lines of authority are clear and should be checked before acting in the
field.
      None of this works in practice. In the field, disaster relief workers
show a surprising dissociation from distant supervisors and their global
goals. Plans and organizational structures are fragile in the face of
surprise and the inevitable contretemps. Actual work immediately drifts
away from protocol and procedure, and workers defer to people with
experience and resource access rather than to formal hierarchy.
Improvisation occurs across organizational and political boundaries,
sometimes in contravention to larger political constraints or
sensitivities. Authority is diffuse and often ignored. Sometimes people
check after they have acted (Suparamaniam & Dekker, 2003).
      Generally, the consequence of a large distance appears to be greater
organizational brittleness, rather than resilience. In aircraft maintenance,
for example, the job perception gap means that incidents linked with
maintenance issues do not generate meaningful pressure for change, but
instead produce outrage over widespread violations and cause the
system to reinvent or reassert itself according to the official
understanding of how it works (rather than how it actually works).
Weaknesses persist, and a fundamental misunderstanding of what
makes the system work (and what might make it unsafe) is reinforced
(i.e., follow the procedures and you will be safe). McDonald et al., 2002
famously called such continued dysfunctional reinvention of the
system-as-it-ought-to-be ‘cycles of stability’. Similarly, the distributed
and politically pregnant nature of international disaster relief work
seems to make the aggregate system immune to adapting on a global
scale. The distance between the formal and the actual images of work
can be taken as a sign of local worker intransigence, or of unusual
88                                                       Resilience Engineering

adversity, but not as a compelling indication of the need to better adapt
the entire system (including disaster relief worker training) to the
conditions that shape and constrain the execution of real work. The
resulting global brittleness is compensated for by local improvisation,
initiative and creativity.
     But this is not the whole story. A distance between how
management understands operations to go on and how they really go
on, can actually be a marker of resilience at the operational level. There
are indications from commercial aircraft maintenance, for example, that
management’s relative lack of clues of about real conditions and
fluctuating pressures inspires the locally inventive and effective use of
tools and other resources vis-à-vis task demands. Similarly, practitioners
ranging from medical workers to soldiers can ‘hide’ available resources
from their leadership and keep them in stock in order to have some
slack or reserve capacity to expand when demands suddenly escalate.
‘Good’ leadership always extracts maximum utilization from invested
resources. ‘Good’ followership, then, is about hiding resources for
times when leadership turns out to be not that ‘good’ after all. Indeed,
leadership can be ignorant of, or insensitive to, the locally fluctuating
pressures of real work on the sharp end. As a result, even safety
investments can quickly get consumed for production purposes. In
response, practitioners at the sharp end may secure a share of resources
and hold it back for possible use in more pressurised times.
     From an organizational perspective, such parochial and subversive
investments in slack are hardly a sign of effective adjustment, and there
is a need to better capture processes of cross-adaptation and their
relationship to organizational resilience. One idea here is to see the
management of resilience as a matter of balancing individual resilience
(individual responses to operational challenges) and system resilience
(the large-scale autocatalytic combination of individual behaviour).
Again, the hope here is that this can produce a better understanding of
the micro-macro connection – how individual trade-offs at the sharp
end (themselves influenced by macro-structural forces) in turn can
create global side effects on an emergent scale.

Measuring and Closing the Gap

How can we measure this gap between the system as designed or
imagined and the system as actually operated? And, perhaps more
Chronicling the Emergence of Confused Consensus                          89

importantly, what can we do about it? The distance between the real
system and the system as imagined grows in part through local feedback
loops that confirm managers into thinking that what they are doing is
‘right’. Using their local judgement criteria, this can indeed be justified.
The challenge then, is to make the gap visible and provide a basis for
learning and adaptation where necessary. This implies the ability to
contrast the present situation with, for example, a historical ‘ideal’. The
hierarchical control model proposed by Nancy Leveson is one example
of an approach that can provide snapshots of the system-as-designed
and the system as actually evolved. From one time to the next, it can
show that changes have occurred in, and erosion has happened to,
control loops between various processes and structures (Leveson,
2002). The gradual erosion of control, and the subsequent mismatch
between the system-as-designed and the system as actually operated,
can be seen as an important ingredient in the drift into failure.
     One problem here is that operations ‘as imagined’ are not always as
amenable to capture or analysis as the idealised control model of a
system’s starting position would be. Understanding the gap between the
system-as-imagined and the system as actually operated requires
investment not only in understanding how the system really works, but
also how it is imagined to work. The latter can sometimes even be more
difficult. Take the opinion of the quality manager of an airline flight
school that suffered a string of fatal accidents, who ‘was convinced that
the school was a top training institution; he had no knowledge of any
serious problems in the organization’ (Raad voor de
Transportveiligheid, 2003, p. 41). This is a position that can be shown,
with hindsight, to contrast with a deeply troubled actual organization
which faced enormous cost pressure, lacked qualified or well-suited
people in leadership posts, ran operations with non-qualified
instructors, featured an enormous distrust between management and
personnel, and had a non-functioning reporting system (all of which
was taken as ‘normal’ or acceptable by insiders, as well as the regulator,
and none of which was taken as signals of potential danger). But the
issue here is that the quality manager’s idea about the system is not only
a sharp contradistinction from the actual system, it is also very
underspecified, general, vague. There is no way to really calibrate
whether this manager has the ‘requisite imagination’ (Adamski &
Westrum, 2003) to adapt his organization as necessary, although it is
inviting to entertain the suspicion that he does not.
90                                                         Resilience Engineering

    Ways forward on making both images of work explicit include their
confrontation with each other. A part of resilience engineering could be
to help leadership with what has been called ‘broadening checks’ – a
confrontation with their beliefs about what makes the system work (and
safe or unsafe) in part through a better visualization of what actually
goes on inside. One approach to broadening checks suggested and
developed by Andrew Hale is to do scenario-based auditing. Scenario-
based auditing represents a form of guided simulation, which could be
better suited for capturing eroded portions of an organization’s control
structure. In general, broadening checks could help managers achieve
greater requisite imagination by confronting them with the way in
which the system actually works, in contrast to their imagination.


Towards Broader Markers of Resilience

Looking for additional markers of resilience, what was explored in the
symposium? Here I take up two points: whether safe organizations
succeed in keeping discussion about risk alive, and how organizations
respond to failure. Both of these could be telling us something
important, and something potentially measurable, about the resilience
or brittleness of the organization.

Keeping Discussions about Risk Alive Even When all Looks Safe

As identified previously, an important ingredient of engineering a
resilient organization is constantly testing whether ideas about risk still
match with reality; whether the model of operations (and what makes
them safe or unsafe) is still up to date. As also said, however, it is not
always easy to expose this gap between the system-as-imagined and the
system as really operated. The models that managers and even
operational people apply in their management of risk could be out of
date without anybody (including outsiders, such as researchers or
regulators) knowing it because they are often so implicit, so unspecified.
In fact, industries are seldom busily entertained with explicating and
recalibrating their models of risk. Rather, there seems to be hysteresis:
old models of risk and safety (e.g., human errors are a major threat to
otherwise safe systems) still characterise most approaches in aviation,
including latter-day proposals to conduct ‘line-oriented safety audits’
Chronicling the Emergence of Confused Consensus                         91

(which, ironically, are designed explicitly to find out how real work
actually takes place!).
     If the distance between the model of risk (or the system as
imagined) and actual risk (or the system as actually operated) is difficult
to illuminate, are there other indicators that could help us judge the
resilience of an organization? One way is to see whether activities
associated with recalibrating models of safety and risk are going on at
all. This typically involves stakeholders discussing risk even when
everything looks safe. Indeed, if discussions about risk are going on
even in the absence of obvious threats to safety, we could get some
confidence that an organization is investing in an analysis, and possibly
in a critique and subsequent update, of its models of risk. Finding out
that such discussions are taking place, of course, is not the same as
knowing whether their resulting updates are effective or result in a
better calibrated organization. It is questionable whether it is sufficient
just to keep a discussion about risk alive. We should also be thinking
about ways to measure the extent to which these discussions have a
meaningful effect on how the organization relates to operational
challenges. We must remind ourselves that talking about risk is not the
managing of it, and that it constitutes only a step toward actually
engineering the resilience of an organization.
     The role of a safety organization in fanning this discussion, by the
way, is problematic. We could think that a safety department can take a
natural lead in driving, guiding and inspiring such discussions. But a
safety department has to reconcile competing demands for being
involved as an insider (to know what is going on), while being
independent as an outsider (to be able to step back and look at what
really is going on and influence things where necessary). In addition, a
strong safety department could send the message to the rest of an
organization that safety is something that can and should be delegated
to experts; to a dedicated group (and indeed, parts of it probably should
be). But keeping discussions about risk alive is something that should
involve every organizational decision maker, throughout organizational
hierarchies.

Resilience and Responses to Failure

What if failures do occur? Are there criteria of resilience that can be
extracted then? Indicators of how resilient an organization is
92                                                        Resilience Engineering

consistently seem to include how the organization responds to failure.
Intuitively, crises could be a sign of a lack of fundamental
organizational resilience, independent of the effectiveness of the
response. But effective management of crises may also represent an
important marker of resilience: What is the ability of the organization to
rebound even when exposed to enormous pressure? Preventing the
next accident could conceptually be close to managing the aftermath of
one and in this sense carry equally powerful implications for our ability
to judge the resilience of an organization.
     The comparison is this: suppose we want to predict an accident
accurately. This, and responding to a failure effectively, both involve
retreating or recovering from previous understandings of the system
and interpretations of the risk it is exposed to. Stakeholders need to
abandon old beliefs about the real challenges that their system faces and
embrace new ones. Both are also about stakeholders being forced to
acknowledge the gap between work as imagined and work as done. The
rubble of an accident often yields powerful clues about the nature of
the work as actually done and can put this in sharp contradistinction
with official understandings or images of that work (unless the work as
actually done retreats underground until the probe is over – which it
does in some cases, see McDonald et al., 2002). Similarly, getting
smarter at predicting the next accident (if we see that as part of
resilience engineering) is in part about finding out about this gap, this
distance between the various images of work (e.g., ‘official’ versus
‘real’), and carefully managing it in the service of better grasping the
actual nature of risk in operations.
     Cognitively, then, predicting the next accident and mopping up the
previous one demands the same types of revisionist activities and
insights. Once again, throughout the symposium (and echoed in the
themes of the present book) this has been identified as a critical
ingredient of resilience: constantly testing whether ideas about risk still
match reality; updating beliefs about safety and brittleness; and
recalibrating models of risk. A main question is how to help
organizations manage these processes of insight and revision
effectively, and further work on resilience engineering is bound to
address this question.
Part II: Cases and Processes
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 8
Engineering Resilience into
Safety-Critical Systems
Nancy Leveson
Nicolas Dulac
David Zipkin
Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld
John Carroll
Betty Barrett




Resilience and Safety

Resilience is often defined in terms of the ability to continue operations
or recover a stable state after a major mishap or event. This definition
focuses on the reactive nature of resilience and the ability to recover
after an upset. In this chapter, we use a more general definition that
includes prevention of upsets. In our conception, resilience is the ability
of systems to prevent or adapt to changing conditions in order to
maintain (control over) a system property. In this chapter, the property
we are concerned about is safety or risk. To ensure safety, the system or
organization must be resilient in terms of avoiding failures and losses,
as well as responding appropriately after the fact.
     Major accidents are usually preceded by periods where the
organization drifts toward states of increasing risk until the events
occur that lead to a loss (Rasmussen, 1997). Our goal is to determine
how to design resilient systems that respond to the pressures and
influences causing the drift to states of higher risk or, if that is not
possible, to design continuous risk management systems to detect the
drift and assist in formulating appropriate responses before the loss
event occurs.
96                                                       Resilience Engineering

     Our approach rests on modeling and analyzing socio-technical
systems and using the information gained in designing the socio-
technical system, in evaluating both planned responses to events and
suggested organizational policies to prevent adverse organizational drift,
and in defining appropriate metrics to detect changes in risk (the
equivalent of a ‘canary in the coal mine’). To be useful, such modeling
and analysis must be able to handle complex, tightly coupled systems
with distributed human and automated control, advanced technology
and software-intensive systems, and the organizational and social
aspects of systems. To do this, we use a new model of accident
causation (STAMP) based on system theory. STAMP includes non-
linear, indirect, and feedback relationships and can better handle the
levels of complexity and technological innovation in today’s systems
than traditional causality and accident models.
     In the next section, we briefly describe STAMP. Then we show
how STAMP models can be used to design and analyze resilience by
applying it to the safety culture of the NASA Space Shuttle program.


STAMP

The approach we use rests on a new way of thinking about accidents,
called STAMP or Systems-Theoretic Accident Modeling and Processes
(Leveson, 2004), that integrates all aspects of risk, including
organizational and social aspects. STAMP can be used as a foundation
for new and improved approaches to accident investigation and
analysis, hazard analysis and accident prevention, risk assessment and
risk management, and for devising risk metrics and performance
monitoring. In this chapter, we will concentrate on its uses for risk
assessment and management and its relationship to system resilience.
One unique aspect of this approach to risk management is the emphasis
on the use of visualization and building shared mental models of
complex system behavior among those responsible for managing risk.
The techniques integral to STAMP can have great value in terms of
more effective organizational decision-making.
     Systems are viewed in STAMP as interrelated components that are
kept in a state of dynamic equilibrium by feedback loops of information
and control. A socio-technical system is not treated as just a static
design, but as a dynamic process that is continually adapting to achieve
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                       97

its ends and to react to changes in itself and its environment. The
original design must not only enforce constraints on behavior to ensure
safe operations, but it must continue to operate safely as changes and
adaptations occur over time.
     Safety is an emergent system property. In STAMP, accidents are
accordingly viewed as the result of flawed processes involving
interactions among people, societal and organizational structures,
engineering activities, and physical system components. The process
leading up to an accident can be described in terms of an adaptive
feedback function that fails to maintain safety as performance changes
over time to meet a complex set of goals and values. The accident or
loss itself results not simply from component failure (which is treated as
a symptom of the problems) but from inadequate control of safety-
related constraints on the development, design, construction, and
operation of the socio-technical system.
     Safety and resilience in this model are treated as control problems:
Accidents occur when component failures, external disturbances,
and/or dysfunctional interactions among system components are not
adequately handled. In the Space Shuttle Challenger accident, for
example, the O-rings did not adequately control the propellant gas
release by sealing a tiny gap in the field joint. In the Mars Polar Lander
loss, the software did not adequately control the descent speed of the
spacecraft – it misinterpreted noise from a Hall effect sensor as an
indication the spacecraft had reached the surface of the planet.
     Accidents such as these, involving engineering design errors, may
in turn stem from inadequate control of the development process, i.e.,
risk is not adequately managed in design, implementation, and
manufacturing. Control is also imposed by the management functions
in an organization – the Challenger and Columbia accidents, for
example, involved inadequate controls in the launch-decision process
and in the response to external pressures – and by the social and
political system within which the organization exists. A system is
resilient when that control function responds appropriately to prevent
risk from increasing to unacceptable levels as the system and its
environment change over time.
     While events reflect the effects of dysfunctional interactions and
inadequate enforcement of safety constraints, the inadequate control
itself is only indirectly reflected by the events – the events are the result
of the inadequate control. The control structure itself, therefore, must
98                                                        Resilience Engineering

be carefully designed and evaluated to ensure that the controls are
adequate to maintain the constraints on behavior necessary to control
risk. This definition of risk management is broader than definitions that
define it in terms of particular activities or tools. STAMP, which is
based on systems and control theory, provides the theoretical
foundation to develop the techniques and tools, including modeling
tools, to assist managers in managing risk and building resilient systems
in this broad context.
     Note that the use of the term ‘control’ does not imply a strict
military command and control structure. Behavior is controlled or
influenced not only by direct management intervention, but also
indirectly by policies, procedures, shared values, the level of awareness
of behavioral/cognitive patterns and other aspects of the organizational
culture. All behavior is influenced and at least partially ‘controlled’ by
the social and organizational context in which the behavior occurs.
Engineering this context can be an effective way of creating and
changing a safety culture.
     STAMP is constructed from three fundamental concepts:
constraints, hierarchical levels of control, and process models. These
concepts, in turn, give rise to a classification of control flaws that can
lead to accidents. Each of these is described only briefly here; for more
information see Leveson (2004).
     The most basic component of STAMP is not an event, but a
constraint. In systems theory and control theory, systems are viewed as
hierarchical structures where each level imposes constraints on the
activity of the level below it – that is, constraints or lack of constraints
at a higher level allow or control lower-level behavior.
     Safety-related constraints specify those relationships among system
variables that constitute the non-hazardous or safe system states – for
example, the power must never be on when the access to the high-
voltage power source is open, the descent engines on the lander must
remain on until the spacecraft reaches the planet surface, and two
aircraft must never violate minimum separation requirements.
     Instead of viewing accidents as the result of an initiating (root
cause) event in a chain of events leading to a loss, accidents are viewed
as resulting from interactions among components that violate the
system safety constraints. The control processes that enforce these
constraints must limit system behavior to the safe changes and
adaptations implied by the constraints. Preventing accidents requires
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                   99

designing a control structure, encompassing the entire socio-technical
system, that will enforce the necessary constraints on development and
operations. Figure 8.1 shows a generic hierarchical safety control
structure. Accidents result from inadequate enforcement of constraints
on behavior (e.g., the physical system, engineering design, management,
and regulatory behavior) at each level of the socio-technical system.
Inadequate control may result from missing safety constraints,
inadequately communicated constraints, or from constraints that are
not enforced correctly at a lower level. Feedback during operations is
critical here. For example, the safety analysis process that generates
constraints always involves some basic assumptions about the operating
environment of the process. When the environment changes such that
those assumptions are no longer true, the controls in place may become
inadequate.
     The model in Figure 8.1 has two basic hierarchical control
structures – one for system development (on the left) and one for
system operation (on the right) – with interactions between them. A
spacecraft manufacturer, for example, might only have system
development under its immediate control, but safety involves both
development and operational use of the spacecraft, and neither can be
accomplished successfully in isolation: Safety must be designed into the
physical system, and safety during operation depends partly on the
original system design and partly on effective control over operations.
Manufacturers must communicate to their customers the assumptions
about the operational environment upon which their safety analysis and
design was based, as well as information about safe operating
procedures. The operational environment, in turn, provides feedback to
the manufacturer about the performance of the system during
operations.
     Between the hierarchical levels of each control structure, effective
communication channels are needed, both a downward reference channel
providing the information necessary to impose constraints on the level
below and a measuring channel to provide feedback about how
effectively the constraints were enforced. For example, company
management in the development process structure may provide a safety
policy, standards, and resources to project management and in return
receive status reports, risk assessment, and incident reports as feedback
about the status of the project with respect to the safety constraints.
100                                                     Resilience Engineering




Figure 8.1: General form of a model of socio-technical control
(Adapted from Leveson, 2004)

    Between the hierarchical levels of each control structure, effective
communication channels are needed, both a downward reference channel
providing the information necessary to impose constraints on the level
below and a measuring channel to provide feedback about how
effectively the constraints were enforced. For example, company
management in the development process structure may provide a safety
policy, standards, and resources to project management and in return
receive status reports, risk assessment, and incident reports as feedback
about the status of the project with respect to the safety constraints.
    The safety control structure often changes over time, which
accounts for the observation that accidents in complex systems
frequently involve a migration of the system toward a state where a
small deviation (in the physical system or in human behavior) can lead
to a catastrophe. The foundation for an accident is often laid years
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                  101

before. One event may trigger the loss, but if that event had not
happened, another one would have. As an example, Figures 8.2 and 8.3
show the changes over time that led to a water contamination accident
in Canada where 2400 people became ill and seven died (most of them
children) (Leveson et al., 2003). The reasons why this accident occurred
would take too many pages to explain and only a small part of the
overall STAMP model is shown.




Figure 8.2: The designed safety control structure in the Walkerton
Water contamination accident

    Each component of the water quality control structure played a
role in the accident. Figure 8.2 shows the control structure for water
quality in Ontario Canada as designed. Figure 8.3 shows the control
structure as it existed at the time of the accident. One of the important
changes that contributed to the accident is the elimination of a
government water-testing laboratory. The private companies that were
substituted were not required to report instances of bacterial
contamination to the appropriate government ministries. Essentially,
the elimination of the feedback loops made it impossible for the
government agencies and public utility managers to perform their
oversight duties effectively. Note that the goal here is not to identify
individuals to blame for the accident but to understand why they made
102                                                       Resilience Engineering

the mistakes they made (none were evil or wanted children to die) and
what changes are needed in the culture and water quality control
structure to reduce risk in the future.




Figure 8.3: The safety control structure existing at the time of the
Walkerton Water contamination accident

     In this accident, and in most accidents, degradation in the safety
margin occurred over time and without any particular single decision to
do so but simply as a series of decisions that individually seemed safe
but together resulted in moving the water quality control system
structure slowly toward a situation where any slight error would lead to
a major accident. Designing a resilient system requires ensuring that
controls do not degrade despite the inevitable changes that occur over
time or that such degradation is detected and corrected before a loss
occurs.
     Figures 8.2 and 8.3 show static models of the safety control
structure, drawn in the form commonly used for control loops. (Lines
going into the left of a box are control lines. Lines from or to the top or
bottom of a box represent information, feedback, or a physical flow.
Rectangles with sharp corners are controllers while rectangles with
rounded corners represent physical processes.) But to build a resilient
system, models are needed to understand why the structure changed
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                  103

over time in order to build in protection against unsafe changes. For
this goal, we use system dynamics models. The field of system
dynamics, created at MIT in the 1950s by Forrester, is designed to help
decision makers learn about the structure and dynamics of complex
systems, to design high leverage policies for sustained improvement,
and to catalyze successful implementation and change. System
dynamics provides a framework for dealing with dynamic complexity,
where cause and effect are not obviously related. Like the other
STAMP models, it is grounded in the theory of non-linear dynamics
and feedback control, but also draws on cognitive and social
psychology, organization theory, economics, and other social sciences
(Sterman, 2000). System dynamics models are formal and can be
executed, like our other models.
     System dynamics is particularly relevant for complex systems.
System dynamics makes it possible, for example, to understand and
predict instances of policy resistance or the tendency for well-
intentioned interventions to be defeated by the response of the system
to the intervention itself. In related but separate research, Marais and
Leveson are working on defining archetypical system dynamics models
often associated with accidents to assist in creating the models for
specific systems (Marais & Leveson, 2003).
     Figure 8.4 shows a simple systems dynamics model of the
Columbia accident. This model is only a hint of what a complete model
might contain. The loops in the figure represent feedback control loops
where the ‘+’ or ‘-’ on the loops represent polarity or the relationship
(positive or negative) between state variables: a positive polarity means
that the variables move in the same direction while a negative polarity
means that they move in opposite directions. There are three main
variables in the model: safety, complacency, and success in meeting
launch rate expectations.
     The control loop in the lower left corner of Figure 8.4, labeled R1
or Pushing the Limit, shows how, as external pressures increased,
performance pressure increased, which led to increased launch rates
and thus success in meeting the launch rate expectations, which in turn
led to increased expectations and increasing performance pressures.
This, of course, is an unstable system and cannot be maintained
indefinitely – note the larger control loop, B1, in which this loop is
embedded, is labeled Limits to Success. The upper left loop represents
part of the safety program loop. The external influences of budget cuts
104                                                      Resilience Engineering

and increasing performance pressures that reduced the priority of safety
procedures led to a decrease in system safety efforts. The combination
of this decrease along with loop B2 in which fixing problems increased
complacency, which also contributed to reduction of system safety
efforts, eventually led to a situation of (unrecognized) high risk. One
thing not shown in the diagram is that these models can also contain
delays. While reduction in safety efforts and lower prioritization of
safety concerns may lead to accidents, accidents usually do not occur
for a while, so false confidence is created that the reductions are having
no impact on safety and therefore pressures increase to reduce the
efforts and priority even further as the external performance pressures
mount.




Figure 8.4: Simplified model of the dynamics behind the shuttle
Columbia loss

    The models can be used to devise and validate fixes for the
problems and to design systems to be more resilient. For example, one
way to eliminate the instability of the model in Figure 8.4 is to anchor
the safety efforts by, perhaps, externally enforcing standards in order to
prevent schedule and budget pressures from leading to reductions in
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                   105

the safety program. Other solutions are also possible. Alternatives can
be evaluated for their potential effects and impact on system resilience
using a more complete system dynamics model, as described in the next
section.
     Often, degradation of the control structure involves asynchronous
evolution, where one part of a system changes without the related
necessary changes in other parts. Changes to subsystems may be
carefully designed, but consideration of their effects on other parts of
the system, including the control aspects, may be neglected or
inadequate. Asynchronous evolution may also occur when one part of a
properly designed system deteriorates. The Ariane 5 trajectory changed
from that of the Ariane 4, but the inertial reference system software did
not. One factor in the loss of contact with the SOHO (Solar
Heliospheric Observatory) spacecraft in 1998 was the failure to
communicate to operators that a functional change had been made in a
procedure to perform gyro spin-down.
     Besides constraints and hierarchical levels of control, a third basic
concept in STAMP is that of process models. Any controller – human
or automated – must contain a model of the system being controlled.
For humans, this model is generally referred to as their mental model of
the process being controlled, cf. Figure 8.5.




Figure 8.5: Role of models in control

     For effective control, the process models must contain the
following: (1) the current state of the system being controlled, (2) the
required relationship between system variables, and (3) the ways the
process can change state. Accidents, particularly system accidents,
frequently result from inconsistencies between the model of the process
used by the controllers and the actual process state; for example, the
106                                                       Resilience Engineering

lander software thinks the lander has reached the surface and shuts
down the descent engine; the Minister of Health has received no
reports about water quality problems and believes the state of water
quality in the town is better than it actually is; or a mission manager
believes that foam shedding is a maintenance or turnaround issue only.
Part of our modeling efforts involves creating the process models,
examining the ways that they can become inconsistent with the actual
state (e.g., missing or incorrect feedback), and determining what
feedback loops are necessary to maintain the safety constraints.
     When there are multiple controllers and decision makers, system
accidents may also involve inadequate control actions and unexpected
side effects of decisions or actions, again often the result of inconsistent
process models. For example, two controllers may both think the other
is making the required control action, or they make control actions that
conflict with each other. Communication plays an important role here.
Leplat suggests that accidents are most likely in boundary or overlap areas
where two or more controllers control the same process (Leplat, 1987).
     A STAMP modeling and analysis effort involves creating a model
of the organizational safety structure including the static safety control
structure and the safety constraints that each component is responsible
for maintaining, process models representing the view of the process by
those controlling it, and a model of the dynamics and pressures that can
lead to degradation of this structure over time. These models and
analysis procedures can be used to investigate accidents and incidents to
determine the role played by the different components of the safety
control structure and to learn how to prevent related accidents in the
future, to proactively perform hazard analysis and design to reduce risk
throughout the life of the system, and to support a continuous risk
management program where risk is monitored and controlled.
     In this chapter, we are concerned with resilience and therefore will
concentrate on how system dynamics models can be used to design and
analyze resilience, to evaluate the effect of potential policy changes on
risk, and to create metrics and other performance measures to identify
when risk is increasing to unacceptable levels. We demonstrate their use
by modeling and analysis of the safety culture of the NASA Space
Shuttle program and its impact on risk. The CAIB report noted that
culture was a large component of the Columbia accident. The same
point was made in the Rogers Commission Report on the Challenger
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                      107

Accident (Rogers, 1987), although the cultural aspects of the accident
was emphasized less in that report.
    The models were constructed using both our personal long-term
association with the NASA manned space program as well as interviews
with current and former employees, books on NASA’s safety culture
such as McCurdy (1993), books on the Challenger and Columbia
accidents, NASA mishap reports (Gehman, 2003), Mars Polar Lander
(Young, 2000), Mars Climate Orbiter (Stephenson, 1999), WIRE
(Branscome, 1999), SOHO (NASA/ESA Investigation Board, 1998),
Huygens (Link, 2000), etc., other NASA reports on the manned space
program (SIAT or Shuttle Independent Assessment Team Report
(McDonald, 2000), and others) as well as many of the better researched
magazine and newspaper articles.
    We first describe system dynamics in more detail and then describe
our models and examples of analyses that can be derived using them.
We conclude with a general description of the implications for building
and operating resilient systems.


The Models

System behavior in system dynamics is modeled by using feedback
(causal) loops, stock and flows (levels and rates), and the non-linearities
created by interactions among system components. In this view of the
world, behavior over time (the dynamics of the system) can be
explained by the interaction of positive and negative feedback loops
(Senge, 1990). The models are constructed from three basic building
blocks: positive feedback or reinforcing loops, negative feedback or
balancing loops, and delays. Positive loops (called reinforcing loops) are
self-reinforcing while negative loops tend to counteract change. Delays
introduce potential instability into the system.
     Figure 8.6a shows a reinforcing loop, which is a structure that feeds on
itself to produce growth or decline. Reinforcing loops correspond to
positive feedback loops in control theory. An increase in variable 1
leads to an increase in variable 2 (as indicated by the ‘+’ sign), which
leads to an increase in variable 1 and so on. The ‘+’ does not mean the
values necessarily increase, only that variable 1 and variable 2 will
change in the same direction. If variable 1 decreases, then variable 2 will
decrease. A ‘-’ indicates that the values change in opposite directions. In
108                                                       Resilience Engineering

the absence of external influences, both variable 1 and variable 2 will
clearly grow or decline exponentially. Reinforcing loops generate
growth, amplify deviations, and reinforce change (Sterman, 2000).




Figure 8.6: The three basic components of system dynamics
models

     A balancing loop (Figure 8.6b) is a structure that changes the current
value of a system variable or a desired or reference variable through
some action. It corresponds to a negative feedback loop in control
theory. The difference between the current value and the desired value
is perceived as an error. An action proportional to the error is taken to
decrease the error so that, over time, the current value approaches the
desired value.
     The third basic element is a delay, which is used to model the time
that elapses between cause and effect. A delay is indicated by a double
line, as shown in Figure 8.6c. Delays make it difficult to link cause and
effect (dynamic complexity) and may result in unstable system behavior.
For example, in steering a ship there is a delay between a change in the
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                 109

rudder position and a corresponding course change, often leading to
over-correction and instability.




Figure 8.7: An example system dynamics and analysis output

    The simple ‘News Sharing’ model in Figure 8.7 is helpful in
understanding the stock and flow syntax and the results of our
modeling effort. The model shows the flow of information through a
population over time. The total population is fixed and includes 100
people. Initially, only one person knows the news, the other 99 people
do not know it. Accordingly, there are two stocks in the model: People
who know and People who don’t know. The initial value for the People who
110                                                        Resilience Engineering

know stock is one and that for the People who don’t know stock is 99. Once
a person learns the news, he or she moves from the left-hand stock to
the right-hand stock through the double arrow flow called Rate of sharing
the news. The rate of sharing the news at any point in time depends on
the number of Contacts between people who know and people who don’t, which
is function of the value of the two stocks at that time. This function
uses a differential equation, i.e., the rate of change of a variable V, i.e.,
dV/dt, at time t depends on the value of V(t). The results for each
stock and variable as a function of time are obtained through numerical
integration. The graph in Figure 8.7 shows the numerical simulation
output for the number of people who know, the number of people who
don’t know, and the rate of sharing the news as a function of time.
     One of the significant challenges associated with modeling a socio-
technical system as complex as the Shuttle program is creating a model
that captures the critical intricacies of the real-life system, but is not so
complex that it cannot be readily understood. To be accepted and
therefore useful to risk decision makers, a model must have the
confidence of the users and that confidence will be limited if the users
cannot understand what has been modeled. We addressed this problem
by breaking the overall system model into nine logical subsystem
models, each of an intellectually manageable size and complexity. The
subsystem models can be built and tested independently and then, after
validation and comfort with the correctness of each subsystem model is
achieved, the subsystem models can be connected to one another so
that important information can flow between them and emergent
properties that arise from their interactions can be included in the
analysis. Figure 8.8 shows the nine model components along with the
interactions among them.
     As an example, our Launch Rate model uses a number of internal
factors to determine the frequency at which the Shuttle can be
launched. That value – the ‘output’ of the Launch Rate model – is then
used by many other subsystem models including the Risk model and
the Perceived Success by Management models.
     The nine subsystem models are:

•     Risk
•     System Safety Resource Allocation
•     System Safety Status
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems               111

•     System Safety Knowledge Skills and Staffing
•     Shuttle Aging and Maintenance
•     Launch Rate
•     System Safety Efforts and Efficacy
•     Incident Learning and Corrective Action
•     Perceived Success by Management.




Figure 8.8: The nine submodels and their interactions

    Each of these submodels is described briefly below, including both
the outputs of the submodel and the factors used to determine the
results. The models themselves can be found elsewhere (Leveson et al.,
2005).
112                                                       Resilience Engineering

Risk

The purpose of the technical risk model is to determine the level of
occurrence of anomalies and hazardous events, as well as the interval
between accidents. The assumption behind the risk formulation is that
once the system has reached a state of high risk, it is highly vulnerable
to small deviations that can cascade into major accidents. The primary
factors affecting the technical risk of the system are the effective age of
the Shuttle, the quantity and quality of inspections aimed at uncovering
and correcting safety problems, and the proactive hazard analysis and
mitigation efforts used to continuously improve the safety of the
system. Another factor affecting risk is the response of the program to
anomalies and hazardous events (and, of course, mishaps or accidents).
     The response to anomalies, hazardous events, and mishaps can
either address the symptoms of the underlying problem or the root
causes of the problems. Corrective actions that address the symptoms
of a problem have insignificant effect on the technical risk and merely
allow the system to continue operating while the underlying problems
remain unresolved. On the other hand, corrective actions that address
the root cause of a problem have a significant and lasting positive effect
on reducing the system technical risk.

System Safety Resource Allocation

The purpose of the resource allocation model is to determine the level
of resources allocated to system safety. To do this, we model the
factors determining the portion of NASA’s budget devoted to system
safety. The critical factors here are the priority of the safety programs
relative to other competing priorities such as launch performance and
NASA safety history. The model assumes that if performance
expectations are high or schedule pressure is tight, safety funding will
decrease, particularly if NASA has had past safe operations.

System Safety Status

The safety organization’s status plays an important role throughout the
model, particularly in determining effectiveness in attracting high-
quality employees and determining the likelihood of other employees
becoming involved in the system safety process. Additionally, the status
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                    113

of the safety organization plays an important role in determining their
level of influence, which in turn, contributes to the overall effectiveness
of the safety activities. Management prioritization of system safety
efforts plays an important role in this submodel, which in turn
influences such safety culture factors as the power and authority of the
safety organization, resource allocation, and rewards and recognition
for raising safety concerns and placing emphasis on safety. In the
model, the status of the safety organization has an impact on the ability
to attract highly capable personnel; on the level of morale, motivation,
and influence; and on the amount and effectiveness of cross-boundary
communication.

System Safety Knowledge, Skills, and Staffing

The purpose of this submodel is to determine both the overall level of
knowledge and skill in the system safety organization and to determine
if the number of NASA system safety engineers is sufficient to oversee
the contractors. These two values are used by the System Safety Effort
and Efficacy submodel.
     In order to determine these key values, the model tracks four
quantities: the number of NASA employees working in system safety,
the number of contractor system safety employees, the aggregate
experience of the NASA employees, and the aggregate experience of
the system safety contractors such as those working for United Space
Alliance (USA) and other major Shuttle contractors.
     The staffing numbers rise and fall based on the hiring, firing,
attrition, and transfer rates of the employees and contractors. These
rates are determined by several factors, including the amount of safety
funding allocated, the portion of work to be contracted out, the age of
NASA employees, and the stability of funding.
     The amount of experience of the NASA and contractor system
safety engineers relates to the new staff hiring rate and the quality of
that staff. An organization that highly values safety will be able to
attract better employees who bring more experience and can learn
faster than lower quality staff. The rate at which the staff gains
experience is also determined by training, performance feedback, and
the workload they face.
114                                                    Resilience Engineering

Shuttle Aging and Maintenance

The age of the Shuttle and the amount of maintenance, refurbishments,
and safety upgrades affects the technical risk of the system and the
number of anomalies and hazardous events. The effective Shuttle age is
mainly influenced by the launch rate. A higher launch rate will
accelerate the aging of the Shuttle unless extensive maintenance and
refurbishment are performed. The amount of maintenance depends on
the resources available for maintenance at any given time. As the
system ages, more maintenance may be required; if the resources
devoted to maintenance are not adjusted accordingly, accelerated aging
will occur.
     The original design of the system also affects the maintenance
requirements. Many compromises were made during the initial phase of
the Shuttle design, trading off lower development costs for higher
operations costs. Our model includes the original level of design for
maintainability, which allows the investigation of scenarios during the
analysis where system maintainability would have been a high priority
from the beginning.
     While launch rate and maintenance affect the rate of Shuttle aging,
refurbishment and upgrades decrease the effective aging by providing
complete replacements and upgrade of Shuttle systems such as avionics,
fuel systems, and structural components. The amount of upgrades and
refurbishment depends on the resources available, as well as on the
perception of the remaining life of the system. Upgrades and
refurbishment will most likely be delayed or canceled when there is high
uncertainty about the remaining operating life. Uncertainty will be
higher as the system approaches or exceeds its original design lifetime,
especially if there is no clear vision and plan about the future of the
manned space program.

Launch Rate

The Launch Rate submodel is at the core of the integrated model.
Launch rate affects many parts of the model, such as the perception of
the level of success achieved by the Shuttle program. A high launch rate
without accidents contributes to the perception that the program is
safe, eventually eroding the priority of system safety efforts. A high
launch rate also accelerates system aging and creates schedule pressure,
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                    115

which hinders the ability of engineers to perform thorough problem
investigation and to implement effective corrective actions that address
the root cause of the problems rather than just the symptoms.
     The launch rate in the model is largely determined by three factors:

1.      Expectations from high-level management: Launch expectations
        will most likely be high if the program has been successful in the
        recent past. The expectations are reinforced through a ‘Pushing
        the Limits’ phenomenon where administrators expect ever more
        from a successful program, without necessarily providing the
        resources required to increase launch rate;
2.      Schedule pressure from the backlog of flights scheduled: This
        backlog is affected by the launch commitments, which depend on
        factors such as ISS commitments, Hubble servicing requirements,
        and other scientific mission constraints;
3.      Launch delays that may be caused by unanticipated safety
        problems: The number of launch delays depends on the technical
        risk, on the ability of system safety to uncover problems requiring
        launch delays, and on the power and authority of system safety
        personnel to delay launches.

System Safety Efforts and Efficacy

This submodel captures the effectiveness of system safety at identifying,
tracking, and mitigating Shuttle system hazards. The success of these
activities will affect the number of hazardous events and problems
identified, as well as the quality and thoroughness of the resulting
investigations and corrective actions. In the model, a combination of
reactive problem investigation and proactive hazard mitigation efforts
leads to effective safety-related decision-making that reduces the
technical risk associated with the operation of the Shuttle. While
effective system safety activities will improve safety over the long run,
they may also result in a decreased launch rate over the short term by
delaying launches when serious safety problems are identified.
     The efficacy of the system safety activities depends on various
factors. Some of these factors are defined outside this submodel, such
as the availability of resources to be allocated to safety and the
availability and effectiveness of safety processes and standards. Others
depend on the characteristics of the system safety personnel
116                                                       Resilience Engineering

themselves, such as their number, knowledge, experience, skills,
motivation, and commitment. These personal characteristics also affect
the ability of NASA to oversee and integrate the safety efforts of
contractors, which is one dimension of system safety effectiveness. The
quantity and quality of lessons learned and the ability of the
organization to absorb and use these lessons is also a key component of
system safety effectiveness.

Incident Learning and Corrective Action

The objective of this submodel is to capture the dynamics associated
with the handling and resolution of safety-related anomalies and
hazardous events. It is one of the most complex submodels, reflecting
the complexity of the cognitive and behavioral processes involved in
identifying, reporting, investigating, and resolving safety issues. Once
integrated into the combined model, the amount and quality of learning
achieved through the investigation and resolution of safety problems
impacts the effectiveness of system safety efforts and the quality of
resulting corrective actions, which in turn has a significant effect on the
technical risk of the system.
     The structure of this model revolves around the processing of
incidents or hazardous events, from their initial identification to their
eventual resolution. The number of safety-related incidents is a function
of the technical risk. Some safety-related problems will be reported
while others will be left unreported. The fraction of safety problems
reported depends on the effectiveness of the reporting process, the
employee sensitization to safety problems, and the possible fear of
reporting if the organization discourages it, perhaps due to the impact
on the schedule. Problem reporting will increase if employees see that
their concerns are considered and acted upon, that is, if they have
previous experience that reporting problems led to positive actions.
The number of reported problems also varies as a function of the
perceived safety of the system by engineers and technical workers. A
problem-reporting positive feedback loop creates more reporting as the
perceived risk increases, which is influenced by the number of
problems reported and addressed. Numerous studies have shown that
the risk perceived by engineers and technical workers is different from
high-level management perception of risk. In our model, high-level
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                   117

management and engineers use different cues to evaluate risk and
safety, which results in very different assessments.
     A fraction of the anomalies reported are investigated in the model.
This fraction varies based on the resources available, the overall
number of anomalies being investigated at any time, and the
thoroughness of the investigation process. The period of time the
investigation lasts will also depend on these same variables.
     Once a hazard event or anomaly has been investigated, four
outcomes are possible: (1) no action is taken to resolve the problem, (2)
a corrective action is taken that only addresses the symptoms of the
problem, (3) a corrective action is performed that addresses the root
causes of the problem, and (4) the proposed corrective action is
rejected, which results in further investigation until a more satisfactory
solution is proposed. Many factors are used to determine which of
these four possible outcomes results, including the resources available,
the schedule pressure, the quality of hazardous event or anomaly
investigation, the investigation and resolution process and reviews, and
the effectiveness of system safety decision-making. As the organization
goes through this ongoing process of problem identification,
investigation, and resolution, some lessons are learned, which may be of
variable quality depending on the investigation process and
thoroughness. In our model, if the safety personnel and decision-
makers have the capability and resources to extract and internalize high-
quality lessons from the investigation process, their overall ability to
identify and resolve problems and to do effective hazard mitigation will
be enhanced.

Perceived Success by Management

The purpose of this submodel is to capture the dynamics behind the
success of the Shuttle program as perceived by high-level management
and NASA administration. The success perceived by high-level
management is a major component of the Pushing the Limit
reinforcing loop, where much will be expected from a highly successful
program, creating even higher expectations and performance pressure.
High perceived success also creates the impression that the system is
inherently safe and can be considered operational, thus reducing the
priority of safety, which affects resource allocation and system safety
status. Two main factors contribute to the perception of success: the
118                                                       Resilience Engineering

accumulation of successful launches positively influences the perceived
success while the occurrence of accidents and mishaps have a strong
negative influence.


Principal Findings and Anticipated Outcomes/Benefits

The models we constructed can be used in many ways, including
understanding how and why accidents have occurred, testing and
validating changes and new policies (including risk and vulnerability
assessment of policy changes), learning which ‘levers’ have a significant
and sustainable effect, and facilitating the identification and tracking of
metrics to detect increasing risk. But in order to trust the models and
the results from their analysis, the users need to be comfortable with
the models and their accuracy.
     We first validated each model individually, using (1) review by
experts familiar with NASA and experts on safety culture in general and
(2) execution of the models to determine whether the results were
reasonable.
     Once we were comfortable with the individual models, we ran the
integrated model using baseline parameters. In the graphs that follow,
Figures 8.9-8.13, the arrows on the x-axis (timeline) indicate when
accidents occur during the model execution (simulation). Also, it should
be noted that we are not doing risk assessment, i.e., quantitative or
qualitative calculation of the likelihood or severity of an accident or
mishap. Instead, we are doing risk analysis, i.e., trying to understand the
static causal structure and dynamic behavior of risk or, in other words,
identifying what technical and organizational factors contribute to the
level of risk and their relative contribution to the risk level, both at a
particular point in time and as the organizational and technical factors
change over time.
     The first example analysis of the baseline models evaluates the
relative level of concern between safety and performance (Figure 8.9).
In a world of fixed resources, decisions are usually made on the
perception of relative importance in achieving overall (mission) goals.
Immediately after an accident, the perceived importance of safety rises
above performance concerns for a short time. But performance quickly
becomes the dominant concern.
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                      119




Figure 8.9: Relative level of concern between safety and
performance




Figure 8.10: Fraction of corrective action to fix systemic safety
problems over time

     A second example looks at the fraction of corrective action to fix
systemic safety problems over time (Figure 8.10). Note that after an
accident, there is a lot of activity devoted to fixing systemic factors for a
short time, but as shown in the previous graph, performance issues
120                                                       Resilience Engineering

quickly dominate over safety efforts and less attention is paid to fixing
the safety problems. The length of the period of high safety activity
basically corresponds to the return to flight period. As soon as the
Shuttle starts to fly again, performance becomes the major concern as
shown in the first graph.
    The final example examines the overall level of technical risk over
time (Figure 8.11). In the graph, the level of risk decreases only slightly
and temporarily after an accident. Over longer periods of time, risk
continues to climb due to other risk-increasing factors in the models
such as aging and deferred maintenance, fixing symptoms and not root
causes, limited safety efforts due to resource allocation to other
program aspects, etc.




Figure 8.11: Level of technical risk over time

     The analysis described so far simply used the baseline parameters in
the integrated model. One of the important uses for our system
dynamics models, however, is to determine the effect of changing those
parameters. As the last part of our Phase 1 model construction and
validation efforts, we ran scenarios that evaluated the impact of varying
some of the model factors. Two examples are included here.
     In the first example scenario, we examined the relative impact on
level of risk from fixing symptoms only after an accident (e.g., foam
shedding or O-ring design) versus fixing systemic factors (Figure 8.12).
Risk quickly escalates if symptoms only are fixed and not the systemic
factors involved in the accident. In the graph, the combination of fixing
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                   121

systemic factors and symptoms comes out worse than fixing only
systemic factors because we assume a fixed amount of resources and
therefore in the combined case only partial fixing of symptoms and
systemic factors is accomplished.




Figure 8.12: Fixing symptoms vs. fixing systemic factors

    A second example scenario looks at the impact on the model
results of increasing the independence of safety decision makers
through an organizational change like the Independent Technical
Authority (Figure 8.13). The decreased level of risk arises from our
assumptions that the ITA will involve:

•     The assignment of high-ranked and highly regarded personnel as
      safety decision-makers;
•     Increased power and authority of the safety decision-makers;
•     The ability to report increased investigation of anomalies; and
•     An unbiased evaluation of proposed corrective actions that
      emphasize solutions that address systemic factors.

    Note that although the ITA reduces risk, risk still increases over
time. This increase occurs due to other factors that tend to increase risk
over time such as increasing complacency and Shuttle aging.
122                                                     Resilience Engineering

Implications for Designing and Operating Resilient Systems

We believe that the use of STAMP and, particularly, the use of system
dynamics models can assist designers and engineers in building and
operating more resilient systems. While the model-building activity
described in this paper involved a retroactive analysis of an existing
system, similar modeling can be performed during the design process to
evaluate the impact of various technical and social design factors and to
design more resilient systems that are able to detect and respond to
changes in both the internal system and the external environment.
During operations for an existing system, a resilient risk management
program would involve (1) deriving and using metrics to detect drift to
states of increasing risk and (2) evaluation of planned changes and new
policies to determine their impact on system resilience and system risk.




Figure 8.13: The impact of introducing an independent technical
authority

    The ability for evaluation of design factors and the heightened
awareness of the critical shortcomings of an organizational
management system or decision-making process is of real value and
importance in the real world context that demands ever-increasing
performance or productivity. The tension that managers and others in a
organization feel as their deadlines are shortened, their resources
Engineering Resilience into Safety-Critical Systems                   123

constrained, and the competition intensifies often allows safety and risk
considerations to diminish. Using STAMP and the models we introduce
can potentially provide decision-makers with critical insights that can
prevent organizations from drifting into less safe behaviors and
promote greater adaptability. Organizations that operate in hazardous
conditions must make every effort to have proper prevention as well as
mitigation activities.
     To evaluate the approach in a real setting, we are currently using it
to perform a risk and vulnerability analysis of changes to the
organizational structure of the NASA manned space program in the
wake of the Columbia loss. We plan to follow this analysis up with a
field study to determine how well the analysis predicted the risks over
time and how accurate the modeling activity was in analyzing the
resilience of the new NASA safety organization.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 9
Is Resilience Really Necessary?
The Case of Railways
Andrew Hale
Tom Heijer




Introduction

In other parts of this book resilience is discussed as a desirable attribute
of organisations in managing safety in complex, high-risk environments.
It seems to us necessary to explore also the boundaries of resilience as a
strategy or state of organisations. Is it the only successful strategy in
town? If not, is it always the most appropriate strategy? If not, when is
it the preferred one? This chapter tries to address some of these
questions, to give some thoughts and ways forward.

Railways as a Running Example

We take as our example the railways. We have been involved intensively
in the last few years in a number of projects concerning safety
management in the Dutch and European railways, partly sponsored by
the European Union under the SAMRAIL and SAMNET projects
(www.samnet.inrets.fr for official documents and reports of the
project), and partly by the Dutch railway regulator (Hale et al., 2002).
These have addressed the issues of the design of safety management
systems for the increasingly privatised and decentralised railway systems
in the member countries. In particular, our work has been concerned
with the role of safety rules in risk control, and the methods of
managing rules in the separate organisations and in the whole
interacting railway system (Larsen et al., 2004; Hale et al., 2003). The
information that we gathered from interviews, workshops and the study
126                                                        Resilience Engineering

of documentation was designed to produce a best practice guideline for
safety rule management. However, safety rules and how an organisation
deals with them are such central issues for an organisation that we
believe that the data can throw useful light on the question of
organisational resilience. So we have recast the information we have
and used it to reflect on the questions in this book. Inevitably there are
gaps in what we can say, because the data were not originally collected
to answer the questions posed here. However, we hope they prompt
some thought and discussion and may even point out ways forward in
both theory and practice.
      The railway industry is particularly interesting in this context, since
it prides itself, based on European Union figures (see Table 9.1) on
being the safest form of transport in terms of passenger deaths per
person kilometre (equal with aviation), or in deaths per person travel
hour (equal with buses and coaches). In this sense it would like to see
itself as an ultra-safe activity in Amalberti’s terms (Amalberti, 2001).
However, if we look at its record on track maintenance worker safety,
its performance in the Netherlands is at or below the average of the
construction industry in terms of deaths per employed person per year.
The passenger train companies have a record of problems related to the
safety of staff, particularly conductors and ticket controllers, where
violent assaults by passengers resisting paying their fares are a problem
that has been increasing in recent years. The railways are also one of the
favourite mechanisms chosen by people in the Netherlands wishing to
kill themselves (over 200 successful attempts per year) and it kills some
30 other transport participants per year at level crossings, as well as a
number of trespassers.
      These different safety performance indicators are looking at very
different aspects of the railways and their management, some of which
are only partly within the control of the participating companies, at least
in the short term. For example, the risk of road traffic crossing railways
can be greatly improved in the long term by eliminating level crossings
in favour of bridges or underpasses. However, this would require, for
such flat countries as the Netherlands, a very large investment over a
long time. Although this is being actively worked on, it has to be
coordinated with, and some of the money has to come from, the road
managers. We will therefore concentrate here on the two aspects that
are most within the control of the railway companies and their
contractors, namely passenger safety and the safety of track
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                                    127

maintenance workers. By looking at these we want to pose the question
of whether railways are an example of a resilient system or not? Do
they achieve their high level of passenger safety by using the
characteristics that are typical of resilient organisations and systems, or
is their success due to another strategy? Does the poor performance on
track worker safety arise from a lack of resilience? The majority of the
information comes from our Dutch study, but some is also used from
the European cases.


Table 9.1: Comparative transport safety statistics 2001/2002
(European Transport Safety Council, 2003)

                                  Deaths/100 million person   Deaths/100 million
                                  kilometres                  travel hours
Road: total, of which:            0.95                        28
Motorcycle/moped                  13.8                        440
Foot                              6.4                         25
Cycle                             5.4                         75
Car                               0.7                         25
Bus/coach                         0.07                        2
Ferry                             0.25                        8
Air (civil aviation)              0.035                       16
Rail                              0.035                       2

Origins of the Data Used. The safety rule study was conducted using a
protocol of questions based on the following framework of steps
(Figure 9.1), which we expected to find carried out in some shape or
form in the railway system, both within the different companies, and
across the interfaces where they have to cooperate. The case studies
concentrated on the maintenance of infrastructure, as it is one of the
most complex and dangerous areas where safety rules play a big role.
     The interviews were based on this framework and were conducted
with a range of informants, who worked for the infrastructure
company, a train operating company, several track maintenance
companies, the traffic control and the regulatory bodies. The topics
covered by the framework range over the link to the fundamental risk
assessment process and the choice of preventive strategies and
measures, before diving more deeply into the way in which rules and
procedures are developed, approved, implemented and, above all,
monitored, enforced or reviewed. The interviews therefore gave a
128                                                                      Resilience Engineering

broad coverage of many aspects of the safety management system and
culture of the organisations concerned, as well as the communication
and coordination across the organisational boundaries that make up the
decentralised railway system.

      1. Define processes,
                                                      Proposed new rail
      scenarios & controls
                                                         processes
          for the activity


      2. Choice of controls
         where rules are
           necessary



       3. Develop & write                                Existing rail
             rules                                       processes




        4. Approve rules        10. Modify rules



                                                                           Feedback to/from
                                 8. Evaluate rule
       5. Communicate &                                                     higher levels of
                              effectiveness, errors
           train rules                                                      control – e.g. to
                                   & violations
                                                                            change process


                              7. Monitor individual
        6. Execute rules        and group use of        Existing rules
                                     rules



       9. Enforce use of
             rules


Figure 9.1: Framework for assessing the adequacy of
management of safety procedures and rules (Larsen et al., 2004)

     ‘Rules and procedures’ were also interpreted broadly, to include
everything from laws and regulations, through management procedures
down to work instructions. We therefore ranged broadly in our
interviews from policy makers in Ministries down to track maintenance
supervisors. The observations that come out of the study can therefore
be expected to give a good view of the resilience of the railway system.
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                      129

     A number of the researchers working on the Dutch and European
projects were familiar with other high hazard industries, notably the
chemical process, steel, nuclear and oil and gas industries. For a number
of these researchers the SAMRAIL project was a first attempt to come
to grips with the railway industry and its safety approaches and
problems. The frame of reference they had, and which they expected to
find in the railways, was conditioned by the very explicit requirements
of the process industries. These included:

•    a documented safety management system, subject to regular audit
     against extensive normative descriptions of what should be found
     in a well-managed system, and
•    safety cases making explicit the major hazard scenarios and arguing
     that the levels of safety achieved by specified preventive measures,
     backed up by the safety management systems, are acceptable, often
     in comparison to quantitative risk criteria.

     The study of the safety rules management system in railways
produced a number of surprises, when compared with this background
expectation. They are presented in the following section, largely in the
form that they manifested themselves in the SAMRAIL study, notably
in response to the questioning under boxes 1 and 2 and to a lesser
extent boxes 6-8 in Figure 9.1. In the section on ‘Assessing Resilience’
we return to the insights presented, but now with spectacles of
‘resilience’ as it was defined at the workshop.


Observations on Safety Management in Railway Track
Maintenance

Explicit Models of Accident Scenarios and Safety Measures

We were surprised to find that none of the railway organisations
involved (the infrastructure manager, the train companies, but also not
the regulator) could provide us with a clear overall picture of the
accident scenarios they were trying to manage. Safety seemed to be
embedded in the way in which the system ran and the personnel
thought, in a way which appeared at first to resemble descriptions of
130                                                      Resilience Engineering

generative organisations (Westrum, 1991; Hudson, 1999). The informal
culture was imbued with safety and much informal communication
took place about it. Yet there was no overall explicit model of how risk
control was achieved. As part of our project, we had to develop a first
set of generic scenarios, and barriers/measures used to control these
scenarios, in order to analyse the part played by safety rules and
procedures in controlling them. This situation is in marked contrast to
what is found in the nuclear, oil and gas and chemical process industries
(or in the US defence industry), where companies and regulators have
worked for many years with explicit scenarios. These concentrated in
the early years (1970s to 1990s) more, it is true, on the stage of the
scenario after the loss of control or containment, rather than on the
preventive stages before this occurred. However, prevention scenarios
have become a standard part of the safety cases for these industries for
many years.
     A similar surprise had occurred when the Safety Advisory
Committee at Schiphol airport was set up in 1997 in the wake of the
Amsterdam Bijlmer El-Al Boeing crash (Hale, 2001). Requests to the
different players at the airport (airlines, air traffic control, airport,
customs, fuel and baggage handling, etc.) to supply an explicit
description of the risks they had to control and how their safety
management systems did this, notably how they interacted with each
other in this control activity, led to long silences and blank looks, or
statements that ‘they were working on them’. Only some 8 years later is
there significant progress in scenario and risk modelling at Schiphol,
and this is still far short of what is desirable (VACS, 2003; Ale et al.,
2004). A similar lack of an explicit model for air traffic control safety
can be inferred from studies of that activity (Pilon et al., 2001; Drogoul
et al., 2003). The Dutch railways would appear to be lagging even
further behind in this respect.

Communication Channels

We were struck by the extreme centralisation of the system and the way
it has consistently discouraged local communication, e.g., between train
drivers and maintenance gangs on the tracks they are running on, and
even direct (e.g., mobile telephone) communication between train
drivers and traffic controllers. Communication is still seen as something
that should occur primarily via the track signals set by the controllers.
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                                                            131

Figure 9.2 is a diagram of the communication channels in the railway
system at the time of our study. This shows the lack of fast and direct
channels between different parts of the system. This paucity of
communication channels, and the limited information available to the
controllers (e.g., only which block a train is in and not where in that
block and what it is doing – riding or stationary with a problem) means
that the system operates to a considerable extent in an open-loop mode.

           Planningof
           Planning   of                                                      Primary production process
             carriers
              carriers

                            Other                                                         External
                                            Traffic & capacity planning
                           regions                                                        reports


                                           Regional network controller


                                                                                      Power switching &
                                                     Traincontroller(s)
                                                    Train  controller(s)              information centre


                                                            Infrastructure(rails,
                                                           Infrastructure   (rails,
           Long term                                       signs,
          instructions,                                             points,ATC,
                                                             signs,points,  ATC,
                                                            blocksystem,   etc.)
                                                             blocksystem, etc.)
         mandates etc.                                      Scene   of accident
                                                             Scene of accident
                                                                 scenarios
                                                                  scenarios

                                                                   Train
                                                                    Train
                                                                  drivers
                                                                   drivers



          TIMETABLE                      Railway              Contractors (maintenance,
                                        regulator            breakdown and modification)
        MAINTENANCE
         PLANNING                                               or
                                                                 Engineering bureau
 Continuous information flow
 Intermittent information flow
                                                          Infrastructure provider
 Determine boundary condition
 Operational information, instruction


Figure 9.2: The railway communication structure (Hale et al.,
2002)

    The safety and other rules then take on a particular role as
feedforward controls. They provide a degree of certainty about who will
be doing what, where and when. Of course this certainty is only there if
the rules and plans are strictly adhered to; hence the great emphasis on
rule knowledge and obedience, which is characteristic of the railway
132                                                      Resilience Engineering

system. We interpreted the discouragement of communication as the
desire to stop rules being altered on-line outside the knowledge and
approval of the controllers. Yet our interviews show widespread need
for local adaptation, since many rules are locally impossible to apply as
written. This is confirmed by many other studies of railway rules, e.g.,
Elling (1991), Free (1994), and Reason et al. (1998). The lack of
communication channels to achieve this on-line adaptation is one factor
leading to widespread routine violations.
     It is perhaps understandable from a historic context why central
control and communication through the track signals grew up. There
were, before the advent of cheap and effective mobile telephony, few
possibilities for distributed communication. The only option was fixed
signals, with local telephone lines between distributed signal boxes.
However, technology has now far more to offer than the railway system
has been willing or able to accept.
     We can contrast this lack of on-line communication about rule or
schedule modification with the situation described by, for example,
Bourrier (1998) in her study of nuclear power plants. She described the
presence of close and effective communication channels between
maintenance workers and rule-makers to allow for rapid rule
modification. Her work was inspired by the High Reliability
Organisation school at Berkeley (Weick & Roberts, 1993; Weick, 1995)
which has, as one of its central findings, the importance of many
overlapping communication channels and checking procedures as a
guarantee of flexible and effective operation in high-hazard
environments, in other words of resilience.

Operating Philosophy

When we consider operating philosophy, one of the most important
issues is whether control is centralised or not.

Centralised Control. We concluded that this highly centralised method of
control means that the system copes with threats to its process safety
by operating an ‘exclusive’ regime. No train or work is officially allowed
to proceed unless the requirements for safety are guaranteed to be
present according to the rules. This is the essence of the block-working
system common to all railways and developed after many years of trial
and error involving train collisions (e.g., Holt, 1955). This assigns a
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                           133

defined section of the rail track to a single train and does not allow a
following train (or opposing train on single line working) to enter it
until the preceding train has left the block. This ensures, if all the rules
are obeyed and nothing in the hardware fails to danger, that there is
always a defined minimum distance between moving trains. Stop signs
(signals) protect the block, and these must stay red until it is clear. The
following train must wait at the red signal, even if it strongly suspects
that the sign is defective. (This is in stark contrast to the behaviour of
road traffic at traffic lights, where red lights, at least in the Netherlands,
are treated by cyclists and pedestrians, and increasingly by drivers, as
pretty coloured indicators to proceed with caution. The high level of
road accidents may seem to show that this ‘laxity’ in road operations
leads to low safety. However, the much higher traffic densities on the
road should make us ask whether the relative safety is in fact lower –
see Chapter 3 on definitions of resilience.) Only after communication
with the controller, through the often-slow communication channels
mentioned above, is permission given to proceed through a red signal.
In other words, safety of the train in respect of avoidance of collisions
is currently bought at the cost of a ‘stop and restart’ philosophy. If the
system moves outside a certain expected and defined safe envelope, i.e.,
deviates from planned operation, the system has to be brought to a halt
in parts at least, so that action can be taken to remove the threat,
reposition the operating elements and then restart the system. No plans
are made on a routine basis to cope with operation outside this
envelope. The controllers therefore have to work out on the spot, or
with a time horizon of only a few minutes, what to do in such cases.
This often means that they are not able to do it fast enough to ensure
smooth continuation of operations without introducing delays. This
improvisation is in marked contrast to the planning of the normal
timetable, which starts around a year before the operations take place.
This approach can cost a great deal in punctuality of running, if things
begin to slip in the timetable, due to unplanned delays, and trains have
to wait at unprogrammed points before they can occupy critical parts of
the network.
     A future development, on which the railway industry has been
working for many years, is to define the protected blocks not in terms
of the fixed infrastructure, but in terms of a fixed envelope around a
moving train. This could make the blocks smaller, but does not
inherently increase the flexibility. The driving force to develop and use
134                                                       Resilience Engineering

this technology is, therefore, to increase the capacity of the network, by
allowing trains to run more closely one after the other.

Towards Decentralisation? Aviation has similar rules allocating slots and
route segments to aircraft, particularly at airports and at busy parts of
the network, but these are already related to the moving aircraft itself
and not to fixed segments of the infrastructure. In this system there are
also new developments, but these would represent a much greater
revolution in operating philosophy, which might move that system
much more towards resilience and flexibility. The ‘free flight’ concept
(Hoekstra, 2001) would leave the resolution of conflicts between
aircraft not to a central controller, as now, but to apparatus on board
the individual aircraft. These would detect other aircraft with potentially
conflicting trajectories and issue advisory flight path changes to the
pilot. Hoekstra proposed a simple algorithm, which would ensure that
the changes made by the two conflicting aircraft would always lessen
the conflict and not cancel each other out. His simulation studies
showed that this simple distributed system could cope effectively with
traffic densities and conflict situations many times denser and more
threatening than currently found in even the busiest airspace. Yet air
traffic controllers, with their current central control philosophy, are
already worried about their ability to cope with existing densities. Whilst
there is still strong opposition to the free flight concept, such
simulation studies do call into question the centralised control that both
railways and aviation appear to be wedded to. See also Pariès’
discussion (Chapter 4) of the possibly inherently safe characteristics of
distributed systems.

Track Maintenance Safety

In contrast to the philosophy of passenger (= process) safety, the trade-
offs for track maintenance seem to occur very differently. Here the
maintenance teams have in the past been expected to ‘dodge between
the trains’ to do their work. Only a minority of inspection and
maintenance work is done with complete closure of the track to be
maintained, let alone of the track running parallel to it a few metres
away. The tracks are laid close together, particularly in the crowded
Netherlands, in order to use up as little land as possible. A project
manager for some new track being laid told us that he had requested
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                       135

permission to lay the parallel tracks further apart to allow physical
barriers to be inserted between them when maintenance was being
conducted on one track. This would avoid the need for evacuation of
the maintenance area when trains passed on the adjacent line, because it
would prevent the maintenance workers inadvertently straying onto, or
being sucked onto the adjacent tracks and would reduce the risk of
equipment in use on or around the one track breaching the safe
envelope of the adjacent track. It would also reduce to some extent the
need for very slow running of trains on the adjacent track. He was told
that this proposal would only cost more money and that there was no
decision-making or accounting mechanism in place to discount that
extra cost against the savings from faster, safer and more effective
maintenance in the later stage of the life cycle.

Controlled Access. There is, according to the Dutch railway rulebook, a
regime of ‘controlled access’ to track under maintenance. This involves
handing control of a section of track over to the maintenance team,
who actively block the signal giving access to it and can make trains
wait until they have cleared the track before admitting them to it. This
can be done by various means, but the commonest is to place a
specially designed ‘lance’ between the two rails to short circuit them and
activate the upstream signal, which thinks there is a train in that block
of track, until the lance is physically removed. Implementation of this
regime would require some development of new technology and rules.
Train controllers have resisted implementation of this regime. The
conclusion we drew from our study was that their underlying reason for
doing this is that it would undermine their central control of the
network and would make their decisions about train running, especially
in unplanned situations, dependent on others outside their direct
control. Because this regime is hardly ever used, most maintenance
work is done with lookouts warning the maintenance workers to clear
the track at the approach of the train. Studies in different countries
(e.g., Hale, 1989; Itoh et al., 2004) have shown that this system is
subject to many opportunities for errors and violations, often in the
name of getting the work done according to the tight maintenance
schedules. Under this regime the casualties among workers are relatively
high. Track capacity is bought here at the cost of safety.
136                                                       Resilience Engineering

Trading Risks. As a coda to this point it is interesting to relate that the
Dutch labour inspectorate has begun in the last few years to insist on
the closure of tracks and even adjacent tracks to protect maintenance
workers (its constituents) and has come into conflict in that respect not
only with the infrastructure manager (responsible for the track integrity,
but also for allocating (selling) capacity to the train operators), but also
with the railway inspectorate, which is concerned with passenger safety.
From calculations made for the latter (Heijer & Hale, 2002), it is clear
that, if the tracks were to be closed completely for maintenance and the
trains cancelled, the increase of risk for the passengers by transferring
them from rail to bus or car to cover the same journey would far
outweigh the extra safety of the maintenance workers by closing the
parallel line. This type of calculation was something new in the debate
between the different parties, which had, up to then, argued purely
from the point of view of the interests of their own constituents.


Assessing Resilience

The observations made above are by no means an exhaustive set of
relevant observations about the resilience of the railway system. The
data were not collected explicitly for that reason, which means there are
many gaps in what we can say from them. It would be necessary at least
to discover how risk controls are developed and used over time in order
to be more certain about those aspects of how the system adapts itself
to change. However, we can use these insights as a preliminary set of
data and conclusions to suggest questions for further study and debate.
What follows is, therefore, in many respects speculative.
     Woods (2003) listed five characteristics as indicating lack of
resilience in organisations. These were expanded on during the
workshop. We have compiled the following list of topics from those
two sources, on which to assess the railways, in so far as our data allows
that.

•     Defences erode under production pressure.
•     Past good performance is taken as a reason for future confidence
      (complacency) about risk control.
•     Fragmented problem-solving clouds the big picture – mindfulness
      is not based on a shared risk picture.
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                        137

•    There is a failure to revise risk assessments appropriately as new
     evidence accumulates.
•    Breakdown at boundaries impedes communication and
     coordination, which do not have sufficient richness and
     redundancy.
•    The organisation cannot respond flexibly to (rapidly) changing
     demands and is not able to cope with unexpected situations.
•    There is not a high enough ‘devotion’ to safety above or alongside
     other system goals.
•    Safety is not built as inherently as possible into the system and the
     way it operates, by default.

     We might wish to question whether we need the term ‘resilience’ to
define these characteristics, since many have already been discussed
extensively in the literature on safety management and culture, which
we have referenced above. However, we will take resilience as a
working title for them. In the next sections we compare the
information we collected from the railway industry with these
characteristics and come to the conclusion that the industry scores
relatively poorly. Hence we conclude that the current good passenger
safety performance seems not to be achieved by resilience.

Defences Erode under Production Pressure

We have indicated above that we believe that the relatively poor record
on track maintenance worker safety is related to the sacrifice of safety
for the train timetable. There is strong resistance to the sort of track
and line closures that would be needed to make a significant
improvement in maintenance safety. There are also too few
mechanisms for considering the needs of maintenance safety at the
design stage of new track. In contrast, train and passenger safety shows
the opposite trade-off at present, with delays in the timetable being
accepted as the price of the stop-restart philosophy, which is needed to
guarantee passenger safety. Currently the railways are resilient in respect
of passenger safety according to this criterion, but not in respect of
track maintenance worker safety.
    It is important to ask whether this current resistance to production
pressure in relation to passenger safety will be maintained. There has
138                                                          Resilience Engineering

been intensive pressure the last five years on the Dutch railway system
to improve its punctuality. Heavy fines have been imposed by
government under performance contracts for falling below the targets
set in relation to late running and outfall of trains. At the same time, the
need for an extensive programme to recover from a long period of too
limited track maintenance has been recognised and launched. This has
resulted from and led to the discovery of many cracked rails and
damaged track bedding. This requires very major increases in the
maintenance program, to achieve its primary aim of sustaining and
improving primary process safety. However, the capacity of railway
contractors is limited and large infrastructure projects like the high
speed line from Amsterdam to Brussels and the Betuwe Route (a
dedicated new freight route from the Rotterdam harbours to Germany)
occupy a large part of that capacity (and the available funds). Train
controllers have been given targets linked more closely to these
punctuality targets, as their task has been modified to give more
emphasis to their function as allocators of network capacity and not
just as guardians of its safety. This has led, according to our interviews,
to increasing conflicts with train drivers reporting safety-related
problems, which would require delays. All of the signs are therefore
present for erosion of safety margins to take place. Our data cannot
indicate whether or not such erosion is taking place. That would require
a much more extensive analysis of subordinate indicators of safety, such
as maintenance backlogs, violations of manning rules, or other signs of
compromises between safety and the timetable being increasingly
decided in favour of the timetable. The jury is therefore still out on this
issue.

Past (Good) Performance is Taken as a Reason for Future Confidence –
Complacency

There are less clear signs here from our interviews. These showed that
the personnel are proud of their passenger safety record and talk about
that aspect of performance to the relative exclusion of the other less
favourable indicators, such as the track maintenance worker safety, or
issues such as level crossing safety. However, there is also widespread
concern about safety performance and about the likelihood that it will
deteriorate in the face of the privatisation and decentralisation, which is
far advanced. So we did not find any widespread complacency, certainly
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                             139

about passenger safety. Track worker safety and level crossing safety are
also priority areas identified in the annual report of the Dutch
infrastructure manager (Prorail, 2003).
     What we do find in documents and workshops (Dijkstra & v.
Poortvliet, 2004) is extensive argumentation that still more demands for
investment in passenger safety for rail transport would be
counterproductive. They would be inclined to increase the prices of rail
tickets, restrict the number and punctuality of trains, and hence
discourage people from making the modal transfer from the road to the
rail systems. We do not, however, interpret this as complacency about
the continued achievement of the high levels of passenger safety. It
seems to fit more into an active concern with system boundaries,
deriving from just the sorts of analysis of relative safety between
modes, which we indicated in the section on track maintenance safety
above. In general, the railways would appear to be resilient according to
this criterion.

Fragmented Problem-Solving Clouds the Big Picture. No Shared Risk Picture

We consider a number of topics under this heading: the presence of an
explicit risk model for the railway system, whether an integrated view is
taken of all types of safety (passengers, track workers, drivers at level
crossings, trespassers, etc.) and the issue of privatisation and
decentralisation as threats to an integrated picture of risk control.

No Explicit Risk Model. As indicated in the preceding discussion of
models of accident scenarios and safety measures, the Dutch railway
system does not seem to have an explicit big picture defined in relation
to its risk control task. The requirement of a system controller that it
has a good model and overview of the system to be controlled is
certainly not explicitly met. When we looked at the implicit picture its
managers and workforce have, as seen through the scenarios we
defined and the control measures we found in place to prevent,
recognise and recover from, or mitigate the scenarios, we found that
pretty well all those we defined during normal operation, maintenance
and emergency situations were covered by rules or built-in barriers, but
that those during the transitions between those phases were not. For
example, a large number of the serious accidents to maintenance
personnel occur in the phase of getting to or from their workplace,
140                                                        Resilience Engineering

which is relatively poorly covered by procedures and safety measures.
We also found the same sort of controversy raging about safety
regimes, which we have described in the discussion of track
maintenance safety. This represents a different view of how safety
should be achieved, between the traffic controllers and the contractors
required to do the maintenance.

An Integrated View of all Types of Safety? A further indicator of a lack of a
clear and agreed risk picture is a split between the departments
responsible for the different types of safety in the system. This split
used to be far deeper in railways (Hale, 1989), with completely different
departments in the old monopoly company dealing with train and
passenger safety and with the working safety of staff. Within the
infrastructure manager this split has now been considerably reduced.
The safety departments have been fused. Safety indicators are brought
together and presented in annual reports (Prorail, 2003) under one
heading. There is also a move in the last few years to relate and trade-
off the different risk numbers quite explicitly, implying an overarching
risk picture at the level of goals.
     When we look at the translation of this increasing unity of goals
into specific risk control measures, we see a different picture. The
technical departments dealing with each type of risk are still relatively
separate, as our example, in the section on track maintenance safety, of
the lack of trade-off possible between track separation and maintenance
costing shows. The consideration of different types of safety measures
is also uneven and unintegrated. Relatively recent risk assessment
studies of tunnel safety (Vernez et al., 1999) still show a relative overkill
in the use of technical safety measures, with far too little integrated
consideration of the concomitant organisational and human factors
issues of clear responsibilities, ergonomic design, communication and
(emergency) organisation. Our study of safety rule management (Larsen
et al., 2004) showed that the railway system is still a technocratic one,
with a mechanistic view of human behaviour and the role of rules in
shaping that behaviour. There is little recognition of the need for on-
line safety to be managed flexibly by those ‘at the sharp end’, which
implies that rules and plans must be modifiable on-line to cater for local
circumstances and situations. Instead rules are seen as carved in stone,
whilst rule management systems often lack clear monitoring and
modification steps, particularly those that would involve ‘actors’ now
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                           141

working in different organisations, but whose actions interact in
achieving railway safety. We can characterise these safety measures as
relatively rigid and lacking in resilience.

Decentralisation and Privatisation. With the privatisation and splitting up of
the system which has taken place over the last few years, there is now
extensive fragmentation of the system, both vertically in the trajectory
from the regulator down through the railway undertakings to the
contractors, and horizontally in the splitting of the old monopolies into
separate infrastructure, capacity management and train operation
companies. The old unity, which was created in the monopoly railway
undertakings through the traditions of employment from father to son,
through life-long employment and restricted use of external
contracting, has now largely disappeared in the Netherlands. This unity
resulted in a relatively common, if technocratic and rigid, picture of
how safety was achieved. As we have indicated, that picture was largely
implicit. With new train operating companies, maintenance contractors
and sub-contractors now being employed, and with the increasing
pressure for the opening of the national markets to foreign
concessionaries, the basis for this common risk picture and practice is
being rapidly eroded. National differences in safety practices are also
being made apparent, as cross-border operations have increased and as
the European drive towards inter-operability of railway systems has
gathered momentum. Many of these are specific and different solutions
to inherent and common problems, such as the form and content of
signals and signs, the way in which rule violations are dealt with, or how
control philosophies are translated into specific hardware requirements.
The European TSIs (Technical Specifications for Interoperability),
agreed at European level between representatives of national railways,
are gradually reimposing a common risk picture, but this process will
take a long time, as each country is required to change at least some of
its current methods. Such a changeover period always produces the
opportunity for misinterpretation and error.

Conclusion. The balance according to this criterion is that the old
resilience, built into the system through its strong safety culture and
nurtured by a stable workforce, is being rapidly eroded. Because the risk
picture was never made explicit, it is particularly vulnerable to such
cultural erosion. On the positive side, the railway industry has become
142                                                        Resilience Engineering

increasingly open to the outside world over the last decade. This has
meant that there is now much more attention to the need for a clear
and explicit safety philosophy and safety management system. The
SAMRAIL project is a manifestation of this. In that project there was
explicit attention for the question of what the railway industry could
learn from other high technology, high hazard industries, such as
chemical process, nuclear and aviation.

Failure to Revise Risk Assessments as New Evidence Accumulates

Here our study does not offer any direct evidence. We have not
penetrated deeply enough into the detailed workings of the system in
our studies to follow the sort of risk assessment processes over time
that would be necessary to draw conclusions on this point. The
concerns about the still relatively watertight compartments within
which decisions about risk are made, make us suspect that there is a
certain rigidity in dealing with risks. Comparison of risks across
domains is still a relatively new activity, meaning that priorities are not
yet clearly open to risk-based thinking. However, the examples of
normalisation of deviance analysed by Vaughan (1996) for Challenger
and in the Columbia report (Gehman, 2003), which both used risk-
based reasoning to justify risk acceptance, do not make us optimistic
that such risk-based priorities will necessarily be safer ones. We already
see risk comparisons being used for justifying not spending money on
low risk problems (Dijkstra & v. Poortvliet, 2004) rather than for
justifying using money on higher risks.

Breakdown at Boundaries Impeding Communication and Coordination

The break-up of the old rail monopolies mentioned in the discussion of
fragmented problem solving above, has led to a significant decrease in
formal communication and coordination. Our interviews showed that
many existing formal communication and joint problem-solving
meetings across what have become external organisational boundaries,
rather than interdepartmental ones, had been discontinued; those which
still existed had become poorly attended, with members complaining
that their bosses had told them to stick to core business and not waste
time on such meetings. Some channels had been diverted, e.g., a
previous direct reporting channel to the train controllers for train
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                      143

drivers to report things that worried them during the trip (such as
trespassers or objects on or near the line, rough track, anomalies in
signals or level crossings) had been diverted to a ‘Helpdesk’, which
seemed to function in the manner too often found with such ‘animals’
i.e., as a barrier and delaying mechanism, rather than as a problem-
solving organ. We found that informal communication channels were
still working, based on people who had previously worked together, and
who still contacted each other to resolve these communication issues,
even though they were now working for different organisations. This
often occurred despite a lack of support from, and sometimes against
the express instructions of their bosses. These channels are, of course,
vulnerable to these individuals leaving their current jobs or retiring.
      We did, however, find evidence of the development of new
coordinating mechanisms, seemingly as a result of the falling away of
the old ones. For example the large maintenance contractors, despite
their competition with each other, had recently formed a group to write
harmonised safety rules and procedures for their own employees and
sub-contractors, since they no longer got those in an operational form
from the infrastructure manager. This group was also starting to put
pressure on the other players to restore the necessary communication
to cope with on-line rule modification and to discuss the issue of
regimes under which maintenance would take place (see the earlier
discussions on track maintenance safety and on the fragmented risk
picture).
      If we add to these points the inherently difficult nature of
communication and coordination in a highly distributed system, spread
across the whole country, with staff constantly on the move, the verdict
according to this criterion must be that railways are currently not very
resilient and are threatening to become even less so.

The Organisation Cannot Respond Flexibly to Changing Demands and
Unexpected Situations

We have discussed the issues relevant to this criterion in the section on
operating philosophy above. The railway system scores very poorly on
this point. Our thesis is that it can achieve passenger safety only
through its ‘stop and restart’ philosophy, and fails to achieve track
maintenance safety because it does not adopt the same philosophy
there.
144                                                      Resilience Engineering

     Another prerequisite for flexibility is that many people can do the
same tasks and so take over from colleagues who are unable for any
reason to perform them. Railways are generally poor at this. The
reasons are partly structural – there is a lot of single manning, such as
for train drivers, making substitution problematical without incurring
very high duplication costs. This is demonstrated when a driver
becomes incapacitated or emotionally stressed by, for example, a
suicide jumping in front of the train.

Not a Great Enough Devotion to Safety

The conclusion from our study of safety rules (Larsen et al., 2004) was
that there was still a very strong concern for passenger safety at all
levels in the organisation, sustained by the still strong culture we have
described above. Our thesis was that this enabled the railway system to
retain its high passenger safety performance, despite the other
shortcomings we have. Our interviews revealed a less fanatical devotion
to maintenance safety, where accidents were regarded rather more as a
fact of life. However, in recent years and under the growing influence
of the Labour Inspectorate, increasing attention has been devoted to
track worker safety (e.g., the Safe Working on Infrastructure project).
This has resulted, amongst other things, in instructions to perform
most maintenance during train-free periods and only stopping a train
service if necessary.
     Our concern for the devotion to passenger safety was one directed
to the future. If the fragmentation and internationalisation of the
railway industry waters down this strong culture, and if the increasing
performance pressures we have identified discussed above erode the
determination of senior managers to place safety first, we can see that
this strong safety culture could disappear, perhaps even at a rapid pace.
Reorganisations, of which the system has had many in many countries
in the last few years, are quite capable of destroying a good safety
culture in a relatively short time, if turnover is high and job security
low.
     Against this trend we can identify the increasing importance of
passenger safety as a core marketing value for railways. In an on-going
project for a high-speed line operator, we see this being placed centrally
at the highest level in the management system goals and performance
criteria. However, we can also note that the overall responsibility for
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                       145

safety in the reorganised railway industry has been a subject of
considerable lack of clarity, at least in the Netherlands. The position of
the rail regulator within the Ministry, and/or within the infrastructure
company was long unclear, undermining the quality of the regulatory
process (Hale et al., 2002). The shifting priorities of the traffic
controllers, from pure safety to more concern for punctuality, also
chips away at one requirement identified in resilient companies, the
presence of powerful gatekeepers whose only responsibility is the
achievement of high levels of safety.
    The large infrastructure projects that are currently being carried out
in the Netherlands (e.g., the high speed line to Paris and the Betuwe
goods line from the Rotterdam port to Germany), on the other hand,
do have a much higher level of thinking about safety, which would
bring those new systems to a higher, more comprehensive, level. There
is some evidence that those insights will also influence safety
considerations in the old railway system. In time this may well result in
considerably higher resilience on this point.

Safety not Built Inherently into the System

Our study has not penetrated into sufficient depth to conduct a
thorough analysis of this criterion for the operation of railways. The
long history of trial and error learning discussed by such books as that
by Holt (1955) suggests that the traditional operations have built in this
safety very well over time. The very performance in relation to current
passenger safety in Europe is testament to this. The current phase of
major technological and organisational development (high-speed cross-
border lines, new technical train management and safety system
concepts, dynamic train management, mixed concepts of heavy and
light rail, etc.) will provide a new opportunity to increase inherent
safety, but also a new opportunity to make wrong choices. Whereas
change management, particularly of technological change, is an integral
part of safety management in the chemical industry, in order to guide
change to the positive side, the railway industry has still to introduce
that aspect into its safety management. We do not, therefore, draw any
conclusions in this area in respect of resilience.
     In the area of track maintenance work, however, we do draw a
negative conclusion. The examples of failure to implement inherently
safer maintenance regimes and to take account of maintenance safety at
146                                                              Resilience Engineering

the design and layout stage discussed earlier are clear indications that
the railway system is not resilient in respect of this aspect.


Discussion and Conclusions

Railways, on this assessment, would seem to be examples of poor, or at
best mixed, resilience, which can, however, still achieve high levels of
safety, at least in certain areas of their operations. Table 9.2 summarises
the verdict on the eight criteria discussed on the last section.


Table 9.2: Summary assessment of resilience of railways

Criterion                                         Conclusion (+ resilient, - not)
1. Defences erode with production pressure        +/-. Mixed evidence & gaps
2. Past performance leads to complacency          +
3. No shared risk picture                         Was +, is now becoming -
4. Risk assessment not revised with new evidence ? No data from our study
5. Boundary breakdown impedes communication - and getting worse
6. No flexible response to change/unexpected      -
7. Not high enough devotion to safety             +, but under threat
8. Safety not inherent enough in design of system -, but gaps in our data

     Passenger safety appears to be achieved by defining very clearly in
advance what are the necessary prerequisites of safe operation and
forbidding operation outside them. This is an extreme version of a
command and control strategy, which has been defined by the
protagonists of high reliability organisations (Weick, 1995) as the
opposite pole to the flexible, mindful organisation called in this
workshop the ‘resilient organisation’. When the system moves outside
this clearly defined safe envelope, the railway system stops, regroups
and restarts only when the necessary operating conditions have been re-
established. Hence safety is achieved by sacrificing goals, traffic volume
and punctuality. The system does not achieve all its goals
simultaneously and flexibly and is not resilient. Yet it achieves a very
high safety performance on this performance measure. We have argued
that this level of performance may be under threat, because we see the
current level of resilience tending to be reduced rather than increased.
     On track maintenance worker safety, the system has a poorer
performance. Here we can conclude that the lack of resilience on the
Is Resilience Really Necessary?                                      147

criteria mentioned provide a reasonable summary of the reasons for this
safety performance failure. The trade-off works here in the other
direction. Punctuality of the trains and traffic volume are bought at the
price of safety. The system is not resilient and performs relatively
poorly. We fear, here also, a decline in performance as the resilience is
reduced even further.
     If our analysis is accepted, we have shown that safety performance
and resilience are, at least here, relatively independent of each other.
This complements the questions raised in our brief intervention
(Chapter 3), in which we argued that road traffic could be called
resilient in some senses, but performs in absolute terms (accidents per
passenger kilometre) poorly. We said there that the performance was,
however, quite good considering the exposure to risk.
     We would appear to have, with railways, a system that is ultra-safe
on one safety dimension, but not a good performer on several others.
We could argue further along two lines:

•    If railways were to work on improving their resilience, they would
     be able to become much better safety performers on other safety
     dimensions, without sacrificing other system goals. The large new
     projects like HSL and Betuwe route provide an opportunity for
     introduction of such improvements. We would then need to study
     if and how more resilience could be built in the conventional
     system and what that would cost.
•    Resilience is only one strategy for achieving very high levels of
     safety. There are others, but these have other costs. We would then
     need to define when resilience is a suitable strategy for a company
     or system and when other strategies are ‘better’.

    We prefer to leave both of those lines of development open for
further discussion, research and analysis.
This page intentionally left blank
Systems Are Never Perfect
Yushi Fujita




    Engineers may well accomplish self-consistent design, but its
    outcome, the artifact, can never be perfect in operation.
    Neither humans working at the front end (e.g., operators,
    maintenance persons), nor humans working at the back end
    (e.g., administrators, regulators) are perfect. The system (i.e.,
    the combination of artifact and humans with various
    responsibilities) therefore cannot be perfect. It is not only the
    variability of human performances but also the human
    propensity for pursuing perfection with prescriptive rules while
    ceaselessly trying to change the system for better, that makes
    the system incomplete and imperfect as the time passes by.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 10
Structure for Management of
Weak and Diffuse Signals
Lars Axelsson


    After the mid-16th century, samurai general Motonari Mohri had conquered a big part of
    Japan he feared that a crisis might arise in his country due to rivalry of local samurai
    leaders. He let his three sons band together, like a bundle of three arrows, to counter the
    threat. His reasoning was that one arrow can easily be broken. A bundle of three arrows
    cannot be broken.
    Yamamori & Mito (1993)



SKI has, in a few recent events at Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) in
Sweden, found indications of weaknesses in the licensees’ ability to
handle weak signals, or diffuse symptoms of problems, and an inability
to take proper actions in a reasonable time.


Problem Awareness

Most of the problems that arise in everyday operations are, on the
whole, anticipated and therefore easy to recognize and manage.
Operations as well as the rest of the organization (maintenance,
technical and chemical analysis, etc.), try to keep up a constant state of
unease and wariness in its ongoing search for deviations. In addition,
clear-cut ways of reporting the discovered problem must be present for
everyone to follow. The reason is simply that a problem that stays with
whoever discovers it, is a problem that remains unknown.
     The Swedish Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) were good at
identifying problems, including the more diffuse deviations, so the issue
here was not a problem of perceiving weak signals. The problem was to
152                                                     Resilience Engineering

translate the signal into something that could be seen as a safety issue
with a potential to grow much larger.


Forum for Consultation

Different parts of the NPP organization have their own meetings and
ways of discussing and analyzing occurring problems. There are also
many decision forums on different levels of the organizations. One
major meeting, where representatives from different parts of the
organization are invited, is the daily planning meeting, which is held
both during general operations and outages. This is an important part
of the organizational structure that supports the immediate evaluation
of concern.
     The daily morning meetings served to state the unit’s operational
readiness and were generally considered efficient. One factor that
affected the efficiency of this meeting was that it was considered a
meeting of the operations department. Although other departments
were present, the forum was not treated as an opportunity for
representatives from other parts of the organization to put problems on
the table and give a diffuse problem a chance to get consulted by the
different competencies present. A contributing factor was that it was
optional for representatives from the other parts of the organization to
attend the meeting. Representatives from the independent safety
department present at the meetings were, most of the time, just silent
observers and did not comment on issues even when it was clear that
some input could have been useful.
     This meant that the daily planning meeting was a missed
opportunity to get different opinions on potential safety-critical issues
out in the open. Neither were decisions looked at from different
viewpoints. Diffuse problems could therefore slip through the
organizational structure of meetings.
     Interestingly enough, this daily morning meeting was seen as an
important meeting with the potential to catch vague problems. Yet
what the NPPs thought was a cornerstone in an efficient structure for
managing problems, was in fact a ‘barrier’ full of holes. The imagined
efficiency of the meeting was not actually grounded in reality.
Management of Weak and Diffuse Signals                              153

Strengthening the Forum

The daily meeting needed better routines in place to make the forum
stronger and actually live up to its potential. The attendance of
representatives from key departments of the organization was made
obligatory. The agenda was updated with checkpoints where every
representative had the possibility, and obligation, to report potential
safety problems – diffuse symptoms that might need further analysis or
action – so the forum could discuss and decide on a line of action.
Decisions taken since the last meeting, regarding vague problems, were
now expected to surface at the meeting. The focus clearly shifted from
the operations view to a system view of the problems popping up in the
meeting. It is emphasized that detected problems somewhere in the
organization must be made known and should be given full attention in
a forum where different competencies are present.
     Of course, this daily planning meeting can lead to other
investigative meetings where people from different parts of the
organization are present and this type of meetings can also be held ad
hoc at odd hours whenever it is necessary. But the daily planning
meeting remains the forum where the current problems should be
discussed to get the overall view of the state of the reactor unit.


Other Fora

Corresponding meetings at higher levels of the organization are as
important as the one described above. These meetings must also have
the same type of structure and process. The meetings’ members should
have different organizational background and perspectives and act as
‘opponents’ to decisions taken.
     Any discovered unclear deviation, especially problems originating
in parts of the organization other than operations, must not lead to
operating with anomalies with unknown causes. Strange deviations
need the attention of many parts of, and all levels of, the organization
for fast action. Different organizational parts and levels that act as
opponents to decisions taken or ongoing analysis, reduces the risks for
staying on the wrong operating track and makes responses to weak
signals and diffuse safety states and unforeseen events easier.
154                                                    Resilience Engineering

    Yet just to have different forums is not sufficient. More important
than that is what information is discussed and how it is communicated at
meetings between which attendees.


A Bundle of Arrows

This text has only looked into one of several ways of keeping the
organization more resilient; in this case keeping up the resistance to
vague problems by having a clear structure for dealing with these
problems early on, thereby preventing them from growing into big
safety issues. My ending is like my beginning: When different
competencies band together like a bundle of arrows the ability to
counter threats and remain strong is improved and the organization and
its defences will rebound from threats instead of being broken.
Chapter 11
Organisational Resilience and
Industrial Risk
Nick McDonald




Introduction

Is resilience a useful term for describing how or whether an operational
system functions effectively over an extended period of time? First, it is
helpful to explore what resilience could mean and how the term could
apply to operations that carry the threat of disastrous failure.
Examining the normal way in which operational systems (and their host
organisations) function uncovers a stark gap between formal
requirements and what actually happens and points to the important
role of professionalism in compensating for dysfunctional
organisational systems. Quality and safety management does not easily
ameliorate these complex problems. This, in turn, poses a problem for
understanding how improvement and change comes about in
organisational systems. A more fundamental question concerns how
technology innovation processes in complex systems could address the
problems of operational life. The notion of resilience could help shape
our understanding of how to address these conundrums, but significant
gaps limit our knowledge about the resilience of operational systems.


What is the Nature of Resilience?

If we can apply the term resilience to organisations and the operations
they support, then it should be clear to what this term refers. There are
a number of obvious ways to use the term, for example:
156                                                      Resilience Engineering

•     To refer to a property of a system,
•     A post-hoc judgement on a successful outcome – so far (the
      system has survived therefore it must be resilient),
•     A metaphor that maps only loosely onto organisational or system
      characteristics.

     Certainly, if the concept of resilience is to aspire to have some use
in diagnosing systems, let alone predicting outcomes, it needs to be
anchored in some clearly describable characteristics – characteristics
which transcend those that may have an occasional association with
organisational success on one occasion or another. Again, using the
opposition ‘resilience – brittleness’ as a general characterisation of
organisational functioning will not be helpful unless it is more than a
general analogy or metaphor drawing comparison with the dynamic
characteristics of physical objects.
     If resilience is a system property, then it probably needs to be seen
as an aspect of the relationship between a particular socio-technical
system and the environment of that system. Resilience appears to
convey the properties of being adapted to the requirements of the
environment, or otherwise being able to manage the variability or
challenging circumstances the environment throws up. An essential
characteristic is to maintain stability and integrity of core processes,
despite perturbation. The focus is on medium to long-term survival
rather than short term adjustment per se. However the organisation’s
capacity to adapt and hence to survive becomes one of the central
questions about resilience – because the stability of the environment
cannot be taken for granted. Therefore, the notion is important of
being able to read the environment appropriately and to be able to
anticipate, plan and implement appropriate adjustments to address
perceived future requirements.
     Thus, resilience seems to reflect the tension between stability and
change in organisational and operational systems, mediated by the
notion of appropriate adaptation. But what is appropriate and to what
environment? Within this frame, the notion of environment is
potentially very broad, including both local disturbances (which cause,
for example, the risk of operational failure) as well as the social and
commercial factors (for example, the requirement to compete) that
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                         157

determine what has to be done to ensure survival of the organisation
itself.
     Commercial and operational risks interact, but the way in which
they interact is not necessarily simple. For example, the notion of
‘safety margins’ is often invoked to imply a linear relationship between
cost-cutting and the size of a theoretical ‘safety margin’. Safety margins
are hard (perhaps impossible) to define, particularly where operational
processes are characterised by routine and regular unofficial action.
There are also different ways of adapting and cutting costs. For
example, lean, low cost approaches to operations are often based on a
focused approach to managing processes, which, while having the
objective of stripping out redundant or ‘unproductive’ activity, may also
direct attention to the fundamental safety requirements of those
processes. Thus, there may be no necessary link between the degree of
apparent redundancy in operational systems and greater safety. ‘Lean’
operational systems may be safer or less safe than traditionally managed
operations and the nature of their vulnerability to risk may be different.
It is precisely because there are different ways of designing and
managing an operation and different ways of cutting costs or otherwise
responding to environmental pressures of one kind or another, that it is
necessary to drive down the analysis to ask specifically and precisely
what characteristics of operational systems could, in fact, bring benefits
in terms of resilience.
     This then suggests a provisional definition of resilience. Resilience
represents the capacity (of an organisational system) to anticipate and
manage risk effectively, through appropriate adaptation of its actions,
systems and processes, so as to ensure that its core functions are carried
out in a stable and effective relationship with the environment.

System Characteristics of Stability and Change

Adopting the notion of an organisational system brings to the
foreground the functional characteristics of systems. Organisational
systems (as open systems) comprise inputs, transformation processes and
outputs. It is important to show how the manner in which an
organisation deals with the physical, social or economic material it
encounters in its operating environment, leads to outcomes that
maintain a stable (or otherwise positive) relationship with that
environment. The real interest in this is where environments are not
158                                                         Resilience Engineering

inherently stable, and where this instability brings a risk of catastrophic
failure to the system. Thus, maintaining stability requires the capacity to
adjust.
     This adjustment can occur at different levels, for example, an
operational group, the organisational system, groups of organisations
contributing to a single operational system, and the fundamental
technologies of such an operational system produced by an industry
group. All of these levels imply radically different timescales for both
operation and adjustment, from short-term operational decisions to the
development of a new technology over a number of years. In principle
all of these levels of analysis are relevant to resilience and are
interdependent, as if each wider layer of the onion sets the context for
how the layer inside can operate. Nevertheless, despite this
interdependence, each layer may require quite distinct explanatory
mechanisms. There may also be tensions and incompatibilities between
the mechanisms that operate at these different levels. In order to
understand the nature of resilience it is probably necessary to develop
an understanding of these different levels and of the relationships
between them.
     As Amalberti (Chapter 16) has argued, it seems clear that the
relationship between system and environment (i.e., risk) will change
according to the stage of development of the technology. The stage of
development of the organisation is just as important (i.e., how the human
role in managing the technology is itself managed and controlled).
These two are closely related.
     In the context of organisational systems, resilience would seem, on
the one hand, to depend on increasing standardisation. The following
are examples of such tendencies:

•     Stronger co-ordination of processes by routinisation of procedures
      in operations and organisational systems;
•     Increased reliability through the removal of variance due to
      individual skill, and ensuring the substitutability of different people,
      through standardised selection and training;
•     Ensuring, through supervision, inspection, auditing, etc. that
      standardisation of the work-process does control the actual flow of
      work;
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                       159

•    Better standardisation of the outputs of the process is made
     possible through better monitoring, recording of those outputs;
•    Automation of routine or complex functions.

     On the other hand, resilience seems also to require a certain
flexibility and capacity to adapt to circumstances. Common
organisational forms of this are:

•    Informal work-practices, which are often unofficial;
•    Distributed decision systems with local autonomy;
•    Flexible/agile manufacturing systems which can adjust to changing
     demand;
•    Technologies that enable rather than constrain appropriate human
     action and modes of control;
•    Organisational systems that can manage feedback, learning and
     improvement.

    It may be therefore that resilience is bound up with being able to
successfully resolve apparent contradictions, such as:

•    Formal procedures – local autonomy of action;
•    Centralisation – decentralisation of functions/knowledge/control;
•    Maintaining system/organisation stability – capacity to change;
•    Maintain quality of product/service – adjust product/service to
     demand or changing need;
•    Use well-tested technologies – develop innovative technical
     systems.

     In order to explore how some of these contradictions are managed
in practice, we will use some examples from our own research to focus
on the following issues: reconciling planning and flexibility in
operational systems; the role of quality and safety management in
fostering improvement; the problem of organisational change and the
role of human operator requirements in industrial innovation.
     It should be borne in mind, of course, that the successful
reconciliation of these contradictions is not just a matter of internal
consistency within the operation or organisation, but crucially concerns
160                                                      Resilience Engineering

enabling particular ways of managing the interaction with the
environment. This is a highly complex interaction. Take organisational
theory as an example. Contingency theories, which posit an optimal fit
between organisational form and environment, have been
supplemented by recognition of the importance of choice of managerial
strategy. This in turn has been modified by an acknowledgement of the
power of large organisations to control and modify their environments,
both through the dominance of the markets in which they operate and
through their ability to create significance and meaning surrounding
their areas of activity (for contrasting analyses see Thompson &
McHugh, 1995, chapter 3; and Morgan, 1986, chapter 8). To adapt this
line of argument to the notion of resilience, it seems clear that there is
unlikely to be ‘one best way’ to achieve resilience, or even several ‘best
ways’. It is important however to understand how organisations, and
those that manage them make choices, and what the consequences are
of these choices. It is also important to recognise that achieving
‘resilience’ (whatever that means) is not just a matter of finding the
right technical solution to an operational problem, but of constructing a
better way of understanding the operational space. Has the notion of
resilience the conceptual potential to sustain a re-engineering of our
understanding of the way in which organisations and the people within
them cope with danger, difficulty and threat?


Planning and Flexibility in Operational Systems

For the past number of years we have been exploring, through a series
of European projects concerning aircraft maintenance, the notion of a
symbiotic relationship between the functional characteristics of an
organisational/operational system and the behaviour and activity of the
actors within the system. While this is a conceptually simple idea, it
requires the accumulation of evidence from a diversity of sources in
order to substantiate it. These sources include, amongst others, studies
of self-reported compliance with procedures in task performance,
observations of task performance, analysis of documentation and
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                          161

information systems, cases studies of planning and quality systems, and
surveys of climate and culture.1

Compliance with Procedures

The idea originated in a study of compliance with documentation and
procedures. A survey of aircraft maintenance technicians in four
different organisations established that in approximately one third of
tasks the technician reported that he or she had not followed the
procedure according to the maintenance manual. Most commonly the
technicians reported that there were better, quicker, even safer ways of
doing the task than following the manual to the letter. This is a
paradoxical result. On the one hand, in a highly regulated, safety critical
industry like aircraft maintenance it seems surprising that such a high
proportion of technicians admit to what is essentially an illegal act,
which violates the regulations. On the other hand, virtually no-one who
knows the industry well has expressed any surprise at this result.
Follow-up case studies demonstrated that it is indeed not very hard to
find ‘better’ ways than following the manual exactly. It is also not hard
to find examples of where an alternative method to the manual, which
has been followed, is clearly not better or carries an undesirable risk.
The manuals themselves are not an optimum guide to task performance
– they have to fulfil other criteria, such as being comprehensive, fully
accurate and up to date. In many organisations the documentation is
not presented in such a way as to provide an adequate support to task
performance. What this establishes is simply that judgement based on
experience is important, along with following procedures, in
determining how tasks are done (McDonald, 1999).
     So far this is not very different from evidence from other domains
concerning compliance with procedures. Indeed the work of Helmreich
and his colleagues (e.g. Helmreich, 2001; Klampfer et al., 2001; Klinect
et al., 2003; Helmreich & Sexton, 2004) in the development and
deployment of LOSA (Line Operations Safety Audit) in a variety of
airlines has demonstrated the normality and pervasiveness of error and



1
        The ADAMS, AMPOS, AITRAM and ADAMS2 projects were funded by the
        European Commission under the 4th and 5th Framework RTD Programmes.
162                                                       Resilience Engineering

procedural deviation in flight operations and in medicine. This is an
important development for two reasons. First LOSA represents a
system audit procedure for recording ‘normal operational performance’.
While Dekker (2005) might call this a contradiction in terms (because,
for example, the act of observation transforms what is observed) LOSA
represents a serious attempt to get nearer the observation of a normal
situation by using elaborate mechanisms to protect flight crew from
organisational jeopardy, preserve confidentiality, ensure remote analysis
of aggregated data, etc. Thus for the first time there is a serious, if not
perfect, window on an aspect of operational life, which, on the one
hand, everyone knows about, but, on the other hand has been hidden
from scrutiny and analysis. The second reason follows from this. The
evidence from LOSA has been important in contributing to a new view
of ‘human error’ in which error and deviations are seen to be routinely
embedded in normal professional practice, and in which the practice of
professionalism is concerned less with the avoidance of error per se,
than with managing a situation in a way that ensures that the envelope
of acceptable performance is commensurate with the context of
potentially destabilising threats and that any ‘non-standard’ situation is
efficiently recoverable. This is the Threat and Error Management
model.

Planning and Supply

However, our studies of aircraft maintenance provide a wider context
for examining professional behaviour. In some ways the flight deck or
the operating theatre may provide a misleading model for contextual
influence on behaviour precisely because the immediate context of that
behaviour is so clearly physically delineated and apparently separated
from the wider system of which it is part – the flight deck is the
exemplar par excellence of this. On the contrary, aircraft maintenance
operations are clearly intimately located in a wider technical and
organisational context, which includes the hangar, airport, maintenance
organisation and airline.
     Aircraft maintenance is a complex activity. It can involve a
maintenance department of an airline performing mainly ‘own account’
work or fully commercial independent maintenance organisations
whose work is entirely third party. There are inherent contradictions to
be resolved – for example, how to reconcile the requisite inventory of
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                        163

parts and tools to cover all foreseeable planned and unplanned work,
while containing capital costs. A major check may involve thousands of
tasks and take several weeks to complete.
     For many organisations there appears to be an unresolved tension
between effective planning and the requirement of flexibility to meet
the normal variability of the operational environment. Some of the
dimensions of this tension can be illustrated on some of our studies of
aircraft maintenance organisations. The ADAMS project included a
comparison of the planning systems of two organisations (Corrigan,
2002; McDonald, 1999). In one organisation, planning was done in a
very traditional top-down hierarchical manner; in the second there were
serious attempts to create a more responsive and flexible planning
process. In the former the maintenance plan originates in the
engineering department (following the requirements of the
manufacturer’s master maintenance plan). The plan moves down
through the system through schedulers to the operational team on the
hangar floor where it is apportioned out in the form of task cards to the
technicians actually carrying out the work. Within this case study,
nowhere is there an opportunity for feedback and adjustment of the
plan itself in response to unexpected developments, problems or
difficulties in the operational group. The second case concerns an
organisation in the process of redesigning its planning system along
explicit process lines, building in co-ordination mechanisms for the
relevant personnel along the process so that plans could be validated
and adjusted according to changed circumstances. Comments from
those contributing to the case study indicated that while not all the
problems were solved this was a big improvement on what had gone
before.
     It is when one examines what happens in the check process itself
that one finds the consequences of problems of planning and also of
the various supply chains that deliver tools, parts and personnel to the
hangar floor. For those at the front-line (skilled technicians and front-
line managers) problems of adequate supply of personnel, tools, parts,
and time seem to be endemic, according to one study, whereas,
ironically, problems of documentation and information are not seen to
be a problem (presumably because these are not relied on for task
performance). Management appear to spend a lot of time and effort
‘fire-fighting’ in a reactive manner, are not confident in managing their
staff, and tend to engage in various protective stratagems (e.g. holding
164                                                       Resilience Engineering

staff or tools) to protect the efficiency of their group but which also
exacerbate instability elsewhere. There is also a certain ambiguity in the
roles of technical staff – for example in relation to precise
understanding of what is involved in supervising and signing off the
work of others (only those appropriately qualified can certify that the
work has been done according to the required procedures) (Ward et al.,
2004).

Professionalism

In organisational analysis and diagnosis often the easy part is to identify
the apparent imperfections, deficiencies and inconsistencies to which
most organisations are subject. What is less obvious may be what keeps
the system going at a high level of safety and reliability despite these
endemic problems. In many systems, what is delivering operational
resilience (flexibility to meet environmental demands adequately) is the
‘professionalism’ of front-line staff. In this context, professionalism
perhaps refers to the ability to use one’s knowledge and experience to
construct and sustain an adequate response to varying, often
unpredictable and occasionally testing demands from the operational
environment. Weick (2001) has written well about this, using the term
‘bricolage’ to convey the improvisational characteristics that are often
employed. However, it is important to keep in mind the notion that
such behaviour is a function of both the environmental demands on
task performance and the ways in which the organisational system
supports and guides task accomplishment (or, relatively, fails to do so).
The way in which this dynamic relationship between action, system and
environment is represented in professional cultural values is illustrated
in a meta-analysis of some studies of aircraft maintenance personnel.
     Abstracting from a number of surveys of aircraft maintenance
personnel in different organisations led to a generalisation that
pervasive core professional values included the following
characteristics: strong commitment to safety; recognising the
importance of team-working and co-ordination; valuing the use of
one’s own judgement and not just following rules; being confident in
one’s own abilities to solve problems; having a low estimate of one’s
vulnerability to stress; and being reluctant to challenge the decisions of
others. What does this tell us? The significance of these values suddenly
becomes rather more salient when they are counterposed to some of
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                         165

the system characteristics of the maintenance organisations to which
many of these personnel belong. As well as the problems of planning
and supply outlined above, such organisations were not notable for
their facility in solving problems (see below). Thus, these characteristic
professional values seem, in many ways, to match the deficiencies
found in such organisations. Essentially, and perhaps crudely, the
professional values can be seen to reflect a philosophy that says: rely on
your own resources, do not expect help or support and do not
challenge, but above all get the job done and get it done safely. Seen in
this light, professionalism compensates for organisational dysfunction,
it provides resilience in a system that is otherwise too rigid. We have
adopted the label ‘well-intentioned people in dysfunctional
organisations’ to characterise this systematic pattern of organisational
life.
      Of course it does not always work out as intended. One of the
prototypical anecdotal narratives from all around this industry goes like
this. A serious incident happens in which an experienced technician is
implicated – there was pressure to get the job done and the official
rules and procedures were not followed. Management are very
surprised that ‘one of the best technicians’ had committed, apparently
intentionally, such a serious violation. It seems inexcusable, and
incomprehensible, until one reflects on what it is that being ‘one of the
best technicians’ actually involves. The role of such people is to use
their knowledge and experience in the most judicious but effective way
to get the job done. Questions are only asked about precisely what was
done, following something going wrong. On other occasions informal,
unofficial practices are everywhere practised, universally known about
but absolutely deniable and hidden from official scrutiny.

Road Transport

There are many other examples of this syndrome. Some of our recent
research concerns road goods delivery in urban environments (Corrigan
166                                                             Resilience Engineering

et al., 2004).2 This urban multi-drop road transport operation is a highly
competitive business that operates over a small radius. The multiple
stops are arranged according to very tight schedules, which are dictated
by the customer’s requirements, rather than the driver’s optimal
logistics. Access is a major problem, with a lack of loading bays in the
city centre, the absence of design requirements for ensuring good
access, and, often, poor conditions at customer premises. The traffic
system in which these drivers operate is congested, with complex one-
way systems and delivery time restrictions. Clamping, fines and
penalties are routine hazards. Coping with the multi-drop system
reportedly cannot be done without traffic violations, particularly
parking violations and speeding. Interestingly, in many companies,
while the driver is liable for speeding penalties the company pays for
parking violations. The constant time pressure leads to skipping breaks.
Neither the working-time nor the driving-time regulations effectively
control long working hours. Of course, the driver has to compensate
for every problem, whether it relates to wrong orders, waiting for the
customer, or delays due to congestion.
     A high proportion of daily tasks are rated as risky by drivers. Risky
situations are rated as high risk to self and others, high frequency, and
high stress, and drivers have no control over them. For example,
unloading while double parking in street involves risks from other
traffic, loading heavy goods, risks to pedestrians, and a rush (to avoid
vehicle clampers). Professionalism is managing these risks to ensure as
far as possible a good outcome. Again, arguably it is this characteristic
of the operating core – the professionalism of drivers – which gives
properties of resilience to a rigid system that is not optimally designed
to support this operation.

Organisational Differences

This discussion has focused on what may be, to a greater or lesser
extent, common characteristics of humans in organisational systems. It



2
       Safety and Efficiency in Urban Multi-drop Delivery is part of the Centre for
       Transportation Research and Innovation for People (TRIP) at Trinity College
       Dublin, and is funded by the Higher Education Authority.
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                          167

is clear however that organisations differ quite markedly. Our research
in aircraft maintenance organisations explored some of these
differences and, again taking a global view, has given rise to certain
intuitive generalisations. For example, certain organisations devote
more effort and resources than others to the planning process. It
sometimes seems as if this commitment to planning comes with an
expectation that the plans will work and a reluctance to acknowledge
when things go wrong. On the other hand, those organisations who are
less committed to planning, have to learn to be flexible in managing,
largely reactively, the normal variation of operational demands. It is
tempting to suggest that some of these differences may be influenced
by regional organisational cultures – but this is the subject of ongoing
research and it is too early to make confident generalisations.
     Looking at the wider literature, a contrasting analysis of what may
be highly resilient systems has been given by the High Reliability
Organisations group. This emphasises, for example, distributed
decision-making within a strong common culture of understanding the
operational system and mutual roles within it. Descriptions of this work
(for example Weick, 2001) emphasise the attributes of organisations
and their people, which characterise the positive values of high
reliability. But some attributes of organisations may have positive or
negative connotations depending of the context or depending on the
focus of the investigation. Thus, the notion of informal practices based
on strong mutual understanding can be seen in the context of Weick’s
analysis to be one of the characteristics of high reliability in
organisations. In another context (for example Rasmussen, 1997;
Reason, 1997), which emphasises the importance of procedures and
standardisation such practices can be seen to be the basis of systematic
violations. A large part of this contrast may be differences in theoretical
orientation with respect to the nature of performance, cognition, or
intention. However, part of the contrast may also relate to real
differences in organisational forms. It is impossible to know how much
of this difference is due to fundamental organisational differences and
how much is due simply to looking at organisations from a particular
point of view.
     At the operational level, therefore, resilience may be a function of
the way in which organisations approach and manage the contradictory
requirements of, on the one hand, good proceduralisation and good
planning, and on the other hand, appropriate flexibility to meet the real
168                                                     Resilience Engineering

demands of the operation as they present on any particular day.
Different organisations, different industries will have different ways of
managing these contradictions. However from the point of view of our
own research with aircraft maintenance organisations, one problem is
that the ‘double standard’ of work between formally prescribed and
unofficial ways of working is hidden. While everyone knows it is there,
the specifics are not transparent or open to scrutiny or any kind of
validation. It is clear that the unofficial way of working both contains
better (quicker, easier, sometimes safer) ways of working as well as
worse ways. Sometimes these informal practices serve to cover over
and hide systematic deficiencies in the organisation’s processes. Thus, a
major issue is the transparency of informal practices – are they open to
validation or improvement? It is important that transparency is not just
to colleagues but also to the organisation itself. Therefore we need to
look at the capacity of organisations to deal with informal and flexible
ways of working. One aspect of the necessary change concerns the
capacity to change rules and procedures to deal with specific
circumstances. There appear to be few examples of this. Hale et al.
(Chapter 18) cites an example in a chemical company and Bourrier
(1998) describes a process by which the maintenance procedures in one
nuclear power plant (in contrast to some others) are revised to meet
particular circumstances.
      However, the issue is not just one of procedural revision, but of
ensuring that all the resource requirements are met for conducting the
operation well. Indeed, the adequacy of documentation and
information systems may, on occasion, be seen to be the least critical
resource. Thus, the issue in not just one of technical revision of
documentation but of the capacity to adapt the organisation’s systems
(including those of planning and supply) to optimally meet the
requirements of the operation. Thus the ‘resilience’ of the operational
level needs to be seen in the context of some oversight, together with
the possibility of modification, change or development at a wider
organisational level. Although this could be done in a variety of
different ways it makes sense to ask: what is the role of the quality and
safety functions in an organisation in maintaining or fostering
resilience?
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                         169

The Role of Quality and Safety in Achieving Resilience

The argument is, therefore, that to be resilient, the operational system
has to be susceptible to change and improvement – but what is the
source or origin of that change? From some points of view quality and
safety management are about maintaining stability – assuring that a
constant standard of work or output (process and product) is
maintained. From another point of view these functions are about
constant improvement and this implies change. Putting both of these
together achieves something close to the provisional definition of
resilience suggested earlier – achieving sufficient adaptation in order to
maintain the integrity and stability of core functions. How does this
actually work in practice? Again some of our studies of aircraft
maintenance organisations can help point to some of the dimensions
that may underlie either achieving, or not achieving, resilience. The
point is not to hold up a model of perfect resilience (perhaps this does
not exist), but to use evidence from real experience to try to understand
what resilience as a property of an organisational system might involve.

The Role of Quality

The traditional way of ensuring quality in the aircraft maintenance
industry has been through direct inspection, and in several countries
within the European Joint Aviation Authorities system, and in the
United States under the FAA, quality control through independent
direct inspection of work done is still the norm. In some companies the
quality inspectors or auditors are regarded as policemen, with a quasi-
disciplinary function, while in others the role of auditing or inspection
is seen to include a strongly supportive advisory role. However, the
essence of the current European regulations is a quality assurance
function – the signing off for work done (by oneself or others) by
appropriately qualified staff. Fundamentally this is the bottom line of a
hierarchical system based on the philosophy of self-regulation. In this,
the National Authorities, acting under the collective authority of the
JAA (and now of the European Aviation Safety Authority – EASA),
approve an operator (maintenance organisation) on the basis that they
have their internal management systems in place (responsible
personnel, documented procedures, etc.). It is this system that is
audited by the authorities on a periodic basis. How far does this system
170                                                     Resilience Engineering

of regulation contain mechanisms that can foster change and
improvement?
     None of the quality systems we have examined contain a systematic
way of monitoring or auditing actual operational practice. Thus, the
‘double standard’ between the official and the actual way of doing
things becomes almost institutionalised. There is a paper chain of
documentation that originates in the manufacturer’s master
maintenance plan, which moves through the maintenance organisation
(engineering, planning, scheduling, operations, quality) and then is
audited by the national authority. This document chain of
accountability only partially intersects with what actually happens on
the hangar floor or airport ramp, because there is no effective
mechanism for making transparent actual operational practice, let alone
a system for actually reducing the distance between the formal
requirements and actual practice.
     It is a requirement for maintenance organisations to provide an
opportunity to give feedback on quality problems. While this may be a
good idea in theory, our evidence suggests that it is not working in
practice. Not all of the organisations we studied had a fully operational
quality feedback system in place. However, even where there was a
system that gathered thousands of reports per year, there was little
evidence that feedback actually influenced the operational processes
which gave rise to the reported problems.

Improvement

In order to try to address this problem, a specific project was
undertaken in order to examine the improvement process. This project
was called AMPOS – Aircraft Maintenance Procedure Optimisation
System. This was an action research project based on a simple idea. A
generic methodology moved individual cases (suggestions for
improvement in procedure or process) through the improvement cycle
(involving both maintenance organisation and manufacturer). The
methodology was instantiated in a software system and implemented by
a team of people who managed these cases at different stages in both
organisations. A set of cases were gathered and processed through the
system.
     Two very broad conclusions came out of this effort. First, that
problems involving the human side of a socio-technical system are
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                          171

often complex and, even if conceptually tractable, are organisationally
difficult to solve. Although it is nonsensical to separate out problems
into ‘technical’ and ‘human’ categories, as a very rough heuristic it
makes sense to think of a continuum of problems along a dimension
from those that are primarily technical in nature to those that are
primarily human. At the latter end, the potential solutions tend to be
more multifaceted (for example involving procedure, operational
process, training, etc.) and require significant change of the operational
system and the supporting organisational processes. Furthermore, it
was not always clear exactly how these problems could (or should) be
solved or ameliorated at the design end – and it became clear that this
was a much more long-term process.
     The second conclusion was that each succeeding stage of the
improvement cycle was more difficult than the last. Thus, while it was
relatively easy to elicit suggestions for improvement, it was rather more
difficult to facilitate a thorough analysis that supported a convincing set
of recommendations for change. Such recommendations have to be
feasible and practicable to implement, which creates yet more profound
problems, and even when such recommendations are accepted by those
responsible for implementing them, it is even more difficult to get these
recommendations implemented, particularly those that were more
complex and challenging. As for evaluating the effectiveness of the
implementation, this turned out to be beyond the feasible timescale of
the project (McDonald et al., 2001).

Response to Incidents

The messages here are much more general than this particular project,
however, and similar fundamental problems can be seen in relation to
the manner in which organisations manage their response to serious
safety incidents. An analysis of a series of incidents of the same
technical/operational nature in one airline posed the questions: what
was done after each incident in order to prevent such an incident
happening again? Why was this not sufficient to prevent the following
incident? One interpretation of the changing pattern of response to
each succeeding incident was that there seemed to be a gradual shift
from a set of recommendations that were technically adequate to
recommendations that were both technically and operationally adequate
– they actually worked in practice. This case study furthermore
172                                                       Resilience Engineering

demonstrated that it is extremely difficult to get everything right in
practice, as unforeseen aspects often come around in unexpected ways
to create new possibilities for incidents. In this case, each succeeding
incident appeared to have challenged the mindset of the team
responsible for developing an appropriate response, disconfirming
initial assumptions of what was necessary to solve the problem, and in
this case, eventually involving the operational personnel directly in
finding an adequate solution (McDonald, 1999).
     This particular case concerned an airline with an exemplary
commitment to safety and well-developed safety infrastructure (a
dedicated professional investigation team, for example). For other
organisations who are not as far down the road in developing their
safety system, the cycle of organisational activity is a rather shorter one.
Some organisations have not been able to satisfactorily reconcile the
organisational requirement to establish liability and to discipline those
at fault with the idea that prevention should transcend issues of blame
and liability. Others have adopted an uneasy compromise, with an
official ‘no-blame’ policy being associated with, for example, the
routine suspension of those involved in incidents, normally followed by
retraining. A lot of organisational effort goes into these different ways
of managing incidents. The more apparently serious or frequent the
incident the more necessary it is for the organisation to be seen to be
doing something serious to address the problem. Such organisational
effort rarely seems to tackle the underlying problems giving rise to the
incidents. On the contrary such ‘cycles of stability’ appear to be more
about reassuring the various stakeholders (including the national
authorities) that something commensurate is being done, than with
really getting to the bottom of the problem.
     The issue for resilience is this. We do not seem to have a strong,
empirically based model of how organisations respond, effectively or
otherwise, to serious challenges to their operational integrity, such as
are posed by serious incidents. The evidence we have gathered seems to
suggest that ‘organisational cycles of stability’ (in which much
organisational effort goes, effectively, into maintaining the status quo)
may be more the norm than the exception. Even in apparently the best
organisations it can take several serious incidents before an
operationally effective solution is devised and implemented. On a wider
scale, there is a disturbing lack of evidence in the public domain about
the implementation of recommendations following major public
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                          173

enquiries into large-scale system failures. One exception to this is the
register of recommendations arising out of major railway accident
enquiries maintained by the UK Health and Safety Executive. In this
case, when and how and if such recommendations are implemented are
publicly recorded. Thus, by and large, we really do not know how
organisations respond to major crises and disasters.

The Management of Risk

The concept of resilience would seem to require both the capacity to
anticipate and manage risks before they become serious threats to the
operation, as well as being able to survive situations in which the
operation is compromised, such survival being due to the adequacy of
the organisation’s response to that challenge. We know far too little
about the organisational, institutional and political processes that would
flesh out such a concept of resilience. More examples and case studies
are needed of the processes involved in proactive risk management and
safety improvement. Such examples should encompass not only the
identification of risk and prioritising different sources of risk, but also
the assignment of responsibility for actively managing the risk, the
implementation and evaluation of an action plan and monitoring the
reduction of risk to an acceptable level.
     In a local example of such an initiative, Griffiths & Stewart (2005)
have developed a very impressive redesign of an airline rostering system
to reduce the risks associated with fatigue and the management of rest
and sleep. This case was based on a clear identification and
measurement of the extent of the risk, leading to the implementation of
a redesigned roster system together with the continued monitoring of a
number of indices of risk to ensure that the sources of risk were
effectively controlled.
     A systemic approach to quality and safety can help address these
problems. Analysing the organisational processes of quality and safety
as a system which receives inputs, transforms these and produces
outputs can help focus attention on what such processes deliver to the
organisation in terms of improvement. Following this logic, we have
produced generic maps of two quality and safety processes, based on
the actual processes of several aircraft maintenance organisations
(Pérezgonzález et al., 2004). Further to this, Pérezgonzález (2004) has
174                                                     Resilience Engineering

modelled the contribution of a wide range of organisational processes
to the management of safety.
     However, these examples do not really encompass the complex
processes of organisational change that appear to be necessary to create
what one might call an adaptive resilient organisation.


The Problem of Organisational Change

Even apparently simple problems of human and organisational
performance require complex solutions. As we have seen, operational
environments are not always designed to optimally support the
operator’s role. The key to understanding the possibilities of change
concerns this relationship between system and action – how the
organisation’s systems and processes are understood as constraining or
allowing certain courses of action in order to meet the contingencies of
a particular situation. However, even if we understand what may need to
change, how to change poses a question of a different order of
complexity. Even if it is accepted that there is a problem, it cannot be
taken for granted that change will occur. The problem of organisational
systems which are apparently highly resistant to change despite major
failure have been particularly strongly brought to public focus in the
establishment of enquiries into the Hatfield train accident in the UK
and the Columbia shuttle disaster in the US.
     From our evidence, for many organisations, inability to change may
be the norm. We have described ‘cycles of stability’ in quality and
safety, where much organisational effort is expended but little
fundamental change is achieved. Professional and organisational
culture, by many, if not most, definitions of culture, reinforces stasis.
This active maintenance of stability is conveyed in the popular
conception that culture is ‘the way we do things around here’. The
complexity of operational systems and the coupling and linkages
between different system elements are also factors that would seem to
militate against a view that change should be easy or straightforward.
From the point of view of resilience, that core of stability in the
operational system and its supporting processes is undoubtedly an
essential characteristic, enabling it to absorb the various stresses and
demands that the environment throws up, without distorting its
essential mission and operational integrity. Thus the argument is not
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                          175

that change is necessarily beneficial, per se, rather it is the
appropriateness of change that is the issue. Resilience would seem to
demand the possibility of adaptation and change to improve the quality
and reliability of a system’s interaction with the environment and to
meet a variety of challenges: to face new threats or demands from that
environment, to incorporate new technologies that change the nature
of the operating process, to rise to competitive pressures that
constantly alter the benchmark of commercially successful
performance, or to respond to changing public expectations of what is
an appropriate level of risk to accompany a particular social gain.
     The overwhelming weight of evidence we have accumulated in the
aircraft maintenance and other industries is that change is necessary,
but also that change is inherently difficult. The slow deliberate process
of change to create more resilient systems is evident from Hutter’s
(2001) analysis of the implementation of safety regulation through
effective risk management in the British Railways system, following the
major accidents at King’s Cross and Clapham Junction, and just prior
to privatisation. Hutter identifies three phases of corporate
responsiveness to safety regulation. In the Design and Establishment
phase, risk management systems, procedures and rules are set up,
committees established and specialists appointed. The main people
involved at this stage are senior management and relevant specialists. In
the Operational phase, these systems, procedures and rules are
operationalised or implemented. Committees meet, audits are
undertaken and rules are enforced. Those involved are primarily
management at all levels and worker or community representatives. In
the third phase – Normalisation – compliance with risk management
rules and procedures is part of normal everyday life. Everyone in the
corporation is involved, with both corporate understanding and
individual awareness of risk (Hutter, 2001, p. 302). What is well
described in Hutter’s book is the process of moving from the Design
and Establishment Phase to the Operational Phase. However, the
critical transition from the operational phase to the normalisation phase
is not well understood, and in relation to the British railways, appears to
have been made more difficult by the privatisation of a previously
nationally owned industry. Thus there seems to be little evidence about
the way in which organisations have made a transition towards a fully
normalised self-regulatory risk management regime. This poses the
176                                                      Resilience Engineering

central problem in our analysis of change in resilience – how to
generate effective change to increase resilience in the operating core?
     There are few empirically based models that describe the
dimensions and dynamics of the organisational change process. One
such model was developed by Pettigrew & Whipp (1991) from an
analysis of organisational change in a variety of industries in the UK in
the 1980s. One of the compelling features of this model is that it puts
the processes of organisational change firmly in the context of the
competitive pressures in the commercial environment that drive such
change. This perspective leads to a powerful analysis that seeks to
demonstrate how the various dimensions of the change process
contribute to meeting that environmental challenge. It is also a model
of quite radical change, which is also appropriate to our analysis of
resilience. Indeed it can be seen as a prototypical study of commercial
resilience. The five dimensions of change which are highlighted in this
analysis are environmental assessment, linking strategic and operational
change, leadership, the role of human resources as assets or liabilities
and coherence. Interestingly, the first of these, environmental
assessment, is perhaps the least satisfactory. Pettigrew and Whipp
emphasise the subjective, intuitive way in which senior management
assess their commercial environment, which contrasts with the
aspirations to rationality of a risk management approach, as outlined
above. What is particularly interesting is the analysis of how that
strategic imperative, which arises out of environmental assessment, is
linked to the particular form of operational change that will deliver
competitive advantage. Successfully achieving such operational change
requires both intensive and multifaceted leadership support at all levels,
and a programme of human resources development to ensure that the
people in the equation become assets, rather than liabilities, to the
change process. The final dimension – coherence – recognises that
successful organisational change is complex and requires considerable
effort to ensure that the different strands and levels of the process
actually do work together to support the same direction of change.
     This model poses a core challenge of theories of resilience to
demonstrate not only how particular operational forms deliver outputs
that have characteristics of resilience, but also what organisational
requirements are necessary to implement these forms where they do
not already exist.
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                         177

Change in Technology

Arguably, in the long term, a more fundamental issue than that of
organisational change is the issue of increasing resilience through
technological innovation. To take air transport as an example, the
impressive record of the aviation industry in dramatically improving its
major accident rate per mile travelled over the last fifty years or so is
commonly attributed to the advances in technological reliability of
aircraft systems. Nevertheless, the human (pilot, air traffic controller)
continues to make a predominant contribution to aviation accidents.
Therefore it is logical to argue that the next generation of aviation
technologies requires a step change in design for human use if a
significant reduction is to be made in the persistence of human action
as a contributor to accidents. The importance of this is emphasised by
the pace of technological change, where the increasing potential for the
integration of different subsystems (flight deck, air traffic control,
airport ground control, for example) means that the roles of the human
operator can potentially be radically re-engineered in a relatively short
time. In such complex systems it is the human operator who plays the
role of the critical interface between different subsystems. To achieve
this, it is necessary to regard the human operator as a core system
component (at all stages of the processes that make up the system) and
whose role and functions need to be addressed from the very start of
the design process.
     Achieving a ‘system integration’ model of human factors, however,
is difficult in practice as well as in theory. In many systems there is a
considerable distance – professional, cultural, geographic – between
design and operation. To take one example, those who write or are
responsible for revising aircraft maintenance procedures are often
surprised when they hear of routine non-compliance with such
procedures. Such procedures are written to be followed and the idea
that, from the technician’s point of view, there might be ‘better’ ways of
doing the task than following the procedure to the letter often seems
bizarre and irresponsible. Nevertheless, this behaviour makes sense to
the technician. Maintenance manuals are designed to be
comprehensive, accurate, up to date, and sufficiently detailed to allow
an inexperienced mechanic to complete a task. This design requirement
does not include being a user-friendly task support for the average
technician. Designing information and documentation systems which
178                                                       Resilience Engineering

more closely meet the way in which the task is actually performed as
part of a maintenance process is a considerable challenge. The routine
errors and violations uncovered by the LOSA methodology likewise
pose a similar challenge to aircraft flight system designers. The same
principle is true for those who design the road transport and goods
handling infrastructure that is used by urban multi-drop drivers. The
examples can be generalised to virtually any context of human activity
within large complex technological systems. The question is: How to
bring operator requirements to the forefront of the design process?
     Currently we have been unable to find any convincing models of
how user or operator needs can be constituted and put into play as a
driver of innovation in large socio-technical systems. This seems to be a
considerable gap in understanding how to develop resilience in new
generation systems. This is therefore the topic of two current European
projects, which address, amongst other things, the role of human
factors in the aviation system.3 The basic idea is as follows. It is
important to capture knowledge about the operator in the system, not
only about those at the so-called ‘sharp end’ of the operation, but all
along the operational process. Much of the relevant knowledge is tacit
knowledge about how the system operates and how people act within
it. This is knowledge that is rarely made explicit or written down, but
which is commonly known. This knowledge has to be transformed to
be of relevance as a source of potential design ideas. The model for this
knowledge transformation process is the knowledge transformation
project teams, described by Nonaka (2002), whose task is to develop
new product ideas. Such teams have to have the requisite variety and
redundancy of real operational expertise to ensure that good ideas can
be generated and thoroughly explored. Knowledge transformation is
not sufficient on its own, however. In a large distributed multi-
organisation system, like aviation, such knowledge has to be shared
between organisations. The model for this process is the theory of
industrial innovation pioneered by Porter (1998) and Best (2001), who
see innovation as coming from the interaction of clusters of



3
      Technologies and Techniques for New Maintenance Concepts (TATEM) and
      Human Integration into the Life-cycle of Aviation Systems (HILAS) are
      funded by the European commission under the 6th Framework programme.
Organisational Resilience and Industrial Risk                         179

organisations – in this case design and manufacturing organisations,
operators and research and development organisations. Within our
adaptation of this model, human factors research and development
(both basic and applied developmental research) is fully incorporated
into the innovation cycle, drawing its fundamental research topics from
problems of innovation and change in system, process and technology.
It is an ecological model of human factors research, which is grounded
in operational reality, integrated in the systems, processes and
technologies that structure the operation, and is interdisciplinary in
setting the human requirements at the centre of a systems engineering
perspective. The broad objective of this research is to model a system
of innovation that can lead to the design of more resilient systems
precisely because they are designed to meet operationally valid
requirements derived from the actual practice of users. It is too early to
see how far this will in fact be possible.


Conclusions – the Focus on Resilience

Resilience has been defined here in terms of a productive tension
between stability and change. The basic stability and integrity of the
system is an important dimension, as is the capacity to absorb major
disturbances from the operating environment and to recover from
failure. The notion of adaptation to the requirements of the operational
environment implies the capacity to adapt and change in order to
survive in a changing environment. The difficulty of understanding
processes of adaptation and change is a recurring theme in this chapter.
     The notion of resilience has to work on at least three levels – the
operation (the individuals, group or team who work through the task
and operational processes, with the relevant technology to produce the
required result or output); the organisation (which incorporates,
organises, co-ordinates, resources and in other ways supports the
operations which produce the outputs that fulfil the organisations’
mission); and the industrial system (which designs and produces the
technologies that make the operation possible). A truly resilient system
should absorb, adapt, adjust and survive at all three levels.
Requirements are different at each of these levels and in some ways
may be contradictory. Thus, for example, systems that rely on informal
flexibility at an operational level are not always transparent at an
180                                                       Resilience Engineering

organisational level. The independence of quality and safety systems
from operational and commercial influence has to be reconciled with
the need for quality and safety functions to be actively engaged with
improving the operation and its processes. The contradiction has to be
resolved between the organisational imperative to change to adapt to
new circumstances or new events, and the sheer organisational effort
and difficulty of successfully engineering such change. Again, such
change should not in turn disrupt the core stability of operational
processes, which are the central requirement of resilience. There are
also many barriers to sharing, at an industry level, critical knowledge
about how an operation really happens. Putting such knowledge to
work in improving the next generation of systems poses further, as yet
unanswered, questions.
      However, resilience is not just about being able to change (on the
one hand) or maintaining stability (on the other). It is critically about
the appropriateness of stability or change to the requirements of the
environment or, more accurately, about the planning, enabling or
accommodating of change to meet the requirements of the future
environment (as anticipated and construed) in which the system
operates. This poses two challenges – both conceptual and practical.
How to conceptualise and formulate hypotheses about the relationships
between operational systems and the demands of their environments?
How to test these hypotheses over the appropriate timeframe with
appropriate longitudinal design?
      If resilience is to be a useful theoretical concept it has to generate
the research that will identify the particular characteristics of the socio-
technical system that do in fact give it resilience. This chapter has tried
to flesh out some of the relevant dimensions, but at crucial points there
is a lack of sound empirical evidence that is grounded in operational
reality, is systemic (located in its technical and organisational context),
dynamic (i.e., concerns stability and change over time) and ecological
(i.e., concerns systems in their environment). Unless this evidence gap
is addressed, the concept of organisational resilience is in danger of
remaining either a post-hoc ascription of success, or a loose analogy
with the domain of the mechanical properties of physical objects under
stress, which allows certain insights but falls short of a coherent
explanation.
An Evil Chain Mechanism
Leading to Failures
Yushi Fujita




    Setting a higher goal for long-term system performance
    requires a variety of improvements such as improving yield,
    reducing operation time, and increasing reliability, which in
    turn leads to a variety of changes such as modifying the artifact
    (i.e., technical system), changing operating methods (either
    formally or informally), and relaxing safety criteria. These
    changes may implant potential hazards such as a more
    complicated artifact (i.e., technical system), more difficult
    operation, and smaller safety margins, which further may result
    in decreased reliability, decreased safety, and decreased long-
    term performance. The end results may be long interruptions
    or even the termination of business. It is important to
    understand that adaptive and proactive human behaviors are
    often acting as risk-taking compensation for the potential
    hazards behind the scenes, even though they are often admired
    as professional jobs. A resilient system can cut this evil chain
    by detecting and eliminating potentially hazardous side effects
    caused by changes.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 12
Safety Management in Airlines
Arthur Dijkstra




Introduction

Aviation has gone through a change and development from when ‘the
aircraft was made of wood and the men of steel’ to a situation where
‘the aircraft is made of plastic and operated by computers’. This refers
to the many sides of change in the domain of aviation (which, of course
also applies to other industries). Aviation has grown into a highly
complex and dynamic industry where the margins for profitability are
small. Airline companies are maximising production on minimal costs
while trying to avoid accidents. Competition is fierce and cost cutting is
the focus for economic survival. The environment to which an airline
has to adapt is constantly changing. Airlines start network organisations
and specialise in specific markets; rules and regulations are changing
due to multilateral agreements where national laws are replaced by
international regulations; and the technological change of the recent
years has influenced aircraft operations and airline management
strategies considerably.
     In the early years, the men of steel had to deal with unreliable
technical systems on board their aircraft. Accidents in those days were
attributed to technical failure. This was a wide accepted cause since
technical reliability was not very high. Over the years systems became
more reliable, accurate and complex. Slowly accident causation
explanations shifted from technology to the human operator. The
prevailing view was that if machines performed as designed it must
have been the human who failed. The conclusion of ‘human error’ as
cause was accepted for some time, but now, increasingly, human error
184                                                        Resilience Engineering

is the initiation of investigation and not the endpoint. Organisational as
well as technological aspects have come into focus as contributing
factors for accidents. This was the result of the recognition that human
action does not occur in a vacuum but in a context of organisational
and technological factors.
     This is the background in which airline safety management has
contributed to a safety level of one accident in about a million flights.
Other main parties that contributed to safety improvement are the
airline manufactures, Air Traffic Control services and regulators, but
they are not discussed here any further. The increase in safety level has
slowly declined and asymptotically approached its current apparent
limit. I will discuss the developments in safety management, supported
by interviews with accountable managers and safety practitioners. Some
problems will be indicated and a wish list on how to move towards
resilience engineering will be proposed.


How Safe is Flying?

To illustrate the safety of air travel the Boeing website gives the
following data (Boeing 2005).

      In 2000, the world’s commercial jet airlines carried
      approximately 1.09 billion people on 18 million flights, (Figure
      12.1) while suffering only 20 fatal accidents.

      In the United States, it’s 22 times safer flying in a commercial
      jet than travelling by car, according to a 1993-95 study by the
      U.S. National Safety Council. The study compares accident
      fatalities per million passenger-miles travelled. The number of
      U.S. highway deaths in a typical six-month period (about
      21,000) roughly equals all commercial jet fatalities worldwide
      since the dawn of jet aviation four decades ago. In fact, fewer
      people have died in commercial airplane accidents in America
      over the past 60 years than are killed in U.S. auto accidents in a
      typical three-month period. For the year 2000, 41,800 people
      died in traffic accidents in the U.S. while 878 died in
      commercial airplane accidents.
Safety Management in Airlines                                        185




Figure 12.1: Accident rate history. Source: Boeing (2005)

     A comparison between transport modes is shown in Figure 12.2.


Current Practices in Safety Management

ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organisation), IATA (International
Aviation Transport Association) and the FAA (Federal Aviation
Administration) in the United States and the JAA (Joint Aviation
Authorities) are the legal bodies that regulated safety management in
airlines.
     An important issue in safety management is the place in the
organisation of the safety department. This place influences the ‘span of
control’ in the organisation by the number of department boundaries
that have to be crossed horizontally or vertically. Regulations allow two
ways of implementing a safety office into an airline organisation. One
way of organisation is that the flight safety department is directly
connected to the board of directors and directly reports to the COO
(Chief Operating Officer) and consequently the department has a
companywide scope of safety issues. The other is that each main
organisational branch has its own safety department. The different
186                                                     Resilience Engineering

safety departments then have to coordinate safety issues that pass
organisational boundaries. Directors of the safety departments report to
the president of the branch and always have a bypass access to the
COO. Safety discussions that cross organisational boundaries
horizontally, like flight operations talking to aircraft maintenance, can
show different interpretations of safety issues. For example, an engine
that failed during ground operation is regarded by the maintenance
department as a pure technical failure with no impact at flight safety,
while the flight operations department regards this failure as a flight
safety related failure because they consider the question of what would
have happened if the aircraft had just got airborne.
     The practices of safety management are more or less the same
across airlines. Airline safety management systems have to comply with
FAA, JAA and IATA regulations, which are audited by audit programs.
Leverage points for change in safety practices can thus be created by
the changes in the regulations.
     By analysing the practices at the safety department and the way
information is used in the organisation to deal with risk and safety
matters, the underlying theoretical concepts and models of risk and
safety that these practices represent can be extracted. These models are
not made explicit in the FAA, JAA, ICAO or IATA documentation nor
in the safety department. People working at the safety department,
including management, have no clear picture of why they do what they
do. Practitioners and regulations do not refer to any underlying
theoretical foundation for the practices. Comments on this observation
are that it has always been done more or less like this and there are no
alternative safety management practices, just some variations on
common themes. Progress in safety and to break the current safety level
cannot be expected to be initiated by the airlines themselves. They lack
the resources, like time and knowledge for innovations, so help is
needed from, e.g., the field of Resilience Engineering to supply
alternatives to current practices. Since airlines follow the regulator
requirements, regulations that include resilience engineering concepts
might support progress on safety.

Data Sources that Shape the Safety Practices

Work in a safety department consists of data collection and
organisation, composing  management    reports,   conducting
Safety Management in Airlines                                                              187

investigations into accidents or incidents and feeding line management
with safety related information. The different sources are listed and
later an example will be discussed on how information is presented to
management. Various sources of data are used and combined in the
attempt to create a picture about current risks and safety threats.
     The confidentiality of operators, such as pilots, has consequences
for data collection. Protocols for data collection and usage have been
agreed upon with the pilots’ unions. Information about pilots’ names
may never get known outside the safety department. In addition, data
may never be used against pilots unless there is gross negligence or
wilful misconduct (which is of course hard to define). Such pilot
protection positively supports the willingness to report, the fear of
blame is minimised and more reports about safety matters will likely be
submitted to the safety department.

Air Safety Reports. A critical issue in data collection from reports is what
events are reported and how this is done. The commander of an aircraft
may always use his own judgement on what events to report and they
are supported by an operating manual, which states what events must
be reported. Airlines have different sorts of incidents that are defined as
occurrences associated with the operation of an aircraft, which affects
or could affect the safety of operation. A partial list defining incidents is
shown in Figure 12.2.

 Air Traffic incident
               A serious incident involving Air traffic Control
 Technical incident
               Damage or serious cracks, corrosion etc found during maintenance or inspections
               Fires and false fire warnings
               Contained engine problems
               Failure of onboard systems requiring non-normal operating procedures
 Ground incident
               Collision with cars, terrain etc.
 Operational incident
               Not being a technical or air traffic incident
               Incapacitation of a crewmember
               Rejected take-off
               Exceeding operational limitation e.g. hard landing, over speed, low speed
               A significant error in fuelling or load sheet
               Critically low in-flight fuel quantity
               A significant deviation from track of flight level
               Landing at airport other than destination except for reasons of weather

Figure 12.2: Examples of incident description
188                                                       Resilience Engineering

     Some occurrences are also triggered by other data collection
methods (e.g., automatic aircraft data registration) which will be
mentioned later. When an event is not triggered by another data
collection method, the issue of reporting culture becomes important.
Reporting is an aspect of a safety culture (Reason, 1997). In a good
safety culture, reporting of safety threats is welcomed and supported.
Conversely, relevant safety information may never get into the safety
department when pilots are not willing to report or do not see a use in
reporting.
     Currently, reports are paper forms filled out by pilots. In the future,
on-board computers may be used for filling out the report. The boxes
to tick and comments to make should give a representation of the
event. The contextual description of the event is done with aspects
such as, time, altitude, speed, weather, aircraft configuration etc. The
event description itself is a block of free text and the information to
include is up to the writer.
     Some pilot reports are very short and minimal information is given
by the pilots. This may give the impression to the reader that the report
was written just to comply with the rules and that it was not regarded as
a serious event by the pilots. Also professional pride in their work may
make pilots reluctant to submit long reports explaining their own
(perceived) imperfect work. Maybe some pilots have some fear of
negative judgement about their performance. Incidents are assessed at
the safety office and pilots may be invited to see a replay of the flight
data if the safety officer decides so. For this process a protocol is
established between the pilot unions and the airlines. This process will
not be the same across all airlines since this is a delicate issue for the
unions because of the fear of pilot prosecution. Recent developments
fuel this fear. In Japan, a captain was prosecuted when a flight attended
got wounded and finally died after her flight had gone through heavy
turbulence. In the Netherlands, two air traffic controllers were
prosecuted when an aircraft taking off almost collided with an aircraft
crossing the same runway. It takes a long time before these fears fade
away. There is a saying among pilots that they do not want to face the
‘green table’. This is a ghost image of being held responsible for some
mishap on the basis of hindsight. There is a feeling of unfairness that
that pilots have to take their decisions sometimes in split seconds and
that the investigation committee can take months and have knowledge
of the outcome.
Safety Management in Airlines                                                                            189

    Air safety reports are kept in specially designed database programs.
Each event is assigned a risk level according to the IATA risk matrix
(Figure 12.3) or an own matrix developed by the airline.
                                                     Severity / Scope of Damage

  Likelihood or        Insignificant        Minor            Moderate           Critical     Catastrophic
    Probability         No or minor     Minor injury or      Serious but      Permanent       May cause
 that an incident /       injury or     minor property     non-permanent      disability or death or loss of
accident or damage       negligible        damage             injuries or    occupational      property
      occurs              damage                             significant  illness or major
                                                               property         property
                                                               damage           damage
       Often              Medium             High            Substantial      Substantial      Substantial

   Occasionally           Medium             High               High          Substantial      Substantial

      Possible             Small           Medium               High             High          Substantial

      Unlikely             Small           Medium             Medium             High             High

     Practically           Small             Small             Small           Medium           Medium
     impossible
4 risk levels

Small risk            safety is largely guaranteed

Medium risk           safety is partially guaranteed
                      normal protective measures are required
High risk             safety is not ensured,
                      protective measures are urgently required
Substantial risk      safety is not ensured, enhanced protective measures are urgently required



Figure 12.3: IATA risk matrix

    Every day many reports are processed and the assignment of a risk
level is a judgement based on experience. There is not time for a
methodological approach to risk assessment for every event. This is not
considered a shortcoming. Some airlines have a 3 by 3 matrix for risk
assessment and as a reaction on the question, whether so few scales
does not oversimplify too much, the answer was based on a practical
approach: ‘that you can’t go wrong more than two scales’, which means
you are almost always nearly correct.
    With an interval of several weeks, trend reports are made and the
reports are assessed with a team consisting of safety officers and a
representative from the aircraft type office, e.g., a flight technical pilot.
The risk level might be reassessed with expert judgement and further
possible actions on specific reports and possible trends are discussed.
190                                                       Resilience Engineering

The challenge in these meetings is to distinguish between noise and
signal with respect to threats for safety. How can attention in a smart
way be given to the events that have the potential to become incidents
or even accidents? What are the signals that indicate a real threat and
how can the evaluation of all the 100 to 200 reports per month in an
average airline be managed?
    In addition to risk, analysis reports are also categorised. The
categories used to classify the air safety reports are a mix of genotypes
and phenotypes. There is, e.g., a category with ‘human factors’ which is
a genotype, inferred from data from the report, and a category with ‘air
proximities’ (insufficient separation between aircraft) which is a
phenotype, the consequence of something. The problems caused by
mixing genotypes and phenotypes, such as mixing causes and effects,
are discussed by Hollnagel (1993a).

Accident or Incident Investigations. The ICAO emphasises the importance
of analysis of accidents and has published an annex, which is a strongly
recommended standard, specifically aimed at aircraft accident and
incident investigations. ICAO requests compliance with their annexes
from their member states, which are 188 (in 2003) countries in total.
The ICAO document with its annexes originates from 1946, and today
ICAO annex 13 is used as the world standard for investigations
conducted by airlines and the national aviation safety authorities such as
the NTSB (National Transport Safety Board).
     Annex 13 provides definitions, standards and recommended
practices for all parties involved in an accident or incident. One specific
advantage from following annex 13 is the common and therefore
recognisable investigation report structure along with terms and
definitions.
     Annex 13 stresses that the intention of an investigation is not to
put blame on people but to create a learning opportunity. To seek to
blame a party or parties creates conflict between investigations aimed at
flight safety, focussed on the why and how of the accident and
investigations conducted by the public prosecutor aimed at finding who
to blame and prosecute. Fear of prosecution reduces the willingness of
actors in the mishap to cooperate and tell their stories. Conflicting
investigation goals hamper the quality of the safety report and reduce
the opportunity to learn.
Safety Management in Airlines                                                              191

     For classifying an event as an accident the ICAO annex is used.
The ICAO definition of an accident states that it is when a person is
injured on board or when the aircraft sustains damage or structural
failure that adversely affects the structural strength, performance or
fight characteristics and would require major repair, except for
contained engine failure or when the aircraft is missing. This definition
does not lead to much confusion but the definition of a serious incident
is more negotiable, see Figure 12.4.

 Air Traffic incident
               A serious incident involving Air traffic Control
 Technical incident
               Damage or serious cracks, corrosion etc found during maintenance or inspections
               Fires and false fire warnings
               Contained engine problems
               Failure of onboard systems requiring non-normal operating procedures
 Ground incident
               Collision with cars, terrain etc.
 Operational incident
               Not being a technical or air traffic incident
               Incapacitation of a crewmember
               Rejected take-off
               Exceeding operational limitation e.g. hard landing, over speed, low speed
               A significant error in fuelling or load sheet
               Critically low in-flight fuel quantity
               A significant deviation from track of flight level
               Landing at airport other than destination except for reasons of weather

Figure 12.4: ICAO definitions

     Due to lack of support from the definitions, safety officers decide
on the basis of their knowledge and experience how to classify an
event. Based on ICAO event categorisation and or the risk level
assigned, the flight safety manager and chief investigator will advise the
director of flight safety whether to conduct a further investigation on
this event.
     Accidents are often investigated by the national transport safety
authorities in collaboration with other parties such as the airline
concerned, aircraft and engine manufacturers. An incident investigation
in an airline is conducted by several investigators, of which often at
least one is a pilot (all working for the airline) and often complemented
by a pilot union member, also qualified as an investigator. Analysis of
the collected accident data occurs often without a methodology but is
based on experience and knowledge of the investigating team. This
192                                                     Resilience Engineering

means that the qualifications of the investigators shape the resulting
explanation of the accident. An investigation results in a report with
safety recommendations aimed at preventing subsequent accidents by
improving, changing or inserting new safety barriers. Responsibilities
for the safety department stop when the report is delivered to line
management. Line management has the responsibility and authority to
change organisational or operational aspects to prevent re-occurrence
of the accident by implementing the report recommendations.
     It is repeatedly remarked that (with hindsight) it was clear the
accident or incident could have been avoided if only the signals that
were present before the accident were given enough attention and had
led to preventive measures. Is this the fallacy of hindsight or are there
better methods that can help with prevention?

Flight Data Monitoring and Cockpit Voice Recorder. Another source of data
consists of the on-board recording systems in the aircraft that collect
massive amount of data. The flight data recorders (the ‘black boxes’)
record flight parameters such as speed, altitude, aircraft roll, flight
control inputs etc. The aircraft maintenance recorders register system
pressures, temperatures, valve positions, operating modes etc. The
flight data and maintenance recordings are automatically examined after
each flight to check if parameters were exceeded. This is done with
algorithms that check, e.g., for an approach to land with idle power.
This is done by combining parameters. Making these algorithms, which
are aircraft specific, is a specialised job.
     The cockpit voice recorder records the last 30 minutes of sounds in
the cockpit. This is a continuous tape which overwrites itself so that
only the last 30 minutes are available from the tape. The sound
recording stops when a pilot pulls the circuit breaker to save the
recordings or when the aircraft experiences severe impact during a
crash. Data from the cockpit voice recorder are only used in incident or
accident investigations and the use of information from this tape is
strictly regulated by an agreement between the airline and the pilot
union to preserve confidentiality of the pilots.

Quality and Safety. JAR-OPS (Joint Aviation Requirements for
Operations) states that the quality system of an operator shall ensure
and monitor compliance with and the adequacy of, procedures required
to ensure safe operational practices and airworthy airplanes. The quality
Safety Management in Airlines                                         193

system must be complied with in order to ensure safe operations and
airworthiness of the airline’s fleet of aircraft. This statement is
indicative of a perspective that safety and quality have a large overlap,
and that safety is almost guaranteed as long as quality is maintained.
      Quality management is currently regarded as a method of pro-
active safety management. While accident and incident investigations
are re-active, quality audits and inspections are pro-active. Quality
audits compare organisational processes and procedures as described in
the companies’ manuals with the rules, regulations and practices as
stated in, e.g., the JAR or IOSA. Company rules and procedures should
comply with these standards and should be effective. The measure of
effectiveness is based on a ‘common sense’ approach (remark by an
IATA accredited auditor) and compared to best practices as performed
by other airlines. Auditors are mostly not flight safety investigators and
vice versa. Quality inspections are observation of people at work and the
comparison of their activities with the rules and regulations as described
by the company in the manuals. Audit observations and interpretations
are thus clearly not black and white issues but are, to a certain extent,
negotiable. Audits and inspections lead to recommendations for
changes to comply with rules and best practices.

Airline Safety Data Sharing. Safety data is shared among airlines as
reported in the GAIN (Global Aviation Information Network, 2003)
work package on automated airline safety information sharing systems.
Several systems for data exchange exist with the aim of learning from
other airline’s experiences. No single airline may have enough
experience from its own operations for a clear pattern to emerge from
its own incident reports, or may not yet have encountered any incidents
of a type that other airlines are beginning to experience. In some cases,
such as introducing a new aircraft type or serving a new destination, an
airline will not yet have had the opportunity to obtain information from
its own operations. Therefore, the importance of sharing information
on both incidents and the lessons learned from each airline’s analysis of
its own safety data is also becoming more widely recognised.
     When, for example, an airline has a unique event, the safety officer
can search in the de-identified data for similar cases. If useful
information is found, a request for contact with the other airline can be
made to the organisation supervising the data. Via this organisation the
194                                                      Resilience Engineering

other airline is requested if contact is possible. This data sharing has
been very useful for exchanging knowledge and experience.

Safety Organisation Publication. Organisations like the FSF (Flight Safety
Foundation), GAIN, ICAO organise seminars and produce
publications on safety-related issues. Periodical publications are sent to
member airlines where those papers are collected and may serve as a
source of information when a relevant issue is encountered. Daily
practice shows that due to work pressure little or no time is used to
read the information given through these channels. The documents are
stored and kept as a reference when specific information is required.
     As a summary, an overview of the mentioned data sources is
supplied in Figure 12.5.

Safety Management Targets

Even though airlines may not market themselves as ‘safe’ or ‘safer’,
safety is becoming a competitiveness aspect between airlines. This can
be seen from the several websites that compare airlines and their
accident history. The disclaimers on these sites indicate that such
ratings are just numbers and the numbers only give a partial picture of
the safety level of an airline. The way data are complied could tell a lot
about the validity of the ranking numbers but the general public might
not be able to make such judgements. Still, there is a ranking and it
could influence people’s perception of safe and less safe airlines.
     The term ‘targets’ is confusing if the number is higher than zero.
Does an airline aim for, e.g., five serious incidents? No, in safety the
word target has more the meaning of reference. This is what I
understood when discussing this with safety managers, but still the
word target is used.
     Safety targets can be defined as the number of accidents,
sometimes divided into major- and minor accidents, serious incidents
and incidents and this number is indicative of safety performance. The
definitions used for event categorisation are very important because this
determines in which category an event is counted. As a reference for
definitions, the ICAO annex 13 is used. These definitions are widely
accepted but interpretations, as in which category an occurrence is
placed, are often highly negotiable. A large list of event descriptions is
published in annex 13 to facilitate these categorisation process
Safety Management in Airlines                                                                         195

discussions. The trap here is that events are compared with items on
the list on phenotypical aspects, on how the event appears from the
outside, while the underlying causes or genotypes may make the events
qualitatively different. This makes the judgement for severity, what
determines the classification, very negotiable.
Data source           Method of compilation               Interpretation and usage

Air Safety reports    Paper report sent by pilots         The rules require the submission of a report.
                                                          Safety officer categorises and assigns risk
                                                          level.
Investigations of     Team of investigators need 3 to 9 Recommendations are discussed with line-
accidents and         months to complete the report     management, accepted recommendations
incidents             and compile recommendations. must be incorporated.
Flight data           Automatic registration of flight  Screened by computers, when outside
monitoring            and system parameters             bandwidth a specialist makes interpretation
                                                        and can advise for further investigation.
Cockpit voice         Automatic recording of last 30 to   Only used in accident investigation under strict
recorder              90 minutes of sounds in the         rules.
                      cockpit.
Quality audits        Regulations require audits done     Recommendations must be complied with.
                      by qualified auditors
Airline data share    Automatic exchange of de-           Database interrogated when specific
                      identified data                     information is required.
Safety organisation   Organisations send their            Publications browsed and stored.
publications          members publications.

Figure 12.5: Overview of data sources

     The target value for accidents is zero, but some airlines distinguish
between major and minor accidents and have a non-zero value for
minor accidents. The target values for serious accidents and incidents
are often based on historical data, and the number from previous year is
then set as the target.
     An airline’s current safety status can be expressed in counts of
occurrences. Occurrences are categorised in a fixed number of
categories and are assigned a risk level and are published in
management reports together with historical data to show possible
trends. Quantitative indicators may, in this manner, lead to further
investigations and analyses of categories with a rising trend while absent
or declining trends seldom invoke further analysis.
     Workload is high in a safety department as in other production
related offices. Much work has to be done with a limited number of
people and this results in setting priorities and shifting attention to
196                                                      Resilience Engineering

noticeable signals such as rising trends, accidents and incidents. Weaker
signals and investigations into factors higher in the organisation that
could have negative effects may consequently get less attention than
practitioners really want. For example, can we find threats due to a
reduction of training, which have not yet been recognised in incidents?
These are pro-active activities for which currently the time and
knowledge is lacking. Daily administrative duties and following up
‘clear’ signals such, as air safety reports, absorb the available human
resources.
     On a regular basis, management information is complied from
reports and data monitoring. The data presentation shows graphical
counts of occurrences, risk classification and history. Text is added with
remarks about high risk events, and there is other explanatory text
written by the flight safety manager. A de-identified extract of such a
report is shown as an example in Figure 12.6.




Figure 12.6: Example of safety data presentation for management

     Upper management is very time constrained and safety information
must be delivered in a simple representation. This (over)simplification
is recognised, but ‘that is the way the management world works’. These
kinds of reports have to trigger upper management for requests for
further investigation on the why and how on specific issues. Some
reports for upper management compare actual counts compared to the
safety targets. It would be interesting to know what meaning is assigned
Safety Management in Airlines                                           197

by upper managers to a value that is below the target. Is it only when a
count exceeds the target that action is required? Much has been
published on the problems of using counts as indicators (Dekker,
2003a).

Summary Safety Practices

This is a description of current airline safety management practices
constructed from GAIN reports and communication with practitioners
and responsible managers. Different sources of data show that the
aviation community puts much effort into sharing information and
trying to learn. Many data are of the same dimension, and
manifestations of events and common underlying patterns are
occasionally sought. Events are converted into numbers, classifications
and risk levels and numbers are the main triggers for action from
management. This is the way it has been done for a long time and
practitioners and management lack resources to self-initiate substantial
changes to safety management. They have to turn to science to supply
practical diagnostic and sensitive approaches. When no alternatives are
supplied, safety management will marginally improve and numbers will
rule forever.
     In the next sections the theoretical foundation of the current
practices will be discussed and in the final section I propose a ‘wish list’
of what would be necessary to move forward in practice.


Models of Risk and Safety

Aviation is very safe, on average one accident in a million flights, so
why should airlines try to improve this figure while they experience
almost no accidents? Managers come and go about every three years,
often too short to experience the feedback from their actions. Many
years may pass, depending of airline size and flight frequency, before an
accident occurs. From the manager’s perspective it can be hard to
justify safety investments; which have unclear direct results, especially in
relation to cost-cutting decisions that have clear desired short term
effects and are deemed necessary for economical survival. How do
most accountable managers and practitioners perceive flight safety data,
198                                                      Resilience Engineering

and what models of risk and safety actually shape their decision and
actions?

From Data to Information and Meaning

As the description above shows there is much data available in a safety
department. But is it the right data? Can safety be improved with this
sort of data or is it just number chasing?
      A critical factor for success is the translation from data to
information and meaning. Collecting all the data points in a software
database structure is not the same as interpreting data and trying to
understand what the data points could mean for processes that may
influence flight safety. Making sense of the data is complicated by
classification methods and current practices are not able to deal with
this.
      First, all events are categorised and problems arise when categories
are mixed in the sense of antecedents and consequents of failure as an
event description. As said, Hollnagel (1993a) explains how classification
systems confuse phenotypes (manifestations) with genotypes (‘causes’).
The phenotype of an incident is what happens, what people actually did
and what is observable. Conversely, the genotype of an incident is the
characteristic collection of factors that produce the surface (phenotype)
appearance of the event. Genotypes refer to patterns of contributing
factors that are not observable directly. The significance of a genotype
is that it identifies deeper characteristics that many superficially
different phenotypes have in common.
      The second issue is that of classification of occurrences. An often
complex event in a highly dynamic environment is reduced to one
event report. Shallow information, no contextual data and lack of
method to assign a category make categorisation a process that is
greatly influenced by the personal interpretation of the practitioner
doing the administration. This also goes for the risk level that is
assigned to an event and used to rank the events.
      Third, the requirement from most of the database software is to
put events in a single category. Most software tools cannot handle
events in different categories at the same time. Counting gets difficult
when some events are assigned to more than one category and counting
events per category is regarded as valuable information.
Safety Management in Airlines                                           199

     Management is presented with numbers and some qualitative
descriptions of high risk events. An initial quantitative approach on
occurrences is often used and a further qualitative approach is
postponed to the point where a trend, a rise in occurrences in a specific
category, is observed. When a trend is observed an analysis of this data
is started and this is then the initiation of a more qualitative analysis
where data is interpreted and assigned a meaning.
     All the mentioned re-active practices are assumed to be useful
based on the ‘iceberg’ theory, which basically means that preventing
incidents will prevent accidents. But is this still a valid assumption?

Learning from Accidents

Accident and incident investigations are executed to create a learning
opportunity for the organisation. As a result, from the investigation a
report is published with safety recommendations that, according to the
investigation team, should be implemented to prevent re-occurrence of
the mishap. The responsibility of the safety department ends when the
report is published; thereafter it is up to the line management (e.g., fleet
chiefs) to consider the recommendations in the report. Line
management has the authority to interpret the recommendations and
can reject or fully implement the changes suggested by the investigators.
First, often recommendations can have a negative effect on production,
and thus on cost. Implementation may include extra training for pilots
or changing a procedure or limitations of equipment. Line management
will make trade-offs between these conflicting goals and it is not often
that a recommendation is rejected. Second, failure is often seen as a
unique event, an anomaly without wider meaning for the airline in
question. Post-accident commentary typically emphasises how the
circumstances of the accident were unusual and do not have parallels
for other people, other groups, other parts of the organisation, other
aircraft types.
     One airline is experimenting by involving line management when
the recommendations are defined. Having early commitment from line
managers, to comply with the recommendations that they themselves
have helped to define, can increase acceptance of the final
recommendations when the report is published. Without acceptance of
the suggested changes the time and money invested in executing the
investigation is wasted, since no change, or learning has occurred. A
200                                                       Resilience Engineering

downside of involving line managers in this early stage might be that
only easy-to-implement changes are defined as recommendations and
that the harder and more expensive changes are not accepted. It was
suggested to use the acceptance of recommendations as a quality
indicator for the report. Since costs of implementation play an
important role in managers’ acceptance of recommendations it might
be more suitable to use acceptance of the suggested changes as a
measure of quality of the learning organisation.
     The quality management system in an organisation checks if the
accepted recommendations are indeed implemented. There is, however,
no defined process that analyses if the recommendations had the
intended effect. Only if new events are reported that seem to relate to
the installed changes can a connection be made and an analysis done of
the ‘old’ recommendations.
     Much effort is put into investigations and after a few weeks and
months operations go back to ‘normal’. The investigation is still in
progress and only after many months or sometimes after two or more
years, is the final report published. This delay can be caused by factors
such as the legal accountability of the parties involved and their
subsequent withdrawal of the investigation, or a lack of resources in the
(national) investigation bureaus. The eagerness to use the final
recommendations a long time after the accident is considerably
reduced. The possible learning opportunity was not effectively used and
the system’s safety is not improved.

Quality versus Safety

Current practices in safety management build on the view that quality
management is the pro-active approach to preventing accidents. Quality
management focuses on compliance with procedures, rules and
regulations of people and organisations in their activities. Audits and
inspections are done to confirm this compliance and, in a high quality
organisation, few deviations from the standards are observed. This
raises the question of whether high quality organisations are safer than
lower quality organisations. The approach that quality guarantees safety
builds on a world view that compliance is always possible, that all
procedures are perfect, that no failures outside the design occur, that all
performance is constant, and that no constraints exist which limit the
ability of people to have full knowledge certainty and time to do their
Safety Management in Airlines                                        201

work. This view explains that accidents are caused by deviations from
the approved procedures, rules and regulations, thus quality and safety
have a complete overlap.
    A more realistic view is that the complexity and dynamics of our
world are not so predictable that all rules, regulations and procedures
are always valid and perfect. Due to coincidences, people have to
improvise, because sometimes conditions do not meet the
specifications as stated in the procedure, and trade-offs have to be
made between competing goals and this is normal work. In this view
there is far less overlap between quality and safety, it is assumed that
procedures, rules and regulations are as good as they can be but at the
same time their limitations are recognised.
    Quality as a pro-active approach to safety is a limited but research
and science has not yet delivered practical alternatives.


What Next? From Safety to Resilience

Having given an interpretation of current practices and having pointed
at some problematic issues, here are some questions to the researchers
and scientists:

     Should data collection only be done from the ‘sharp end’, the
     operators or should this be complemented by data gathering
     from other cross-company sources such as maintenance,
     ground services and managerial failures?

     How can the above-mentioned data sources be combined to
     provide a wider perspective on safety and risk?

     Current practices use only flight operation related data sources.
Maintenance event reports are not evaluated outside the maintenance
department. Managerial accidents, such as failed re-organisations are
not investigated like operational events but all these different types of
failures occur in the same organisational context so common factors
can be assumed.

     What sort of data should be collected from operational events
     with, e.g., an air safety report?
202                                                        Resilience Engineering

     Current practices show reports with descriptions of events and only
a few contextual factors. Classification and risk assessment are done by
a flight safety officer.

      How can it, with the evaluation of events, be determined
      whether the event is signal or noise in relation to safety or risk
      and whether putting resources in the investigation is justified?

     Operational events (not yet determined if it is an incident) are
reported to the safety department. Safety officers and management
have to decide in a short time frame (the flight is, e.g., postponed until
the decision is made) whether an investigation is deemed necessary.
     Safety reports are evaluated periodically and, based on their
assigned risk level, further investigation or other follow up actions may
be decided.

      What kind of data should be presented to management to keep
      them involved, willing to follow-up on findings and supportive
      for actions such as investigations and risk analysis?

    Experienced and knowledgeable safety officers have a feeling
certain indications, e.g., an increased numbers of technical complaints
about the aircraft, point to increased risk. But in the ‘managers’ world’ it
requires ‘hard facts’ or evidence to make (upper) management react to
these signals. Currently, owing to the immense work pressure on
management, data are presented in simplified form that takes little time
to evaluate.

      How can risks be predicted and managed if, e.g., training of
      pilots is reduced, procedures changed and new technology
      introduced?

    Judgements about possible risks are made ‘during lunch’ since no
methods are available to predict the consequences of changing
procedures and if, e.g., additional training is required when the
procedure to abort a take-off is changed. What kind of problems can be
expected and how should these be handled when, e.g., new technology
such as a data link, is introduced. Nowadays, engineering pilots and
Safety Management in Airlines                                        203

managers with much operational experience but limited human factors
knowledge try to manage these issues.

     How can a common conceptual and practical approach to
     reporting, investigation and risk prediction be developed?

     The three issues of reporting, retrospective investigations and pro-
active risk prediction have no commonalities whatsoever. These
isolated approaches do not reinforce each other and valuable insight
may be missed.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 13
Taking Things in One’s Stride:
Cognitive Features of Two
Resilient Performances
Richard I. Cook
Christopher Nemeth


    “If you can keep your head when all about you
    Are losing theirs and blaming it on you…”
    Rudyard Kipling, 1909


Introduction

Resilience is a feature of some systems that allows them to respond to
sudden, unanticipated demands for performance and then to return to
their normal operating condition quickly and with a minimum
decrement in their performance.
     Our approach to resilience comes from the perspective of
practitioner researchers, that is, as people engaged directly with sharp-
end work and sharp end workers. Regarding human performance in
complex systems, we take two things for granted:

•   The many-to-many mapping that characterizes a system’s goal –
    means hierarchy relates the possible to the necessary (Rasmussen,
    Pejtersen & Goodstein, 1994).
•   Human operator performance in these systems is encouraged,
    constrained, guided, frustrated, and enacted within this hierarchy
    (Rasmussen, 1986).
206                                                      Resilience Engineering

     The location of the system’s operating point is the result of a
balance of forces (Cook & Rasmussen, 2005) and tracing the movement
of that point over time maps the history of that system’s safety.
     This chapter describes some of the cognitive features of resilience.
We seek to prepare the ground for discussions of resilience and its
characteristics using two examples. While the following accounts of two
events are both drawn from the domain of healthcare, they have few
overlapping features. One occurs over a very short period of time, is a
highly technical problem, and has a few actors. The other spans a half a
day, encompasses a large socio-technical system, and involves hundreds
of people. Despite their differences, the two events demonstrate
resilience. To be more precise, each is a resilient performance.


Example 1: Handling a ‘Soft’ Emergency

Setting. The Department of Anesthesia (DA) in a major urban teaching
hospital is responsible for management of the Surgical and Critical Care
unit (SACC). The unit includes six activities in the hospital complex
that require anesthesia services. Cases are scheduled for the outpatient
clinic (SurgiCenter), the inpatient operating rooms (IOR) or four other
services, such as radiology. The most acute cases are treated in the IOR.
Cases vary from cardiology to neurology to orthopedics, transplants
and general surgery. In each case, staff, equipment, facilities, and
supplies must be matched to meet patient needs and surgeon
requirements.
     The DA employs a master schedule to funnel cases into a
manageable set of arrangements. Completed each day by an anesthesia
coordinator (AC), the schedule lists each case along with all needed
information. The finished master schedule, which is distributed
throughout the organization at 15:30 each day, is the department’s best
match between demand and available resources. One hard copy is
posted at the coordinator station that is located at the entryway of a 16-
operating room SACC unit. There, the AC and Nurse Coordinator
(NC) monitor the status and progress of activity on the unit as the day
progresses. Surgeons reserve OR rooms by phone, fax, e-mail, and in-
person at the coordinator station. This flow of bookings is continuous
and varies according to patient needs and surgeon demands. Because
the flow of demand for care is on-going, surgeons continue to add
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                        207

cases through the day. These are hand written onto the master schedule
‘add-on list.’
     Cases are either scheduled procedures or emergencies. Each
surgeon estimates case severity as either routine, urgent or emergency.
If a room is not available, a case is pre-empted (‘bumped’) to make
resources available. While the bumping arrangement works, the staffs
prefer not to use it if possible. That is because bumping causes
significant changes to the way staff, rooms and patients are assigned,
which the unit would prefer to avoid. Officially, the potential loss of a
patient’s life or vital organ would be an emergency; and its declaration
requires that resources be freed up and made available for that case. In
reality, there are very fine gradations of what constitutes an emergency.
Because of that ambiguity, it is possible for a surgeon to declare a case
‘emergent’ in order to free up resources for his or her case. In the
instance of cases that are declared emergent, it is up to the AC to
evaluate the case. Anesthesia and nursing staff members use the term
‘soft emergency’ to those cases that are declared yet have no apparent
high risk. It is up to the AC to ‘read’ each declaration to ensure that
there is an equitable match between demand and resource.
     It is Friday at mid-day and surgeons are attempting to clear out
cases before the weekend. The master schedule add-on list is 2.5 pages
long. One page is more routine. The chief anesthesiology resident
speculates that there may be a backlog because admitting was
suspended on Thursday due to no available beds (the queue ‘went
solid’). At around 11:30 the Anesthesiology Coordinator fields a phone
call to the AC. The following sequence of events occurs over about ten
minutes from 11:30 to 11:40. Portions of the dialog (Nemeth, 2003)
that occur at the Coordinator station provide a sense of what is
occurring.

Observations. Operating room number 4 is the day’s designated bump
room. The sequence begins as the AC explains to Surgeon 2, whose
next case is scheduled in the bump room, that an emergency declared
by Surgeon 1 is bumping him and, therefore, that his next case may not
be done today.

    AC:    [on phone with Surgeon 2] “I don’t think we can do it
today. We can book it and see if we can fit it in.” [pause]
208                                                     Resilience Engineering

      “You’re in the bump room, number 1 [in line to be bumped].”
[pause]
      “He [Surgeon 1] wants to do it.” [pause]
      “I don’t make those decisions.” [pause]
      “You’ll have to talk to him [Surgeon 1].”
    Nurse1 [from Room number 4]: “Are we being bumped?”
    AC:     “Yes, you’re being bumped.”
    Nurse: “How do they decide which rooms get bumped?”
    AC:     “The bump list.”
    Nurse: “Doesn’t it make sense to bump by the severity of the
case?”
    AC:     “It depends on the surgeons to make those decisions.”
    AC:     [to NC] “Clean it up and let’s set it up. Ask the person
bumping to talk to the surgeon who is being bumped.”
    --break--

     NC: “[O.R. number] Six is coming out.”
     AC:      [to NC] “We can put [Surgeon 1] in there.”
       [Calls on the phone and waits, no answer.]
       [to NC] “We can put [Surgeon 2] in [OR number] 4 and [Surgeon
1] in [OR number] 6.”
       “Let me page [Surgeon 1].”
     --break--
       [to NC] “You’re planning to put something in [OR number] 6.”
       [points to a case on the add-on list]
       [pages Surgeon 1]
       [calls Surgeon 2]
     --break--

     Nurse1:[while walking past station] “Are we being bumped? Is this
for sure now?”
     AC:     [to Nurse1] “Do the scheduled case.”
     --break--

      AC:    [to Surgeon 1] “Surgeon 1? Room 6 is coming out.” [pause]
      --break—
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                           209

    AC:    [to Surgeon 2] “Surgeon 2? I just talked to Surgeon 1 and he
doesn’t mind waiting 45 minutes [for OR number 6 to be setup and the
emergency case to start].”

     The surgeon had called to declare an emergency in order to have
his skin graft case (an add-on procedure) assigned to an operating room
when none were open. Opening a room would require a scheduled case
to be bumped. The AC negotiated an arrangement in which the
surgeon accepted a 45-minute delay until a room became available. The
arrangement avoided bumping a procedure. The AC reflected on the
process shortly afterwards:

     When they declare emergency I don’t have anything to do with
     it. We let them work it out. I struck a deal by getting [Surgeon
     1] to wait 45 minutes and was able to put him into a room that
     was coming open. That avoided having to bump a procedure.

     This particular AC has a reputation for many capabilities, notably
for his expertise in coping effectively with demands for resources. In
this case, he confronts a situation that formally requires a particular
course of action – the use of the bump room. Although he is prepared
to follow this disruptive course, he does more than the formal system
requires. He manages the problem expectantly, discovers an
opportunity, and presents it to the parties for consideration, all the
while reminding all the parties of the formal requirements of the
situation. He manages to avoid confrontation by avoiding a controlling
role. Instead, he invites surgeons to work out the resource conflict
between them. By offering the bumping surgeon a viable alternative
and inviting him to accept it, he relieves the tension between resource
and demand. He averts a confrontation, making good use of available
resources. He understands the surgeons’ personalities, the nature of the
kinds of cases at issue, the pace of work in the operating room, and the
types of approaches that will be viable. He evaluated the skin graft as a
‘soft emergency’, that is, a case that could be delayed but not put off
indefinitely.
     The evolution of responses that the AC gave through the brief
period indicates how elastic the boundaries are between what exists and
what might exist. Circumstances changed from a demand for
unavailable resources, to the potential for an arrangement, to the reality
210                                                      Resilience Engineering

of an arrangement. As he saw that evolving, he adjusted his responses
in order to set actions in motion so that resources were ready for use
when needed (e.g., “Clean it up and let’s set it up,” and “Do the
scheduled case”).
    The episode is subtle, small, and embedded in the ordinary flow of
work in ways that make it almost invisible to outsiders. The AC
employed complex social interactions and various kinds of knowledge
to reorder priorities. The event’s significance lies in the absence of
disruption that the AC’s efforts made possible in the face of a sudden
demand for resources.


Example 2: Response to a Bus Bombing

Setting. At 07:10 on Thursday morning, 21 November, a suicide
bombing on #20 Egged bus occurred while the bus was in the Kiryat
Menahem neighborhood of Jerusalem. The bomb was detonated by a
22 year old Palestinian from Bethlehem who had just boarded the bus
and was standing near the middle of the bus at the time of detonation.
The explosive device included a variety of shrapnel objects; typically
these are ball-bearings, small bolts or screws, or nails. Early reports
from the scene said that seven people had been killed. Two persons
evacuated from the scene died in hospital on the first day. Forty-eight
other people were wounded; twelve people had died of their wounds by
the end of the day (eleven plus the bomber).
     Bus attacks by suicide bombers have fairly monotonous features.
They occur during the morning rush hour because ridership is high at
that time. Bombers board busses near the end of their routes in order
to maximize the number of people in the bus at the time of detonation.
They preferentially board at the middle doors in order to be centered in
the midst of the passengers. They detonate shortly after boarding the
bus because of concern that they will be discovered, restrained, and
prevented from detonating. They stand as they detonate in order to
provide a direct, injurious path for shrapnel. Head and chest injuries are
common among seated passengers. The injured are usually those some
distance away from the bomber; those nearby are killed outright, those
at the ends of the bus may escape with minor injuries. The primary
mechanism of injury of those not killed outright by the blast is impaling
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                          211

by shrapnel. Shrapnel is sometimes soaked in poison, e.g.
organophosphate crop insecticides, to increase lethality.

Traveling to the Hospital. A senior Israeli physician (DY) heard the
detonation of the bomb at 07:10 and drove with one of the authors
(RC) to the Hadassah Ein Karem hospital. It is routine for physicians
and nurses to go to their respective hospitals whenever it is clear that an
attack has taken place. Within 15 minutes of the detonation, FM radio
broadcasts included the bus route name and location at which the
explosion had occurred and provided early estimates of casualties. DY
did not use his cell phone to call the hospital for information,
explaining that there was no reason to do so, that he could not
participate effectively by telephone, and that the senior staff person at
the hospital would already be managing the response. DY explained
that this was a ‘small’ attack and that the fact that the operating room
day had not commenced at the time of the detonation meant that there
were ample staff and facilities to handle whatever casualties would
appear.
     Ambulance drivers are trained to go to the site of a mass casualty
without direction from the dispatch center. The dispatch center triages
ambulance hospital assignments once they are on scene and loaded with
patients. Emergency personnel describe this approach as ‘grab and go.’
This leads to rapid delivery of patients to hospitals where definitive care
may be obtained. It decompresses the scene so that police forensic and
recovery operations can take place unhindered by the presence of
injured people. It also reduces the risk of further injuries from
secondary attacks.

At the Hospital. As the largest modern hospital in the Mid-East,
Haddassah Ein Karem could be expected to be busy and crowded in
the morning of a regular workday but it was especially so at this time.
Although the detonation had been less than an hour before, people
were already arriving to search for family members. The hospital had
already dedicated a large meeting room for the families and friends, and
hand-lettered signs were posted indicating the location of this room. In
the room were trained social workers and physicians. These personnel
had donned colored plastic vests with English and Hebrew print
indicating that they were social workers. The room itself was supplied
with tables and chairs, a computer terminal connected to the internet,
212                                                          Resilience Engineering

and water and juice. This room had been selected, provisioned, and
manned within 30 minutes of the detonation and in advance of the first
families arriving at the hospital.
     Staffing for the social work activities is flexible and it is possible to
recruit additional support personnel from the hospital clerical and
administrative staff. The goal of the social work staffing is to provide
sufficient numbers of staff that there is one staff person for each
individual or family group. Once attached to the individual or family,
the social worker focuses narrowly on him or them for the duration of
the emergency.

To the Operating Rooms. DY went immediately to the operating room
desk for a brief conversation with the four or five anesthesiologists and
nurses present there. He then manned the telephone at that location.
He checked an internet terminal on the desk for the latest information
from the scene and took a telephone call regarding a casualty being
transferred in from another hospital. The apparent death toll was seven
or eight and there were thought to be forty to fifty wounded. The
wounded had already been dispersed to hospitals in the city. This triage
of cases is managed by the ambulance drivers and dispatchers in order
to distribute the casualties efficiently. In particular, the triage is intended
to move the most seriously injured to the main trauma centers while
diverting the minor casualties to smaller hospitals. Coordination to free
up intensive care unit beds for the incoming casualties had begun.
    Two severe casualties had been taken directly to the operating
room, bypassing the trauma room. Operating rooms are used as trauma
rooms for expediency: cases that will obviously end in the operating
room bypass the trauma room and are taken by a team directly to the
OR. This speeds the definitive care of these patients and preserves the
three trauma room spaces for other casualties; observed activities were
considerably faster and involved fewer people than in many US trauma
centers.

To the Emergency Room. The emergency room can be reached by driving
into a square that is approximately 80 meters across and surrounded on
three sides by hospital buildings. Ambulances enter along one side of
the square, discharge their patients, and proceed around the square and
exit the area. Security personnel had erected a set of bicycle rack
barricades to create a lane for the ambulances. This was necessary
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                          213

because the television and newspaper reporters and camera crews were
present in force and crowded into the area that is normally reserved for
the ambulances.
     A hospital spokeswoman was present and patiently repeated the
minimal information that was available. Members of the press were
intrusive and persistent and were the most visibly keyed-up people
observed during the day. The hospital spokeswoman was remarkably
patient and quite matter-of-fact in her delivery. The hospital’s director
of media relations was standing off to the side, uninvolved in
continuous press briefing but monitoring the activities.
     Arriving families were directed to the emergency room where they
were met by social workers. Triage of casualties to multiple hospitals
and the transfer of the dead to the morgue happens before
identification. In many instances, casualties and the dead are not readily
identifiable by medical personnel. This is particularly true for those who
are dead or severely injured because of the effects of blast and fire.
     Following a bombing, people begin by attempting contact bus
riders by cell phone. If there is no answer or if the rider does not have a
cell phone, family members go to the nearest hospital. Social workers at
that hospital will gather information about the person being sought. All
such information is shared via the internet with the all the other
hospitals. Similarly, hospitals collect identifying information about the
patients they have received, including gender, approximate age, habitus,
and clothing. These two sets of information are then collated by social
workers at each hospital. This helps the medical staff identify who is
being treated and helps the families determine the location of the
person they are seeking. Pooling the information makes it possible
quickly to refine a casualty list and identify individuals. Police use this
information from the hospital at the morgue formally to identify those
who have died. In this case, a complete casualty list was available within
about 6 hours of the bombing. The next morning’s newspapers
provided names and pictures of all the dead including the suicide
bomber.
     The Israelis place a high premium on providing family members
with access to casualties. The author observed several sets of parents
and siblings being brought into the preoperative holding area or the
emergency room to be with the casualty. In each case, the family
members were accompanied by at least one social worker.
214                                                       Resilience Engineering

     For each person who is injured, as many as four people may be
expected to come to the hospital. Parents, grandparents, siblings, and
children may arrive simultaneously or in waves. The management of
this crowd of people, who are all under intense psychological stress, is a
major undertaking that requires substantial resources.

Care of a Severe Head Injury. An ambulance delivered a young female
patient with a serious head injury to the Haddassah Ein Karem
emergency receiving area. This patient had initially been taken to
another hospital and was now transferred to this center where
neurosurgeons were located. While the ambulance attendant provided a
detailed description of the nature of the suspected injuries, medical staff
took the patient to the trauma room performed resuscitation, and took
physiological vital signs. The patient was found to have multiple, minor
shrapnel wounds but no apparent major trauma other than a
penetrating head injury. She had already been intubated and was being
mechanically ventilated. She was in a cervical collar and secured on a
transport backboard. All the elements of the Advanced Trauma Life
Support (ATLS) protocol were observed: a complete examination was
made, the cervical spine and chest were x-rayed and the C-spine cleared,
and blood samples were sent for evaluation. Verbal exchanges in the
trauma room were exclusively technical and the tenor of the
conversation was relaxed. A senior radiology physician performed an
abdominal ultrasound examination. The blood gases were returned
within five minutes and slight adjustments to mechanical ventilation
were made. The patient’s vital signs were stable and the patient was
mildly hypertensive. A negative pregnancy test result was returned at
almost the same time. Narcotics and neuromuscular blocking drugs
were administered.
     Much of the paperwork that is completed during routine
operations is deferred or abandoned entirely during a mass casualty
response. A notable exception is the blood type-and-cross match
paperwork, which is conducted using the routine forms and procedures.
DY explained that abandoning some documentation was necessary to
allow the critical documentation to be completed. Successful blood
transfusion depends on accurate documentation.
     A computerized tomography (CT) scan was planned and the
patient was taken on a gurney to the CT scanner, while connected to a
pulse oximeter, electrocardiograph (ECG), and non-invasive blood
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                         215

pressure monitor. The senior anesthesiologist, an anesthesiology
resident, and a neurosurgeon accompanied her as a staff security person
cleared a path through the hospital corridors. When the team and
patient arrived in the CT room, they used a small, compressed gas
powered ventilator that is permanently installed in the CT scan room,
to continue mechanical ventilation. As the CT scan was made, the chief
neurosurgeon arrived and, together with a radiologist, read images at
the console as they were processed.
     The decision was made to perform a craniotomy, which is surgery
that involves opening the skull, and the team transported the patient to
the operating room. The neurosurgeon received and answered a cellular
telephone call about another patient as he pulled the gurney. While
waiting for an elevator, the patient’s parents came to the gurney,
accompanied by a social worker. One of the transporting physicians
spoke with them about the known injuries and the expected surgical
procedure. The parents touched the patient, and looked under the
blankets at her legs and feet.
     The attending anesthesiologist, a scrub nurse, and a circulating
nurse were waiting in the OR for the surgical team and patient to arrive.
The anesthesiology resident provided an update on the patient’s
condition. After transfer to the operating room table, the patient was
positioned, a radial arterial line was started and the head prepared for a
craniotomy. The craniotomy began one hour after the detonation.

Return to Normal. Although several operating rooms were occupied with
procedures that were related to the bombing, the remainder of the
operating rooms had begun cases from the regular daily list. Efforts to
resuscitate a trauma victim continued in one room. Several other
patients with less serious injuries were in the preoperative holding area.
No further direct casualties were received.
    The author met briefly with anesthesiologists, surgeons, and nurses
in the operating room corridor and then visited the emergency room
and the family room. Many of the families had dispersed to other areas
in the hospital as the patients received treatment, were admitted to
wards, or were being discharged.
    DY noted that the team generally holds a brief informal discussion
of lessons learned immediately after a mass casualty response. The
value of these discussions, he said, has fallen off substantially as the
handling of such events has become routine.
216                                                              Resilience Engineering

Analysis

We propose the cases as examples of resilient performances and these
resilient performances as evidence of the presence of a resilient system.
Systems may be resilient but we do not know how to detect resilience
short of the direct observation. This is because resilient performances
occur in the face of sudden, unanticipated demands. At present, the only
strong evidence of resilience that we can identify is the presence of these resilient
performances. They are made possible by the configuration of the
workplace, incentives, and social structures that surround them. This
does not lessen our regard for the critical role that is played by the
participants’ attention, knowledge, assessments, and decisions.
Confronted with a sudden demand, we observed the practitioners
respond purposefully and appropriately. It was clear from their actions
and speech that they recognized the demand and its significance. Their
reaction responded directly to the demand. Their reaction was also
temperate and tempered by other considerations. These resilient
performances depend heavily, but not exclusively, on particular
individuals and on the particular expert cognitive abilities that they
bring into play. Through their experience, intentions, and judgement as
events evolve, practitioners invest cognitive effort to maintain
successful performance in the face of unexpected challenges. Cognition
creates what we observe as resilient performance.

Unusual but Not Unknown: The Roles of Deep Domain Knowledge

Events that provoke resilient performances are unusual but not entirely
novel. The practitioner in the soft emergency case knows that an
‘emergency’ can have different degrees of criticality. The experience of
being called on to respond to a sudden demand is common enough that
the practitioner has developed expertise in coping with such demands.
Similarly, in the bombing case, the practitioners know from the earliest
description of the event what sorts of wounds to anticipate, how
patients will arrive, and where the bottlenecks in response are likely to
be. They also know what resources they can call on and the established
processes of dealing with this sort of event. In both examples, the
practitioners use their knowledge of how operational tempo plays out,
and what pathways can be exploited to respond.
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                          217

Return to Normal Operations

Resilient performances include a response to a sudden demand and the
return to ‘normal’ operations following that response. Concern for
routine operations shapes the planning and execution of the response
to the sudden demand. In the ‘soft emergency’ case, the response is
fashioned in order to have a minimal effect on routine operations. This
is a very practical concern. Routine system functions are important and
expensive resources such as the OR are usually operated near, or at, full
workload.
     In the ‘soft emergency’, the anesthesia coordinator is able to
foresee an opportunity to meet the new demand within the stream of
activity. He knows that emergencies vary in criticality. Some require
immediate response but others can tolerate a delay. He queries the
surgeon to see whether this case can be delayed. He also examines
current operations in order to see whether an operating room will, or
could, become available.
     In the bus bombing response, the response to sudden demand is
continually assessed and normal work resumed even as the casualties
from the bombing are being cared for. The resilient system is an
inherently valuable resource so that interrupting its normal function
generates costs and it is important to resume that normal function as
smoothly and quickly as possible.
     The concern for routine operations in the midst of sudden demand
distinguishes resilience from other types of reactions. In both of these
cases the system responds to a need without entirely abandoning
routine operations. Normal operations continue in the face of the
sudden demand. The response to the demand includes efforts both to
gauge its effect on normal operations and to devise the response so as
to disrupt those operations as little as possible.

Defining Successful Performance

Performances might be resilient without being successful, at least in the
conventional sense. There are ways that these cases could have turned
out better. If there were no delay in treating the burn patient, if the
head injured patient had been taken directly to the main hospital instead
of an outlying one, it is possible that these patients would have done
better. Even so, the activities of these practitioners qualify as resilient
218                                                                  Resilience Engineering

performances. What, then, is the relationship between resilience and
success? Can performances be resilient and unsuccessful? Are
successful outcomes evidence of resilience?
     Some sudden demands, such as large scale natural disasters, might
be so overwhelming that any plan of action is destined to fail. In such
situations, just returning to normal in the wake of an event could count
as a resilient performance. Indeed, some of the more compelling
examples of resilience are those in which the people and processes are
restored after terrible outcomes. This is often evident from the small
signs of normal activities that resume in the wake of a catastrophe.
Abandoning attempts to meet the sudden demand and instead reserving
resources to reconstitute the system after the demand has passed could,
in our view, qualify as a resilient performance. But in each instance we
note that resilient performance is not present because of a certain form
nor is it absent if the outcome is undesirable. Instead, the resilient
performance itself involves either a tacit or explicit redefinition of what it means to be
successful.

Changing the Definition of Success

These examples and other cases of resilient performance involve a shift
in goals and redefinition of what constitutes success. To perform resiliently,
practitioners necessarily defer or abandon some goals in order to
achieve others. Negotiating trade-offs across multiple goals is common
in complex systems operations and it should not be surprising to find
this type of activity in resilient performance. In these cases, however,
the trade-offs occur at relatively high levels within the goal – means
hierarchy. Rather than minor trade-offs, the sudden demand presents
opportunities for a significant failure. The sudden demand creates a
conflict that requires practitioners to refer to high-level goals. The
resilience in resilient performance is the degree to which the operators are able
to handle the disruption to the usual goal – means features of their work.

Traversing the Goal – Means Hierarchy

Rasmussen’s goal – means hierarchy represents the semantic structure
of the domain of practice. During operations, practitioner cognitive
performances map a set of transitions through this hierarchy. In routine
operational situations, the transitions are likely to map a small space at
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                          219

low levels of abstraction as workers perform ‘routine’ activities and
achieve ‘routine’ results. Cognition at these relatively concrete levels of
the hierarchy does not mean that the higher-level goals are not active. It
is only that worker cognition does not engage high-level goals because
the work activities do not produce conflicts.
     Reference upwards in the goal – means hierarchy occurs when
conflicts arise between goals that are located at the same level. The
need to refer upwards in the hierarchy is brought about by the presence
of conflicting goals. Most operational settings are set-up so that
conflicts are rare. (If they were not rare, their operations would be very
inefficient!)
     Resilient performances are remarkable because the sudden
demands that provoke them generate the need for practitioners to
engage quite high levels of the goal – means hierarchy. A resilient
performance is a cognitive performance that ably traverses the
hierarchy in order to resolve a conflict. Within Rasmussen’s goal –
means hierarchy, a sudden demand will register as the appearance of a
challenge to a goal high up in the hierarchy. The appearance of this
challenge leads to the rapid working out of various trade-offs at lower
levels as the means to cope with this challenge are sought by workers.
This working out appears to observers as a resilient performance.

Taking it in One’s Stride

Our colleagues regard resilience as a desirable and distinct feature of
some systems and we agree with them. The skill and expertise that
people use to cope with the challenges they face is frequently
impressive and sometimes astounding. The robustness of resilient
performances is often remarkable. The response to a bus bombing is a
notable example because it is so vital and so dramatic. But the handling
of a ‘soft emergency’ by the anesthesia coordinator is also remarkable,
in part because it is so graceful and subtle.
    When they are confronted with potentially disruptive demands, the
people involved continue working. They direct their attention to the
emerging threat to a high-level goal. They sacrifice lower level goals to
meet the challenge but do so in ways that preserve the system. They
monitor the escalating involvement with the threat and track the ebb
and flow of operational responses. They strike a balance between
committing resources to handle immediate needs and reserving
220                                                       Resilience Engineering

resources for future ones. They deliberately accept smaller losses and
failures in order to preserve opportunities for more valuable gains and
successes. They anticipate the end of the threat and organize the
resumption of ‘normal’ activities.
     Those who are familiar with the work on cognition in process
control settings will recognize that the litany of practitioner actions in a
resilient performance is very similar to those of ordinary operations.
This leads us to conclude that resilience is not a discrete attribute but
rather an expression of some systems’ dynamic functional traits.
     Resilience can be large or small scale, depending on how high up in
the goal – means hierarchy the sudden demand’s challenge appears. The
monotonous, familiar demands of a static world impose no need for
resilience. The goal – means hierarchy for that domain may be complex.
Practitioner cognitive tasks, though, are firmly bound to only the lowest
levels of the hierarchy. Resilience is what we need to cope with the
sudden appearance of a demand that puts a high level goal at jeopardy.
Observers recognize resilient performances when the threat is abrupt
and the goal put at risk is high in the hierarchy. The deeply resonant
resilience that is so beautifully portrayed in the system that responded
to the bus bombing is a quantitatively, but not qualitatively, different
performance from that seen in the ‘soft’ emergency case. In both
instances practitioners took the unusual event in their stride without
missing a step.


Conclusion

We propose that resilient performance is empirical evidence of
resilience. The need for resilient performance is generated by the
appearance of a sudden demand for resources – a demand that
threatens a high level goal. What distinguishes resilient performance is
the fact that practitioners are able to move through the goal – means
hierarchy to address the threat. In this formulation, cognition is the
critical factor in resilient performances and the central feature of what it
means for a system to possess the dynamic functional characteristic of
resilience.
     If our conclusions are correct, then research on resilience will likely
be some combination of three themes. The first is research on
cognition – including distributed cognition – in demanding situations.
Taking Things in One’s Stride                                         221

The second is research on the explanation of goal – means hierarchies
in naturalistic settings. The third is research on the characteristics of
sudden demands for resources and the reactions that they evoke.
Understanding resilience is likely to depend almost entirely on
assembling research approaches that explore the interactions among
these three themes.
     There is good reason to be encouraged about the prospects for
successful research on resilience. It is certainly difficult to study
dramatic events such as the bus bombing we described. But resilience is
also found in the everyday operations of complex systems. It is part of
the mundane, messy details of real work in the hospital and, we are
certain, elsewhere. Although the scope of the threat in these two cases
is very different, the mechanisms of resilience are, we believe, the same.
The results that we obtained from the study of the work of anesthesia
coordinators offer a means to understand the dramatic response to
large scale disasters such as bus bombings.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 14
Erosion of Managerial
Resilience: From Vasa to NASA
Rhona Flin




Organisational resilience is defined in this volume as ‘the characteristic
of managing the organisation’s activities to anticipate and circumvent
threats to its existence and primary goals. This is shown in particular in
an ability to manage severe pressures and conflicts between safety and
the primary production or performance goals of the organisation’ (Hale
& Heijer, Chapter 3). While the organisational or systems level of
analysis offers one perspective on resilience, for practical application, it
is also necessary to understand how the concept can be decoded to a
behavioural level of analysis. What do workers or managers actually do
differently in more resilient organisations?
     If the above definition is translated to a managerial level, then the
essence of resilience appears to be the manager’s ability to deal with
conflicts between safety and performance goals. Woods conceptualises
this as the skill in making ‘sacrificial decisions’ (Chapter 2). In order to
reduce the risk of accidents, managers have to recognise threats to
safety and rebuff or circumvent these while minimising threats to
productivity. In cases where this component of resilience fails –
managers do not detect the threats or they recognise the threats but fail
to take the requisite action.
     Post-hoc analyses of accidents have well documented limitations
but they do offer salient illustrative material. A number of authors in
this volume have referred to the space shuttle explosions, but much
earlier accounts of transportation disasters also reveal erosion of
managerial resilience.
224                                                    Resilience Engineering

Vasa to Columbia

In 1625, the Swedish King, Gustavus Adolphus, was building an empire
around the Baltic Sea, and to this end, ordered several new warships.
Among them was the Vasa, which was to be built in Stockholm by a
Dutch shipbuilder. His experience was essential as the Vasa was to be
the mightiest warship in the world, armed with 64 guns on two
gundecks. The finished battleship was a magnificient vessel with three
tall masts and her wooden hull decorated with elaborate carvings of
lions’ heads, angels and mermaids. On Sunday August 10th 1628, she
set sail from Stockholm on her maiden voyage, watched by a large
crowd of spectators, including foreign diplomats (Figure 14.1). After a
few minutes, she heeled over and sank to the bottom of Stockholm
harbour. Of 150 people on board, fifty died in the disaster. (The ship
was salvaged in 1961 and now sits, beautifully preserved, in the Vasa
Museum in Stockholm.)




Figure 14.1: The Vasa founders in Stockholm harbour on her
maiden voyage

    Analysis of the circumstances leading to the loss of Vasa
(Borgenstam & Sandström, 1995; Ohrelius, 1962) revealed several
Erosion of Managerial Resilience                                       225

weaknesses in organisational resilience. Treating the Vasa capsize as a
new-product disaster, Kessler et al. (2001) identified contributing causal
factors, including:

•    Obsession with speed (productivity).
•    Top management meddling.

     At the time of the Vasa construction, Sweden’s military campaigns
were under threat. In 1625, ten naval ships had been lost, resulting in a
need to accelerate the development of the Vasa. Moreover, their arch-
rivals the Danes, were building a super-sized warship, and on learning
of this, the Swedish King was determined to have a ship with as many
heavy guns as possible, and added a second gundeck and additional
cannons to the Vasa’s specifications. He had approved the Vasa’s
dimensions and was keen to have her completed rapidly to strengthen
his naval power, but continuously requested design changes in
ornamentation and armature. According to Kessler et al. (2001, p. 89),
“On several occasions the master shipbuilder cautiously tried to
dissuade the king, but the king would not listen. Some speculate the
extreme vanity of the king was to blame for his overly grandiose goals
and over-involvement.” Hybbertson, the master shipbuilder responsible
for the Vasa, then became ill and died in 1627, and the ship’s
construction was left under the supervision of another manager. The
stability test on the ship in the summer of 1628 had to be halted when
she heeled violently in response to thirty men running across her decks.
Nevertheless, the Admiral in charge of the test decided not to delay the
commissioning of the ship, and less than a month later, she sank. It
appears that weaknesses in managerial resilience, especially the failure to
withstand the ‘drive for production’ from the authority of the King,
were instrumental in the disaster.
     So it is proposed that the resilience of middle managers is a critical
component of organisational safety. They should be able to function as
a protective buffer between the competing demands of production
(usually driven by senior management) against the safety needs of
people, plant and environment. In the case of the Vasa, it appeared that
this essential managerial resilience was deficient. For instance, the
senior shipbuilder who had expert knowledge and therefore some
degree of power, had died before the final year of construction. The
Admiral running the sea trials could see that the ship was unstable, but
226                                                      Resilience Engineering

did not dare to delay the launch date (Ohrelius, 1962). One cannot be
over-critical of their decisions; in 17th Century Europe disregarding the
wishes of your King could have fatal consequences, so their reluctance
to contradict Gustavus Adolphus was certainly understandable. But 350
years later, many modern accidents have similar hallmarks indicating a
loss of managerial resilience: The regal is power now located in senior
management boardrooms and government offices. Dangerous practices
can be tacitly encouraged by management even though they contradict
formal safety policies (Cutler & James, 1996; Nichols, 1997).
     Managerial resilience at NASA also failed in the loss of the space
shuttle Challenger in 1986, with powerful political and commercial
pressures being applied by senior managers to keep the shuttle
programme on schedule. On the eve of the fatal launch, when the
engineers were concerned about the fragility of the O rings in low
temperature and were voting against the launch, one of the engineers
who was hesitating was asked to “take off his engineering hat and put
on his management hat” (Vaughn, 1996, p. 398). This engineer then
voted in favour of the launch. When the launch took place the next
morning in low temperature, the O rings failed and the shuttle exploded
on take-off. As Vaughn’s analysis reveals, the behaviour of the engineer
has to be interpreted in the context of the prevailing organisational
culture in NASA, drifting towards the acceptance of increasingly risky
operations. Less than a decade later, in 2003 when the Columbia shuttle
was damaged on take-off and exploded on re-entry, the accident
investigation shows a similar pattern of flaws in NASA managers’
decision-making in response to schedule pressure (Gehman, 2003).
According to Woods (2003, p. 8) this created ‘strong incentives to
move forward and look askance at potential disruptions to schedule’.
     Other industries are not immune to breakdowns in managers’
resilience. Ill-advised trade-offs between production and safety in the
energy industry regularly feature in accident analyses (Carson, 1981;
Hopkins, 2000; Wright, 1986). In the Piper Alpha oil platform disaster,
which killed 167 men (Cullen, 1990), there had been continual pressure
for production, coupled with cost cutting but little evidence of any
resistance to this (Pate-Cornell, 1990). Hopkins (2005) outlines a similar
situation in the Australian airforce where planes became more
important than people and consequently 400 maintenance workers were
poisoned by exposure to toxic chemicals. So what exactly characterises
managerial resilience and how can it be measured and trained?
Erosion of Managerial Resilience                                     227

Managerial Resilience

Resilience has become a fashionable concept in the corporate world
(Coutu, 2002; Sutcliffe & Vogus, 2003; Jackson & Watkin, 2004) with
diagnostic tools available, such as the Resilience Factor Inventory, to
measure individual levels of resilience (Reivich & Shatte, 2002). This is
typically discussed at the level of the employee coping with workplace
demands and based on the notion of resilience to life’s adversities.
Luthans and Avolio (2003) point out that the application of resilience
to leadership has been largely ignored. Their new model of ‘authentic
leadership’ redresses this by incorporating resiliency as a ‘positive
psychological capacity’ – with themes of realism, improvisation and
adaptation. This is a general model of leadership using the
interpretation of resilience as the capacity to bounce back from
adversity, but it does not make any reference to dealing with safety
issues.
     The essence of managerial resilience in relation to safety was
defined above as the ability to deal with conflicts between safety and
the primary performance goals of the organisation. The main goal is
usually pressure for production: in industrial settings, there can be
significant pressure (explicit or tacit) on site managers and supervisors
from more senior managers in the organisation (Mattila et al., 1994).
Moreover, there can be internalised or intrinsic pressures from the
professionalism of the individual manager to complete tasks, meet
targets, reduce costs. These combined pressures can influence
workforce behaviour in a manner that drives the organisation too close
to its risk boundary, as the Vasa, Challenger and other accidents have
shown. Thus, part of the middle manager’s resilience must be the ability
to recognise encroaching danger from antagonistic risk situations and
then to make trade-off decisions between business targets and safety
considerations. Safety-conscious companies operating in higher risk
sectors, such as energy production, do not pretend that these conflicts
do not exist. Malcolm Brinded (currently CEO of Shell Europe) has
stated, ‘Though there are many occasions on which changes to improve
business performance also deliver improved safety, we must ensure that
everybody is clear that “if there is any conflict between business
objectives, safety has priority”‘ (Brinded, 2000, p. 19).
     Three component skills characterise managerial resilience in
relation to safety. The first is Diagnosis – detecting the signs of
228                                                         Resilience Engineering

operational drift towards a safety boundary. For a manager this means
noticing changes in the risk profile of the current situation and
recognising that the tolerance limit is about to be (or has been)
breached. This requires knowledge of the organisational environment,
as well as risk sensitivity: but Hopkins (2005) describes how managers
can be risk-blind in spite of direct warnings. Weick has long argued for
the importance of mindfulness and sensemaking skills in managers, as
well as in operating staff (Weick & Sutcliffe, 2001). This component of
managerial resilience is essentially the cognitive skill of situation
awareness which encompasses gathering information, making sense of
it and anticipating how the present situation may develop (Banbury &
Tremblay, 2004; Endsley & Garland, 2002).
     The second component is Decision-making – having recognised that
the risk balance is now unfavourable (or actually dangerous), managers
have to select the appropriate action to reduce the diagnosed level of
threat to personnel and/or plant safety. These are relevant across work
settings. Woods, (this volume, Chapter 2) calls these trade-off or sacrificial
decisions and argues that these were not being taken when NASA’s
policy of faster, better, cheaper began to produce goal conflicts with
safety objectives. Dominguez et al. (2004) studied conversion decisions
when surgeons abandon the fast, minimally invasive technique of
laparoscopy to switch to a full abdominal incision when the risk balance
for the patient is diagnosed as shifting in an adverse direction. In the oil
industry, interviews with offshore managers who had faced serious
emergencies, showed that their trade-off decisions were key to
maintaining the safety of their installation. One described having to go
against the advice of his onshore managers (not usually a career
enhancing strategy in the oil industry) by dumping a large quantity of
expensive drilling mud overboard in order to de-weight and raise the
level of his rig in a dangerous storm. He said this action was “too
drastic for them but seemed to be the safest thing to do and all on
board relaxed when that decision was made” (Flin & Slaven, 1994, p.
21).
     In order to accomplish this kind of resilient response, the manager
may also require Assertiveness skills in order to persuade other personnel
(especially more senior) that production has to be halted or costs
sacrificed. Dealing with demands from above is a central facet of a
middle manager’s responsibility for safety. Yet almost the entire
literature on managers and industrial safety concentrates on how
Erosion of Managerial Resilience                                       229

managers should behave with their subordinates (e.g., Hofmann &
Morgeson, 2004). What many supervisors and managers actually find
more difficult is how to effectively challenge their boss when they
believe that safety may be in conflict with production goals. During the
Piper Alpha oil platform accident, the two adjacent platforms Claymore
and Tartan were inadvertantly feeding Piper’s catastrophic fire with oil
because they were so reluctant to turn off their own oil production.
(Platforms can take several days to return to full production following a
shut-down.) According to the Public Inquiry report, (Cullen, 1990) the
production supervisor on Claymore asked his boss, the offshore
installation manger, to close down oil production on six separate
occasions without achieving a result.
     These three skills characterising managerial resilience (diagnosis,
decision-making, assertiveness) are influenced by a manager’s
underlying attitudes, particularly Commitment to safety. Managers’ implicit
attitudes can be revealed in sharp relief when production and safety
goals are clashing and critical decisions must be taken.


Safety Culture and Managerial Resilience

Whether or not managers make sacrificial decisions in favour of safety
depends not only on their skills and personal commitment to safety but
on the general level of commitment to safety in the managerial ranks of
the organisation. This is the essential ingredient of the organisation’s
safety culture (Flin, 2003; Zohar, 2003) which affects behaviours such
as balancing production and safety goals, implementing safety systems,
spending on safety. An effective safety culture produces a belief that
when safety and production goals conflict, managers will ensure that
safety will predominate.
     The organisational culture also has to be sufficiently favourable to
allow workers and managers to speak up when they are concerned
about safety. Staff need to be sure that when they do challenge their
boss, order production to be stopped or express concern about risks,
that they will not be penalised. Unfortunately this has not always been
the case and, certainly in the UK, there are some striking examples of
workers having inordinate difficulty in persuading anyone to listen to
their concerns, or even being ostracised for expressing them. In the
Bristol hospital where two paediatric cardiac surgeons were operating
230                                                              Resilience Engineering

on babies despite unusually high failure rates, Stephen Bolsin, the
anaesthetist who endeavoured to raise concern about their unsafe
performance, was given no support and it took several years before the
scandal was fully revealed (Hammond & Mosley, 2002; Kennedy, 2001).
In fact, Bolsin displayed all three resilience skills described above: he
recognised the risks, took the appropriate decision that the situation
was unsafe and something had to be done, and (at considerable risk to
his own career) spoke up. But despite his courage and assertiveness, the
culture of the British medical profession did not endorse such
behaviour and his efforts were thwarted. By all accounts this resulted in
the avoidable deaths of babies treated by the two surgeons before they
were finally suspended. In the UK, ‘whistle blowing’ legislation has now
been introduced (Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998) which is
designed to protect workers who disclose information about dangers to
health and safety in their organisation.


Measuring Managerial Resilience

Three possible techniques to measure managers’ safety resilience are
discussed, safety climate surveys, upward appraisal and identifying
managerial scripts.

Safety Climate

Safety climate questionnaires measure the underlying organisational
safety culture (Cox & Flin, 1998) and provide a leading indicator of
safety that complements lagging data, such as accident reports. They
can be used as one measure of managerial commitment to safety as they
record workforce perceptions of the way in which safety is managed
and how it is prioritised against other business goals (e.g. production,
cost reduction). When safety climate surveys were first conducted in the
North Sea oil industry, they showed that a significant percentage of
workers were sceptical about management commitment to safety. In
one study on six offshore platforms, 44% of workers agreed that ‘there is
sometimes pressure to put production before safety’ and that ‘pointing out breaches
of safety instructions can easily be seen as unnecessary hassle’ (Flin et al., 1996).
Two years later, the culture had not changed, in a safety climate survey
of ten installations, only 46% of workers agreed that ‘Management onshore
Erosion of Managerial Resilience                                             231

are genuinely concerned about workers’ safety’ and just 23% believed that
‘nowadays managers are more interested in safety than production’ (Mearns et al.,
1997).

Upward Appraisal

In one of the North Sea oil companies, the managing director was so
concerned about his offshore workforce’s scepticism about his
managers’ commitment to safety, revealed in their safety climate data,
that he commissioned an upward appraisal of the managers’ safety
attitudes. It was designed to determine how effectively senior managers
communicated their safety commitment to their immediate
subordinates/direct reports (who in this case were also senior
managers). An upward appraisal exercise of this type can also provide a
measure of managerial prioritisation of safety against other goals.
     There are no standard tools for measuring safety commitment and
safety leadership in an upward appraisal exercise, although 360°
appraisal is widely used in assessment of business performance.
Therefore, a special questionnaire was designed which included sections
on safety commitment behaviours, prioritisation of safety, production,
cost reduction and reputation, as well as a leadership scale (Yule, Flin &
Bryden, under review). For example, one question asked ‘if he was to fail
on one of the following business drivers which one would concern him most
(production, reputation, safety, cost reduction)?’ The questionnaire was given to
70 directors and senior managers, including directors from their major
contracting companies. Each manager completed the questionnaire
describing his own safety attitudes, behaviours and leadership style. He
also gave a mirror-version of the questionnaire to five direct reports
and asked them to rate him in the same way.
     The senior managers attended a one-day safety workshop during
which each was given a personal report describing his self-perception of
safety commitment, contrasted against the view of his subordinates
(shown as average and range data). Aggregate results were prepared for
the group and presented, resulting in a frank discussion of whether
senior managers were successfully communicating consistent messages
about their safety commitment. The exercise produced a very positive
response from the managers involved, with subsequent evidence of
managers taking action to change their behaviour in relation to safety
management. Undertaking an upward appraisal survey of this type to
232                                                              Resilience Engineering

assess senior managers’ behaviours, such as prioritisation of safety or
their response when safety concerns are raised, is another indicator of
whether the prevailing culture is likely to support resilient behaviours in
managers and supervisors.

Managerial Scripts

Zohar & Luria (2004) have developed an interesting technique based on
behavioural scripts for identifying the extent to which managers
prioritise production over safety, and the influencing conditions. They
explain that, ‘From the perspective of employee safety as a focal goal, the primary
attribute of managerial action patterns is the priority of safety relative to that of
competing goals, such as production or costs’ (Zohar & Luria, 2004, p. 323).
They gave platoon leaders from the Israeli army a set of eight infantry
scenarios involving competing safety and mission demands and asked
them to say whether the mission should continue or be aborted. They
used the responses to measure the leaders’ safety priority and found
that this interacted with leadership style to influence platoon injury
rates. This method could easily be adapted for use in other
organisational settings to reveal managerial risk awareness and decision-
making in relation to safety versus production goals.


Training Managerial Resilience

There are organisations (e.g. the emergency services, military) whose
incident commanders are trained to be resilient, i.e., to develop the
diagnostic, decision-making and assertiveness skills outlined above
(Flin, 1996). Although their risk acceptance thresholds tend to be much
higher than those of industrial managers, they too have to make
difficult trade-off decisions, such as sacrificing the few to save the
many, or halting an operation because the risks exceed the rewards. As
Bigley & Roberts (2001) have argued, there may be much to learn for
the business world by developing a better understanding of the
organisational systems used by the emergency services. The skills of
incident commanders translate into resilience competencies that
managers could acquire to enhance organisational safety. For example,
dynamic decision-making used by fire officers could be applied to
enhance risk assessment skills in industry (Tissington & Flin, in press),
Erosion of Managerial Resilience                                          233

and there are techniques for training situation awareness and decision-
making (Crichton et al., 2002).
     Assertiveness training can include influencing skills (Yukl & Falbe,
1992), as well as challenging behaviours and these are already taught in
some industrial settings, most notably aviation. Following a series of
aircraft accidents, where co-pilots realised that there was a serious risk
but failed to challenge the captain’s actions, the need for pilots to
receive assertiveness training was identified. This gives pilots specific
advice and practice on the communication methods to make their
challenge in an assertive manner without being passive or aggressive.
One large airline considered changing the term co-pilot to ‘monitoring
and challenging pilot’ to emphasise the safety-critical nature of this role.
     All three of these resilience skills – risk sensitivity, decision-making,
assertiveness – are trained in operational staff in high risk organisations
under the banner of Crew Resource Management (Flin et al., in
preparation; Wiener et al. 1993). Of course, any organisation that
provides this type of training is already moving to a safety culture that
has acknowledged the need for such behaviours and is going to accept
and reward them as essential for the maintenance of safety.


Conclusion

Organisational resilience has emerged as a conceptual antidote to the
traditional pathological approach to safety and disaster research. It
reflects the Zeitgeist in positive psychology to develop an understanding
of human strengths (Seligman, 2003) rather than the prevailing
fascination for cataloguing frailties. So does the resilience approach
offer us a paradigm shift or is it just a more positive repackaging of a
century of ideas on industrial safety? I suspect the latter but it is
encouraging a re-analysis of pervasive, intractable safety problems and
the focus on positive attributes provides more constructive advice for
managers. This chapter has examined one component of organisational
resilience, namely managerial resilience – defined as the ability to deal
with conflicts between safety and performance goals. As Quinn (1988)
has pointed out, leadership is by its very nature inherently paradoxical
and the most resilient managers are those that can recognise and
respond appropriately to the paradoxes of risk.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 15
Learning How to Create
Resilience in Business Systems
Gunilla Sundström
Erik Hollnagel



In the context of the present discussion, we adopt a simple working
definition of resilience as an organisation’s ability to adjust successfully to
the compounded impact of internal and external events over a
significant time period. Within the domain of business systems we
further define success as the organisation’s ability to maintain economic
viability as defined by the economic markets. We finally define time
period as the average time period any firm is part of a critical economic
indicator list such as the DOW Jones Industrial market index.1
     To learn about organisational resilience, we adopt a two-pronged
approach:

•   We first identify implications of adopting a systemic approach to
    organisations, or, business systems. Hereby we primarily build on
    work by Ludwig von Bertalanffy as well as more recent work by
    Senge (1990), Sterman (2000) and Hollnagel (2004).
•   We then use a catastrophic organisational failure to illustrate the
    consequences of lack of resilience. The case in point is the downfall
    of Barings plc in 1995. The analysis identifies actions that
    potentially might have helped Barings plc to reduce the combined




1
      Of the original companies forming the DOW Jones only one (i.e., General
      Electric) made it to the 100th anniversary of the index.
236                                                       Resilience Engineering

      catastrophic impact of the actions of a single individual and market
      events.


The System View: Implications for Business Systems

The originator of general system theory was Ludwig von Bertalanffy, an
Austrian biologist devoted to finding principles that could be applied
across various scientific disciplines. The book “Perspectives on General
System Theory” published in 1975, three years after von Bertalanffy’s
passing, provides an overview of some of the most central concepts of
the proposed system approach. The aim of the following subsections is
to apply some of the most important concepts suggested by von
Bertalanffy to business systems.

The Organism and System Concepts

Two critical concepts in von Bertalanffy’s thinking are the concept of
organism and the closely related concept of a system. von Bertalanffy
introduced the organism concept to create a contrast to a machine
theoretic approach to biological entities (cf. von Bertalanffy, 1952, pp.
9). He stated that

      … organic processes are determined by the mutual interaction
      of the conditions present in the total system, by a dynamic order
      as we may call it. This is the basis of organic regulability …
      Organisms are not machines, but they can to a certain extent
      become machines, congeal into machines. Never completely,
      however for a thoroughly mechanised organism would be
      incapable of regulation following disturbances, or of reacting
      to the incessantly changing conditions of the outside world.
      (von Bertalanffy, 1952, p. 17)

     Hence, the organismic concept as developed by von Bertalanffy
assumes that resilience is one property that organismic processes and
systems have. The term organism (or organised entity) later morphed
into the notion of a system as the program of systems theory emerged
(e.g., von Bertalanffy, 1975, p. 152).
     General system theory defines a system as “… a complex of elements
standing in [dynamic] interaction” (von Bertalanffy, 1952, p. 199). The
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems                   237

basic focus of scientific investigation is to formulate general principles
that guide this dynamic interaction. The type of system that von
Bertalanffy focused most attention upon was an open system, i.e., a
system that constantly exchanges material – matter and energy – with
its environment. In contrast to that, a closed system is defined as one
that does not exchange matter or energy with the surroundings, or even
as a system that is cut off from its environment and does not interact
with it. A closed system must, of course, in practice be able to exchange
information with the environment, since without such an exchange it
would be impossible to know what happened inside it!
     The fundamental research questions emerging from von
Bertalanffy’s perspective include understanding the underlying
principles of system organisation and order, wholeness, and self-
regulation. A business firm is clearly an open system that exchanges
material with its environment. In fact, the open systems view of
business firms lead to approaches focused on demonstrating how
control mechanisms can be leveraged to reach defined objectives while
viewing organisations as organisms (e.g., Morgan, 1986; Lawrence &
Dyer, 1983).
     The following definition of a business system will be used in the
present work: A business system is defined as a set of elements that
interact among themselves and with their environments. The overall
system is focused on achieving shareholder value, profitability and
customer equity. Particular objects, or wholes, within the system are
defined by their interactions within the system as well as with the
environment. The organisation of these wholes can be described in
multiple ways, for instance as hierarchies, heterarchies or networks. A
critical point being that the way wholes self-organise changes over time.
Some system properties are not directly observable, the property of
resilience being among these. To manage a business system, it is
necessary to establish a view of the organisational regularities (‘laws’) at
each system level. General management, policies and control principles
need to be based on principles applicable to all types of organised
entities. To illustrate this point, we provide two examples in the next
section.
238                                                       Resilience Engineering

Examples of System Thinking

The two examples presented in the following illustrate how concepts
developed by general system theory have been used to create principles
that are potentially applicable across all levels of a particular business
system. The first section describes an approach that supports the
identification of generic control elements. The second section provides
a generic view of types of control behaviour – the assumption being
that the behaviour of organised entities, or systems is purposeful, i.e.,
the system if focused on achieving particular goals. In the case of
business systems, we assume that these goals include shareholder value,
profitability and customer equity.

Identifying Management Control Entities

A major contribution of control theory and systems engineering (e.g.,
Sheridan, 1992) has been the introduction of key concepts that can be
used across many types of systems to describe system component types
including control system components. Adopting a control theoretic and
system engineering flavoured approach, a business system can be
described as a state machine characterised by a set of variables and
parameters. Business goals are associated with desired state values of
the business system and the state machine describes how the various
transitions among states can take place. For example, defining the
desired state of profitable operation in terms of profitability (e.g., that
profit margins need to be higher than 30%) and shareholder value,
would be a first step towards articulating business goals. The
management process of a business system is defined as the control
system whose role it is to ensure that the business system meets or
exceeds performance objectives. The behaviour of the control system is
driven by the defined business goals, such as profitability, shareholder
value and customer equity. The business actuators are the means used
to change one or more state variables. Sensors provide information
about the state variables, either by direct measurement or by some
method of estimation. This control system’s view of a complex
networked business is illustrated in Figure 15.1, adapted from
Sundström & Deacon (2002).
     The ovals signify that an entity appears as a whole to other entities
while the different types of lines indicate that the interactions among
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems                             239

entities have different attributes. The basic management philosophy is
uniform across the wholes, i.e., based on collecting data and from that
deriving metrics and/or estimates to be used by a management control
function. The control function takes actions that are designed to impact
the behaviour of individual and/or groups of wholes using various
types of actuators.
                        Business Control System
                                         Estimate
                           Management                    Estimator
      Goals
   (profitability,
shareholder value,            Decision                  Measurement
 customer equity)
                              Actuator                    Sensor


                          Action                               Signal
                        Dynamic Business System

                              Business                                  Profitability
   Customer                    ‘Whole’
   requests                                             Business
                                                         ‘Whole’        Shareholder
     Market                                                                value
     events
                                Business                                 Customer
                                 ‘Whole’                 Business         equity
                                                          ‘Whole’


Figure 15.1: A Control theoretic perspective on business systems

     Broadly speaking, control functions, i.e., management actions at
different dynamic business system levels, are geared towards furthering
behaviours that lead to a healthy state of an individual whole, collection
of wholes, and/or the overall business system. This healthy state is
defined by objectives defined for the whole. State variables are used
both to track progress towards these goals (i.e., leading indicators) and
to establish whether goals have been achieved (i.e., lagging indicators).
Of particular importance are leading measures related to the key
resources used by business systems, i.e., financial, human and
(technology) systems resources.
     For business systems in general, and those focused on financial
services in particular, at least three distinct states can be defined as
illustrated in Figure 15.2.
240                                                                 Resilience Engineering

     A business system can be in a healthy state, i.e., a state in which
business goals are met and risks are understood and accepted. Various
types of behaviours can cause either an individual whole or the
complete business state to transition into an unhealthy state. In such an
unhealthy state the business goals are not met and/or the risk of
incurring losses is unacceptably high. Finally, the system can move to a
catastrophic state, where either one or more individual wholes or the
overall system is lost or destroyed. The probability that the overall
system transitions into an unhealthy state increases if the behaviour of
the wholes creates outcomes that are in conflict with the overall goal
states for the business system. The more wholes adopt behaviours that
do not consider the overall system goals, the more likely these
behaviours will bring about an overall negative impact and, as a result,
the overall system might transition from a healthy to a catastrophic
state.
                               Feedforward behaviour
                              Ability to detect risky and
                              non-compliant practices
                                Proactive and system
                              focused impact analysis




        Effective recovery:            “Healthy             Risky behaviour:
 Timely and correct impact              state”              Unexpected market
                   analysis                                 changes
   Graceful degradation to                                  Failure to detect risky and
             safe practices                                 non-compliant practices
 Competent mobilisation of                                  Lack of feedforward
      additional resources                                  behaviour
                                     “Unhealthy             Reactive impact analysis
                                     “Unhealthy
                                       state”
                                     “Unhealthy
                                       state”
                                       state”
                                                            Risky behaviour:
                                                            Inaccurate data feeding
                                                            analysis
                                                            Scrambled impact analysis
                                    “Catastrophic           Reflexive responses
                                       state”


Figure 15.2: Three key business system states transition
behaviours
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems                 241

    Several interesting questions and implications emerge as a result of
viewing business systems as open dynamic systems: (1) Is it possible to
identify events that indicate when a system is losing control, hence is in
the process of changing from a healthy to an unhealthy state? (2) Is it
possible to monitor business systems’ operational performance? (3) Is it
possible to distinguish healthy system changes from unhealthy changes?
All three of these questions should in fact drive control/management
behaviour. In the next section, we look at various modes of
control/management behaviour.

Models of Control Behaviour

While different domains have different characteristics, a common
feature for all domains, including the domain of business systems, is the
need to be in control. The successful accomplishment of any kind of
activity – from running a nuclear power plant over financial trading to
driving to work and cooking spaghetti carbonara – requires that the acting
entity or agent (manager, team leader, operator, trader, driver, or chef)
can maintain control of the process in question.
      An essential part of control is planning and forecasting what to do
within the system’s short-term time horizon. (Planning for the longer
term is, of course, also important, but the uncertainty of outcomes is
usually so high that only a limited effort in that direction can be
justified.) This planning is influenced by the context, by knowledge or
experience of dependencies between actions, and by expectations about
how the situation is going to develop – in particular about which
resources are and will be available. The outcome can be a more or less
orderly series of activities, where the orderliness or regularity of
performance reflects the degree of control. This can be described in
more formal terms by referring to four characteristic control modes,
called strategic, tactical, opportunistic and scrambled (Hollnagel, 1993b;
Hollnagel & Woods, 2005).
      In the scrambled control mode, the choice of the next action is
basically irrational or random. This is typically the case when the
situation assessment is deficient or paralysed and there accordingly is
little or no alignment between the situation and the actions. In the
opportunistic control mode, the salient features of the current context
determine the next action but planning or anticipation are limited, for
instance because there is limited time available. The resulting choice of
242                                                       Resilience Engineering

actions is often inefficient, leading to many useless attempts being
made. The tactical control mode corresponds to situations where
performance more or less follows a known and articulated procedure or
rule. The time horizon goes beyond the dominant needs of the present,
but planning is of limited scope or range and the needs taken into
account may sometimes be ad hoc. Finally, in the strategic control mode,
the time horizon is wider and looks ahead at higher-level goals. At this
level, dependencies between tasks and the interaction between multiple
goals is also taken into account.
     Adoption of a strategic control mode is facilitated by adopting
system thinking – a critical ability for learning organisations according
to Senge (1990, p. 14). A learning organisation (or system) is an entity
that “continually expands its capacity to create its future” (Senge, 1990,
p.14). Senge discusses five disciplines that will lead to organisational
learning: personal mastery, team learning, mental models, building
shared vision and system thinking. Senge views the fifth discipline, i.e.,
system thinking, as the discipline that integrates all others. Senge
defines the key elements of system thinking as follows: “… seeing
interrelationships rather than linear cause-effect chains, and seeing
processes of change rather than snapshots” (Senge, 1990, p.73). (For
other examples of the importance to adopt a dynamic system view or
system thinking, see Sterman, 2000.) To start a process of system
thinking, Senge argues that the first step is to gain an understanding of
feedback loops. This will eventually establish an ability to identify
recurring event patterns that reflect specific system structures, or
system archetypes. To use von Bertalanffy’s language, the ability to
identify recurring wholes (i.e., patterns of interaction among organised
entities) will develop and as a consequence this will facilitate adoption
of a feedforward-based strategic control mode.
     In summary, the general system view has the following implications
for business systems:

•     A business system is a dynamic open system with wholes organised
      on multiple levels, e.g., wholes could be described as being
      organised in a classical hierarchical structure. Each organised whole
      is defined by its interactions with other entities as well as its
      environment.
•     Business systems will define desired behaviours by defining goals,
      policies, standards, processes and procedures. The expectation is
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems                  243

     that defined policies, processes and procedures should help the
     wholes of the system to stay in a healthy state. The nature of some
     of these policies, standards, processes and procedures will depend
     on what the business system is producing to create market value.
     For example, if a business system produces financial services, its
     policies will reflect the fact that financial services is a regulated
     global industry.
•    Each organised whole develops a pattern of interactions driven by
     its defined and/or perceived goals. Obviously, goals associated with
     organised wholes can be in conflict with each other and/or in
     conflict with the business system’s overall goals, i.e., profitability
     and shareholder value. As we will see in the Barings plc example,
     such a goal conflict eventually drove the organisation into a
     catastrophic failure.
•    Organised wholes can adopt different types of control modes or
     management behaviour. These can be described as strategic,
     tactical, opportunistic, scrambled or a mixture of the four,
     depending on the conditions. Using the Barings example, it will
     become clear that the most appropriate strategy to maintain control
     of an open dynamic business system is a feedforward based
     strategy.
•    The property of resilience emerges as a result of a system’s ability
     to transition from one state to the next. In fact the property of
     resilience implies that a system has the ability to maintain a healthy
     state over time despite the fact that it (or its wholes) may be
     subjected to negative and/or destructive events. A key pre-requisite
     for a system’s ability to maintain a healthy state, or to transition
     from an unhealthy to a healthy state, is to re-organise/re-adjust
     system boundaries and/or re-align/change both the scope and the
     types of business controls used as part of the business control
     system.

    Figure 15.3 provides an overview of the concepts used to describe
business systems. Three separable business systems are portrayed in
Figure 15.3, namely business systems A, B and C. Each system has its
own control system, leveraging the control system elements illustrated
in Figure 15.1. Thus, each system has defined goals, market drivers and
desired output, i.e., measurable shareholder value, profitability and
244                                                            Resilience Engineering

customer equity. The policies, standards, processes and procedures
defined by each firm are designed to cover the scope as determined by
the system boundaries relative to each system’s business control system.
 System boundary defined by Firm A’s Business Control System


         Business
          system
          ‘whole’                     Business
                                       system
                                       ‘whole’


              Business                                           System
               system                        Business            boundary
               ‘whole’                        system             defined by
                                              ‘whole’            Firm B’s
                                                                 Business
                                                                 Control
                                                                 System
                                                  Business
                                                   system
System boundary defined by Firm C’s                ‘whole’
Business Control System


              Business                                           Unhealthy state
               system                 Business
               ‘whole’                 system                    Healthy state
                                       ‘whole’


Figure 15.3: A view of business systems and system boundaries

     Each business system’s whole will develop patterns of interactions
to reach its objectives. A business whole that reaches its objectives
using behaviours in accordance with policies, processes, standards and
procedures is in a healthy state. A key enabler for any business whole to
reach its objectives is to be able to predict the impact of its behaviour.
As discussed above, the ability to predict impact of behaviour is
maximised using a strategic feedforward control approach. As an
example, firm B’s business control system views a part of firm A as part
of its business control scope. As a result, firm B’s control approach can
proactively adopt a strategic view of the impact of the business whole
belonging to firm A. If the reverse is not true, then a likely result is that
firm A has a limited ability to change the business wholes’ unhealthy
state to a healthy state if the state is caused by the interaction with B’s
business whole. Over time, this situation can have a negative impact on
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems                              245

both A and B, or, it can lead to a re-design of the control system scope
of firm A to better match firm B’s approach. As a result, both firms
might end up being more resilient to potential negative impact resulting
from the two firms’ interactions.
     As we will see in the Barings example, the lack of explicit design of
the business control system coupled with the lack of viewing Barings as
a dynamic system eventually led to the catastrophic events that
destroyed the firm.


The Barings plc Case

Barings plc was a 233 year old British financial institution of high
reputation, which proudly counted the Queen as a client. Financial
markets were therefore stunned when this institution had to declare a
state of bankruptcy in February 1995. The reason was a staggering
US$1.3 billion loss caused by the trading practices of a single person,
Nick Leeson (e.g., Kurpianov, 1995; Reason, 1997). This loss was,
however, not due to the actions of an individual trader alone but also
owed much to the failure of Barings’ global management team. Figure
15.4, adapted from Sundström & Hollnagel (2004), provides an
overview of the key components of the dynamic system of which Nick
Leeson was a part.
                                Queries about                     Margin calls +
                                margin calls                      Unexpected
                                (BIS, BoE) Proactive              market changes
   Proactive risk
   management                                  impact
                                              analysis                     Singapore
                                                          Trade
                    Reports                              losses           International
                                                                            Monetary
                                            Nick                           Exchange
                                           Leeson                             Osaka
                                           Barings                           Securities
 Barings                                   Futures                           Exchange
PLC (UK)                                 (Singapore)

                                  Directives                         Trades
       Management                                 Trading
         practice                                 strategy



Figure 15.4: Dynamic system view of the Nick Leeson scenario at
Barings Securities
246                                                      Resilience Engineering

     The situation can be described as two linked control loops –
although neither of them was in full control of the situation. In one, the
right-hand part of Figure 15.4, was the trader (Nick Leeson), who saw
his trading strategy fail. The outcome of the trades was far from
expected (also because of market unpredictability), and he therefore had
to resort to a more risky but less well thought out strategy in the hope
of covering the losses. In order to hide the losses, Leeson removed his
error account from the daily trading, position and price reports to
London. As a result any type of proactive impact analysis by the second
control loop became impossible. In addition to problems with the
market, Nick Leeson also faced requests from the Barings’ home office,
altogether leading to a situation of fire-fighting and opportunistic – or
even scrambled – behaviour rather that tactical thinking.
     In the second control loop, the left-hand part of Figure 15.4, was
the company, Barings plc, which continuously received reports of stellar
profits; in fact profits that were quite unreasonable given the officially
communicated securities trading strategy. However, the management’s
lack of experience and concomitant lack of feedforward strategy, and
their inability to truly understand the behaviour of Barings Securities
business coupled with the perception of Leeson as a star performer, led
to a situation in which the team did not take proper action. During this
time period, Barings plc (UK) was itself under pressure to provide
information about the (excessive) margin calls to the Bank of England
as well as the Bank of International Settlements. (This therefore
constitutes a third control loop that had an effect on the two already
mentioned. The present analysis will, however, disregard that.) Over
time, management’s lack of true understanding of the securities
business (and of derivatives trading in particular) led to opportunistic
management control, which could not effectively monitor how Barings
Futures performed. The result is well known: in both cases control was
lost and Barings plc had to declare a state of bankruptcy.
     Figure 15.5 describes this situation using a state diagram. Clearly,
some of the system wholes in Barings plc were not in a healthy state in
the first place. From the beginning (t1), the management team lacked a
fundamental understanding of securities trading and therefore failed to
establish appropriate management strategies and controls. The lack of
understanding also meant that excessive revenue was not seen as a
problem. Even as the situation deteriorated (t2), management at Barings
plc ignored early warnings in their balance sheet indicating that they
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems                                  247

provided excessive funds to run Barings Futures. Instead they approved
excessive margin calls, failed to separate sales and reconciliation, and
failed to ask for critical data. In the last stage, (t3), the management team
failed to notice that the losses incurred exceeded the available capital,
but continued to provide excessive funding to run Barings Futures.
Despite multiple requests from key regulatory bodies, cf. above, their
reporting was not transparent.
     Conditions were not much better at Barings Futures in Singapore.
The trader, Nick Leeson, was new in his position and lacked
experience. He was furthermore in control of both sales and
reconciliation, contrary to policies. As the situation grew worse, (t2) and
(t3), he continued with excessive margin calls, tried to hide the
reconciliation and removed key data from reports. Thus even if the
Barings plc management team had known what to look for, they would
have had difficulties in finding it.
                                                        Earthquake
                                                         in Japan
          Japan                            Japan                         Japan
          stock                            stock                         stock


               Barings                          Barings                      Barings
                PLC                              PLC                          PLC

          Barings                          Barings                       Barings
          Futures                          Futures                       Futures

        Nick                            Nick                           Nick
       Leeson                          Leeson                         Leeson
                         t1                               t2                           t3


             Healthy state              Unhealthy state              Catastrophic state

Figure 15.5: A state transition view of the Barings plc scenario

    A key learning from this scenario is that a business system can only
be resilient if the management team is able to use a feedforward based
management strategy resulting in the appropriate design of business
controls. Examples of such critical business controls are an appropriate
flow of reporting information and clarity around roles and
248                                                        Resilience Engineering

responsibilities. Both of these obviously impact how the various
business system wholes interact with each other.
     An organisation is resilient if it is able successfully to adjust to the
compounded impact of internal and external events over a significant
time period. Barings plc was clearly unable to do so, and given the
above analysis its collapse was not just due to the specific circumstances
of Nick Leeson’s trading but rather to a general degradation of the
barriers and behaviours that together made up its control systems. In
this case each of the two business control systems, Barings Futures in
Singapore and Barings plc in London, failed in adjusting effectively to
exogenous variability. For Barings Futures, the exogenous variability
came from the markets; for Barings plc the variability came from Nick
Leeson’s trading practices. Both resorted to feedback-driven control
and therefore worked in a basically reactive mode. This is bound to fail
if the feedback is incomplete or delayed, as in the case of Barings plc, or
if the response strategy is short-sighted and shallow, as in the case of
Barings Futures.
     In terms of the four control modes mentioned above (strategic,
tactical, opportunistic and scrambled), both Barings plc and Barings
Futures operated in an opportunistic or even scrambled mode. There is
in general a strong correspondence between system conditions and
control modes, such that the control mode goes down when there is
insufficient time and/or when the situation becomes unpredictable. (A
more detailed discussion of the relationship between time and
predictability can be found in Hollnagel & Woods, 2005.) Referring to
the three states described in Figure 15.5, a healthy state is characterised
by strategic and tactical control, an unhealthy state by tactical and
opportunistic control, and a catastrophic state by scrambled control.
While recovery from a state with opportunistic control is possible with
a bit of luck, i.e., if conditions are favourable, recovery from a state of
scrambled control is unlikely to take place.


What would have made Barings more Resilient?

The first step Barings’ management team should have taken is to view
their trading business from a dynamic open system perspective. Figure
15.6 provides a simple view of the trading system as a dynamic system.
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems               249

     If Barings had used a proactive impact analysis and risk
management approach, and if it proactively had monitored its trading
operations to check for unusual performance variability, then Leeson’s
trade outcomes should have been anticipated – by Barings plc, if not by
Leeson himself. The proactive analyses should have enabled Barings to
anticipate patterns and therefore to be able to proactively take actions
(feedforward-driven) rather than just reacting to events (feedback-
driven). In such a feedforward-driven mode, system control behaviour
is triggered by a model of derivatives trading and likely events. In a
feedback-driven mode, system control behaviour is a reaction to
undesirable events (e.g., Leeson’s frequent margin calls). If trade
outcomes had been predicted, including expected profits, discrepancies
would have been noted in time and Barings would have remained in
control. However, the Barings’ management team was in a reactive
mode; the team furthermore had no access to the appropriate data nor
did they take any action to ensure that Leeson was appropriately
supervised. As a consequence, the Baring business system was highly
unstable and as such vulnerable to disturbances from the market. This
combination of reactive decision-making in response to Leeson’s
behaviour and providing regulatory entities (i.e., Bank of England) with
poor information, over time ended in a complete failure when
unexpected events affected the market in a negative direction.

                                                           Market
                                                          changes
              Monitoring of
            trading practices                    Trade
                                                outcome


   Proactive
impact analysis

 Proactive risk
 management
                                                          Trades
                                       Trading
                                       strategy



Figure 15.6: Dynamic system view of trading operations
250                                                        Resilience Engineering

     If Barings’ management team had adopted a feedforward
management strategy, they would quickly have known that the revenue
reported by Nick Leeson would have been impossible given the trading
strategy that Leeson purportedly was using. However, adopting a
feedforward strategy assumes that the management team has sufficient
knowledge about the nature of the securities business. In Barings plc
this was however not the case, most of the management team had a
traditional banking background and lacked experience with the
securities industry.
     Assuming that Barings’ management team had adopted a dynamic
system view of their business, the team could have proactively
established a feedforward strategy with the following elements:

•     Clearly defined system goals, including the level of risk acceptable
      to both the local Asia-based and London-based management
      teams. These system goals should have been designed seamlessly to
      intertwine business and risk goals. For example, a part of the risk
      management strategy could have been tightly to control the size of
      the margin calls approved before providing Leeson with funds for
      his trading activities.
•     A continuous monitoring of state variables, i.e., those variables that
      could change the state of Barings from healthy to unhealthy. In the
      Barings case the management team did not seem aware of the fact
      that they lacked accurate data to identify the potential impact of
      Leeson’s activities on the whole system. i.e., Barings plc. This
      situation was possibly due to management’s lack of knowledge of
      what they needed to look for. In fact, a very simple report could
      have been used to match up the losses made and the capital made
      available to Baring to cover these losses.
•     Continuous monitoring of state variables related to the three key
      components of operational risk, i.e., people, systems and process.2
      This should have included close supervision of Nick Leeson, the
      reporting systems that were used and of course the associated
      trading and reconciliation processes. As it turned out, Nick Leeson



2
       See http://www.bis.org for information about the Basel II accord and
       operation risk.
Learning How to Create Resilience in Business Systems                     251

     was not supervised and the required data to monitor his activities
     were not available to the London-based management team. Finally,
     trading and reconciliation processes were not properly separated,
     i.e., Nick Leeson was in control of both.

     Figure 15.7 provides a high-level view of the simple management
framework that Barings could have leveraged proactively to manage risk
and the impact of the Barings Securities business on the overall Barings
business system. The Barings example also clearly demonstrates the
importance of identifying unexpected (i.e., unlikely) events that have the
ability to drastically impact the overall state of the business system.

                    Goals: acceptability of
                       •Risk level for Barings Securities
                       •Revenue targets
                       •Cost of running Barings Securities
                             Operational Risk Management System
                                 UK based                   “State
                                management Estimate        variable
                                 Asia based              score card”
                                management
                                                        Measurement
                                  Actuators               “sensors”
                                Organisation             Organisation
                                 Systems                   Systems
                                  Person                    Person

                             Actions                            Signals
                             Barings Securities
           Japanese
          earthquake                    …

               Market                                    …
               events


Figure 15.7: A simple control engineering style approach to
support a feedforward driven proactive risk management strategy
252                                                       Resilience Engineering

Concluding Remarks

An organisation’s ability to survive depends on the extent to which it is
able to adjust to the compounded impact of internal and external
events over a significant time period. A critical success factor for any
organisation is therefore finding ways to learn how to facilitate the
emergence of resilience. In the present chapter, we suggested that
viewing organisations as dynamic open systems, adopting an explicit
view of business control systems and being aware of the impact of
various types of system control behaviours could enable an organisation
to avoid transitioning into a catastrophic state. Our analysis of the
Barings plc case illustrated that articulating system goals, acceptable risk
levels and a focus on monitoring key state variables could potentially
have helped Barings’ management team to detect that the firm was in
the process of entering into an irreversible catastrophic state.
Chapter 16
Optimum System Safety and
Optimum System Resilience:
Agonistic or Antagonistic
Concepts?
René Amalberti




Introduction: Why are Human Activities Sometimes Unsafe?

It is a simple fact of life that the variety of human activities at work
corresponds to a wide range of safety levels.
     For example, considering only the medical domain, we may
observe on the one hand that audacious grafts have a risk of fatal
adverse event (due to unsecured innovative protocol, infection, or graft
rejection) greater than one per ten cases (10-1) and that surgeries have
an average risk of adverse event close to one per thousand (10-3), while
on the other hand fatal adverse events for blood transfusion or
anaesthesia of young pregnant woman at delivery phase are much
below 1 per million cases (see Amalberti, 2001, for a detailed review).
Note that we are not, strictly, speaking here of differences that are due
to the inherent severity of illnesses, but merely on differences due to
the rate of errors and adverse events.
     Another example is flying. It is usually said that aviation is an ‘ultra
safe’ system. However, a thorough analysis of statistics shows that only
commercial fixed wing scheduled flights are ultra safe (meaning that the
risk is 10-6 or lower). Chartered flights are about one order of
magnitude below (10-5), helicopters, scheduled flights and business
aviation are about two orders of magnitude below (10-4), and some
254                                                                      Resilience Engineering

aeronautical leisure activities are at least three orders of magnitude
below (10-3), cf. Figures 16.1 and 16.2.
          Raw number of Aircraft accidents, France only
                  General aviation              Aerial work                Public transport
          Courtesy BEA/ Bureau enquêtes accidents



                                                              364
 300                                          345
                             330                                               329
            296
 250

 200

 150

 100

  50              22                 20             18              16               22

      0
                2000             2001            2002           2003               2004

Figure 16.1: Raw number of accidents in 2004 in France. General
aviation accident rate is about two orders of magnitude of
commercial aviation

     In both cases, neither the lack of safety solutions nor the
opportunity to learn about their use may explain the differences. Most
safety tools are well known by stakeholders, available ‘on the shelf’, and
implemented in daily activities. These tools comprise safety audits and
evaluation techniques, a combination of mandatory and voluntary
reporting systems, enforced recommendations, protocols, and rules,
and significant changes in the governance of systems and in corporate
safety cultures.
     This slightly bizarre situation raises the central question debated in
this chapter: If safety tools in practice are available for everyone, then
differences of safety levels among industrial activities must be due to a
precisely balanced approach for obtaining a maximum resilience effect,
rather than to the ignorance of end users.
     One element in support of that interpretation is that the relative
ranking of safety in human activities at work has remained remarkably
Optimum System Safety                                                                255

stable for decades. Safety is only slowly improving in parallel for most
of these activities, available figures showing an improvement of an
order of magnitude during the last two decades for most human
activities.

   ULTRA SAFE                                                       RISKY


   Scheduled passengers operations, 0.71×10-6 (per million departure)

          Chartered flights and non scheduled operations , 5.81×10-6

                         Helicopter flights, average, 8. ×10-5 (per flight hours)
                                        Aerial applicators, western countries

                           General Aviation, average, 8.2 ×10-5 (per flight hours)
                                      Micro-light a/c
                                                    Gyroplane


  10-6        10-5        10-4         10-3          10-2                Accident rate
Courtesy :
Boeing statistical summary of commercial jet airplane accidents, 1959-2000
www.helicoptersonly.com/sayagain_danger.html (accessed May 25, 2005)
Bureau des enquêtes accidents France, www.bea-fr.org
National Transportation Safety Board, www.ntsb.gov

Figure 16.2: Accident rate in several types of aviation

     Only a very central set of human activities have seen their safety
improving faster than average, and when considering these activities,
e.g., medicine, the reason is usually a severe threat to the economy and
the resilience of the system rather than because safety as such was seen
as not being good enough.
     For example, the impressive effort in the US made in patient safety
since 1998 was directed by the growing medical insurance crisis and not
by any spontaneous willingness of the medical community to improve
safety (Kohn et al., 1999). Consistent with this, once a new level of
resilience has been reached the system re-stabilises the balance and does
not continue to improve. This levelling off can be seen in medicine.
After an initial burst of enthusiasm and an impressive series of actions
that led to a number of objective improvements, the second stage of
256                                                          Resilience Engineering

the ‘safety rocket’ is failing because very few medical managers want to
continue. It is as if a new resilience should have been reached, with a
new set of rules, a new economic balance, and therefore, no need to go
further (Amalberti et al., 2005; Amalberti & Hourlier, 2005).
     To sum up, this paper suggests two supplementary interpretations:

•     Existence of various types of resilience. That there are various types of
      resilience corresponding to classes of human activities. The
      resilience should be understood as a stable property of a given
      professional system, i.e., the ability to make good business in the
      present and near future with the capacity to survive an occasional
      crisis without changing the main characteristic of the business. Of
      course, the safety achievement may be extremely different from
      one type of resilience to another: frequent and dreadful accidents
      may be tolerated and even disregarded by the rest of the profession
      (ultra-light biological spreading activities against crickets, or mining
      accidents in third world countries), although a no-accident situation
      is the unique hope for others (nuclear industry). The following
      section will propose a tentative classification of the types of
      resilience.
•     Incentives to change. Jumping from one stage of resilience to another,
      adopting more demanding safety logic is not a natural and
      spontaneous phenomenon. A professional system changes its level
      of resilience only when it cannot continue making effective
      business with the present level of resilience. It is hypothesised in
      this chapter that there are two major types of incentives to change.
      One is the external incentives due to the emergence of an
      economic or/and political crisis. The crisis can follow a ‘big
      accident’, a sudden revelation by media of a severe threat or a
      scandal (blood transfusion in France, unsafe electricity system in
      northern US, medical insurances in all other Western countries), or
      a political threat (patient safety in UK and re-election of Tony
      Blair). Another is internal and relates to the age of the system.
      Indeed, systems have a life cycle similar to humans. When aging,
      the systems are ‘freezing’, not necessarily at the highest level of
      safety, but with the feeling that there is no more innovation and
      resources to expect, and that a new paradigm is required to make
      the business effective in the future. The following sections detail
      these two incentives to change, external and internal.
Optimum System Safety                                                  257

Examples: Concorde and the Fireworks Industry

For example, when the Concorde aeroplane was designed in the late
1960s it was in perfect compliance with regulations existing at the time.
Since it was impossible to make any retrofit later in the life cycle of the
aircraft (because of the very few aeroplanes existing in the series and
the unaffordable cost of making retrofits), the Concorde progressively
became in breach of the improvements in Civil Aviation regulations. At
the end of its lifetime, in the late 1990s, this airplane was unable to
comply with many of the regulations. For example, adhering to the new
rule of flying 250 kts maximum below flight level 100 was not possible
(as there would not be enough fuel to cross the Atlantic if complying).
It was also unable to carry passengers’ heavy luggage (choices had to be
made between removing some fuel, some seats, or some luggage) and
this limitation was totally in contradiction with the increased use of
Concorde for prestige chartered flights. In both cases, solutions were
found to resist and adapt to growing contradictions, redesigning the
operative instructions to be on the borderline of regulations but
compatible with the desirable outcome. To sum up, for the
continuation of Concorde flight operations, adopting all of the new
safety standards of civil aviation without compromising would have
resulted in grounding the aeroplane. The resilience of Concorde,
playing with boundaries of legality, was so good that Concorde survived
for three decades with borderline tolerated conditions of use [BTCUs]
before being definitively grounded (see Polet et al., 2003, for a theory
on BTCUs). And even after the Paris crash on July, 25th, 2000, that
killed 111 persons, Concorde continued to flight for two more years
despite evidences that it should have been definitively grounded. Again
this strange result can be explained by the superb resilience of the
Concorde operations in British Airways and Air France (of course, in
that case the resilience unfortunately does not apply to the Concorde
having crashed, but applies to the survival of global operations).
Concorde was more than an aeroplane, it was a European flag. As such,
it was considered that the priority of resilience should be put on the
continuation of operations all around the world and not on ultimate
safety.
     The story of Concorde is just one example among many in the
industry. For another, consider the fireworks industry. The average
safety standards of this type of industry remains two orders of
258                                                       Resilience Engineering

magnitude below the safety of advanced chemical industries. However,
when looking carefully at their logic, they deal with extremely unstable
conditions of work. The job is based on a difficult crafting and
innovative savoir-faire to assemble a mix of chemical products and
powders. Innovation is required to remain competitive and products
(made for recreational use only) must be cheap enough to be affordable
to individuals and municipal corporations. All of these conditions make
the fireworks industry a niche of small companies with low salaries.
Finally, a common way of resilience to ensure survival is to adapt first
to the risk, save money and refuse drastic safety solutions. One
modality of adaptation has been illustrated by the national inquiry on
the chemical industry in France conducted after the AZF explosion in
Toulouse in September 2001. The report showed how firework
factories leave big cities in favour of small and isolated villages where a
significant number of inhabitants tolerate the risk because they are
working in the firework factory. In that case, resilience (i.e., industry
survival) has reached a safety deadlock. Accepting to improve safety
would kill this industry. That is exactly what its representatives
advocated to the commission, threatening to leave France if the law had
to be respected. (Note that safety requirements already existed, and the
problem was, in that case, either to enforce them or to continue
tolerating borderline compliance.)


Mapping the Types of Resilience

The analysis of the various human activities at work and their safety-
related policies lead us to consider four classes of system resiliencies
(Table 16.1).

Ultra-Performing Systems

A first category of human activities is based on the constant search and
expression of maximum performance. These activities are typically
crafting activities made by individuals or small teams (extreme sports,
audacious grafts in medicine, etc.). They are associated with limited
fatalities when failing. Moreover, the risk of failure, including fatal
failure, is inherent to the activity, accepted as such to permit the
maximum performance. Safety is a concern only at the individual level.
Optimum System Safety                                                                259

People experiencing accidents are losers; people surviving have a
maximum of rewards and are winners.


Table 16.1: Types of systems and resilience

             Safety level (Order of magnitude)
             Ultra performing Egoistic system Collective                 Ultra-safe
                                             -5
             system             (Safety < 10 )     expectation           systems
                          -3                                    -6
             (Safety < 10 )                        (Safety<10 )
Types        Crafting industry, Drivers using the Food industry,         High risk
             Mountaineering, road facilities, or banks, services,        complex
             Extreme sports, patients              incl. medical, as     systems:
             Transplant         choosing their     part of a standard Transportation,
             surgery            doctors            accompanying          energy
                                                   package set
Model of Outstanding            Individual         Collective            No accidents.
success performance.            satisfaction. The satisfaction.          One accident
             Constant search choice of service Customers are not anywhere
             and expression fully depends on making a direct             means the end
             of maximum         customer           choice of these       of business
             performance        decision           services
Model of Low competence Poor team work. Poor top                         Complacency.
failure                         Unstable quality organisation.           Large accident
                                and delivery.      Accidents possible. is the rule.
                                Fatalities here    Victims form a        Victims form a
                                and there.         group and sue         group and may
                                Individual victims local social entities sue system as
                                sue individual     and local             a whole
                                workers.           politicians.
Criteria for Training           Quality and        Transparency,         Show
resilience competitiveness control                 HRO,                  compliance,
                                procedures         management            accept
                                                   regulations           supervision,
                                                                         ready for the
                                                                         ‘big one’
Who is in Everyone and no Quality                  Safety managers Safety
charge of one                   managers.                                managers
organising                      Business risk                            scrutinised by
resilience?                     control                                  international &
                                department                               government
                                                                         agencies

Egoistic Systems

A second category of human activities corresponds to a type of
resilience based on the apparent contradiction between global
260                                                       Resilience Engineering

governance and local anarchy. The system is like a ‘governed market’
open to ‘individual customers’. This is for instance the case for drivers
using the road facilities or patients choosing their doctors. The
governance of the system is quite active via a series of co-ordinations,
influencing of roles, and safety requirements. However, the job is done
at the individual level with a limited vision of the whole, and logically
the losses are also at the individual level with fatalities here and there.
     One of the main characteristics of this system is that the choice is
made at the users’ level, directly beneficial to him or her, and therefore
exposes most of the safety loopholes. For example, the patient may
choose his/her doctor, or even decide on proposed medical strategies
with pros and cons. General requirements, such as quality procedures,
are sold as additional criteria that may influence the choice of the
customer. Since accident causes mix the choice of end users and of
professionals, they tend to be considered as isolated problems with little
or no consequence for the rest of the activity. The usual vision is that
losers are poor workers or unlucky customers. There are very few
inquiries, and most complaints are based on individual customers suing
individual professionals. Systems of that type are stable and do not seek
better safety, at least as long as the economic relationships remain
encapsulated in these inter-individual professional exchanges. However,
should the choice no longer be the prerogative of individuals, the whole
system is immediately put at risk and therefore moves to a new balance,
adopting the rules of resilience of the next safety level. Regarding safety
tools used at that stage, the priority is to standardise people
(competence), work (procedure) and technology (ergonomics) with
recommended procedures in design (ergonomics) and operations
(guidelines, protocols) as the main generic tools. The tools for
standardisation will then move on to more official prescriptions at the
next level, and ultimately will be turned into new federal or national
laws in the last stage.

Systems of Collective Expectation

The third category of human activities corresponds to public services
and large low risk public industries. Here people in the street are not
making direct choices. This is typically the case of the food, post-office,
energy supply, bank supply, and a series of medical accompanying
services (general hygiene conditions, sanitary prevention, biology, etc.).
Optimum System Safety                                                  261

These services are considered as necessary at the town and region level.
Their failures can lead to social chaos, directly engaging the competency
and commitment of the local top managers and politicians. This is the
reason why resilience at this level consistently incorporates a high
public visibility and communication effort on risk management. Safety
bureaus with safety officers deliver public reports giving proofs of
safety value on a regular basis. To sum up, resilience of that type mainly
consists in showing a higher commitment, developing transparency and
communication on safety, and managing the media, pushing evolution
but not revolutions, and never abandoning the local control of the
governance. However, with this evolution of governance, safety
strategies benefit from new impulses. A continuous audit is required to
address and control residual problems. This may require an extensive
development of monitoring tools such as in-service experience,
reporting systems, sentinel events, morbidity and mortality conferences.
It is an occasion to consider safety at a systemic level, enhancing
communication and the safety culture at all levels, including the
management level. The teaching of non-technical skills (such as Crew
Resource Management) becomes a priority in order to get people to
work as a team. Macro-ergonomics tend to replace local or micro-
ergonomics, and policies tend to replace simple guidelines. The audit
procedure can identify a series of recurrent system and human
loopholes, which resist safety solutions based on standardisation,
education, and ergonomics. All solutions follow an inverted U-curve in
efficiency. When the cost-benefit of a solution becomes negative (for
example, the ratio of time spent on recurrent education versus effective
duty time), the governance of the system has to envisage transitioning
to the next step and the present system of resilience is questioned.
     This is typically the effect of the new French law on industrial risk
prevention (loi Bachelot-Narquin, July 2003) voted after the AZF
explosion in Toulouse in September 2001. The AZF explosion
destabilised the resilience of the whole chemical industry in France,
questioning its presence on French territory. However, the final content
of the law issued two years after the accident is the result of a series of
contradictory and severe debates on the type of action to be conducted
at the nation level for reinforcing safety in the chemical industry (see
the Fiterman report, 2003). This law produced a very prudent ‘baby’.
Instead of changing the foundations and recommending the adoption
of a radical change/restrictions in technique and operations to make the
262                                                      Resilience Engineering

job safer (considered as a non-affordable effort and a major threat by
the chemical industry unions), the law in the end almost only asks for
better visibility, communication and information to neighbours on the
risk around factories. The communication procedure relies on the
creation of ‘local citizen consulting committees’ with a mixture of
industrial and citizen representatives. To rephrase, the letter of the law
matches the characteristics of the resilience of this industry, with a
conscious acceptance that the very core of the business, and the
inherent associated risk, cannot change.
     Another example is provided by the electricity power supply in the
Northern US. This power supply system is known to be severely at risk
after multiple failures occurred in the past three winters: however, the
plan for correctives action taken by the US government is a prudent
compromise that preserves the present balance and resilience, taking
most initiatives at the local regional level and not at the national, or
even at the continental level with Canada.

Ultra-Safe Systems

The fourth and last category of systems corresponds to those for which
the risk of multiple fatalities is so high that even single accidents are
unacceptable. If one accident occurs to one operator it may mean the
end of business for all operators. This is the case of the energy industry
(chemical, nuclear), and public transportation. The resilience of such
systems adds to the characteristics seen in the previous category the
need for a transfer of safety authority at the nation level or at
international level, often leading to the creation of new agencies. Safety
becomes a high priority at all levels of the system and an object of
action by itself. Here the watchword of safety is supervision. Supervision
means full traceability by means of information technology (IT) to
enforce standardisation and personal accountability for errors, and
growing automation to change progressively the role of technical
people, freeing them from repetitive, time consuming and error prone
techniques, and making them more focused on decisions.
     For instance, advances in IT and computers provided aviation with
an end-to-end supervisory system using systematic analysis of on-board
black boxes, and leading to the eventual deployment of a global-sky-
centralised-automated-management-system called the data-link. The
Optimum System Safety                                                  263

impact on people and their jobs, whether pilots, controllers, or
mechanics, is far-reaching.
     To conclude this section, there are multiple examples in the
industry which show that safety managers and professional are perfectly
aware of how the jobs can be done more safely, yet fail to do it in
practice. In most cases, they are limiting their safety actions because the
system can survive economically with remaining accidents, and because
the constraints associated with a better safety would not be affordable.
This is a typical logic of losers and winners. As long as the losers stay
isolated in a competitive market and their failures do not contaminate
the winners, the system is not ready to change and give priority for
resilience to competitiveness.
     When the reality of accidents not only affects the unlucky losers
but also propagates to the profession or to politicians, the system tunes
resilience differently and increases the priority on safety. The first move
consists in keeping the control on performance but increasing
transparency on risk management. The second move is transferring the
ultimate authority of risk management far from the workplace, giving
gradual power to national and international agencies. Only very robust,
organised, and money making systems may resist this last move, which
generates an escalation of safety standards with little consideration for
their cost.
     Figure 16.3 illustrates a revision of Reason’s general framework
model of safety and resilience to fit with this idea of a cascade of
resiliencies, with a paradoxical inversion of the paradigm. The
spontaneous initial stage of resilience corresponds to highly competitive
and relatively unsafe systems. When this stage is no longer viable, the
system reverts to the next type of resilience, accepting more constraints
and regulation, better safety, but losing some capacity to exceptional
performance, etc. The cascade reversions continue until the system has
reached a plateau where no further solutions exist to improve safety.
This is generally the time of the death of the system, followed by the
emergence of a new system (see section below). Note that the longer a
system can remain in the first stages of resilience with high
performance and low safety values, the longer its total life cycle will be
(in that case, the system extends its life cycle, and postpones the arrival
of the final asymptote).
264                                                                        Resilience Engineering

  SAFETY
                                          Detection
                  Resilience
                                                         Recovery




                             Prevention

                                                      Mitigation
         Reason’s original
           illustration of
              resilience
                                  Insurance
                                                            TIME

Competitiveness
                                                           Reason’s revisited Illustration of the
                  Resilience                               swing from one type of resilience to
                                                           another. Note the twist in safety
                                                           reference compared to original figure.
                                                           The successive swings generally
                                                           correspond to better safety arbitrations
                                                           to the detriment of competitiveness

                                                      Resilience




                                                                                      SAFETY


Figure 16.3: Revisiting Jim Reason’s illustration of system
resilience, turning to a cascade model of resiliencies


Understanding the Transition from One Type of Resilience to
Another

As noted above there are two families of causes, external and internal,
that may provoke the transition of one stage of resilience to another.
The reader must understand the paradox of this concept of shift.
Resilience, indeed, is by itself a concept that expresses the reluctance or
resistance to shift. Therefore, each of the stages or types of resilience
described in the previous section, oppose the shift as long as possible.
However, no stage of resilience can exist forever in a given system. The
external and internal forces will sooner or later provoke an inadequacy
of this resilience system and ask for a new one. The conditions for
these breakdown periods are described below.
Optimum System Safety                                                  265

External Causes of Transition

The external destabilising factors are in that case sudden and
unpredictable: they can be a specific accident, or an economical crisis.
     For example, a series of listeriosis infections occurred in France in
the early 1990s due to improper preparation and storage of farm
cheeses and milk products by farmers or (very) small food companies.
Six young pregnant women died in 1992 and 1993, and the reaction of
the media was so strong that this accident became the start of a large
change in the farm product business. Within a period of two years after
the problem occurred, a new law prescribed restrictions for farmers’
food production, conservation, and conditions of food presentation in
the marketplaces. Within a period of five years after the problem, a new
national agency, the AFSSA (‘Agence Française de Sécurité Sanitaire
des Aliments’), was created (April 1999) concentrating the authority for
food quality and control, and reinforcing the requirements for
inspections (new directive dated May, 16th, 2000). From that date, the
business drastically changed. Most isolated small fresh food companies
collapsed or had to merge or sell activities to bigger trusts. The
traditional French farm business that had bet for years on a great and
cheap variety of products has now cut down the variety of products by
30%, been re-concentrated in the hands of a big combination of
collective unions, and has definitively changed its working methods,
moving to a new setting of resilience giving greater priority to safety.
     However, the numerous examples given in the first section of this
paper (e.g., Concorde, AZF follow-up actions) tend to demonstrate that
such a reactive shift after an accident is far from being a standard in
industry. Precisely because each type of human activity has adopted a
system of resilience, it can long resist perturbations and accidents. In
general, the very forces that push the professional activities to adopt a
different system of resilience are more likely to be part of the history of
the profession. This is why it is important to consider a more global
framework model on the evolution of the life cycles of industry.

Internal Causes of Transition

The Life Cycle of Industry and Safety Related Concepts. Socio-technical
systems, as well as humans, have a limited life span. This is specifically
true if we adopt a teleological point of view where a social system is
266                                                      Resilience Engineering

defined as a solution (a means) to satisfy a function (an end) (see
Rasmussen, 1997; Rasmussen & Svedung, 2000, Amalberti, 2001). The
solution is usually based on a strategy for coupling humans to
technology; one can use the term ‘master coupling paradigm’.
     For example, the master coupling paradigm for train driving is
based on a train driver being informed of danger by means of
instructions and signals along the railway. However, some suburban
trains have already adopted a different master coupling, becoming fully
automated, hence with no drivers on board.
     The master coupling paradigm for photographs has been stable for
one century based on argentic printing. Nevertheless, the system totally
collapsed in a short period of time in the early 2000s, being replaced by
the new business of digital cameras and photos. Note also that the
function of taking pictures was integrally maintained for end users
through this drastic change.
     Another example of a change in the master coupling paradigm has
been the move from balloons to aeroplanes in air transportation. For
nearly half of century between 1875 and 1925, commercial public air
transportation was successfully made by airship. The airship era totally
collapsed in a short period after the Hindenburg accident in New York
in 1936, and was immediately replaced by the emerging aeroplane
industry. Again, this change full preserved the main function of the
system (transporting passengers by air).
     Note that the same aeroplanes and associated master coupling
paradigm that replaced balloons are themselves at the end of their life
cycle. The present cockpit design is based on the presence of front-line
actors (pilots, controllers) who have a large autonomy of decision-
making. The deployment of the aircraft traffic satellite guidance via data
link system that is just around the corner will drastically change the
coupling paradigm and redefine all of the front-line professions on
board and across the board.
     The total lifespan for a given working activity based on a master
coupling technological paradigm is likely to be equal to a human
lifespan: half a century in the 19th century, and now about a century.
However, during the period of the life cycle, where the master coupling
paradigm remains macroscopically stable, the quality of the paradigm is
continuously improving. Each period corresponds to a series of safety
characteristics and resilience. This vision is another way to look at the
different step of resiliencies that have been described above. We have
Optimum System Safety                                                    267

seen that there are several categories of resilience with associated safety
properties. We have seen that they are some conditions that lead to a
transition from one to another. In a certain sense, we rephrase the idea
from that section only adding the unavoidability of these transitions
within the life cycle of systems. All system will transition and finally die.
Some external events may precipitate this cycle that will inevitably
come. The most paradoxical result is that speeding up the cycle will
result in rapidly improving safety, but rapidly exposing the system to
dying.
     It is also important to consider that the usual way to look at system
resilience and safety proceeds much more by audit and instant
‘snapshots’.
     With the information contained in the previous section of the
chapter, such audits make it possible to classify the observed system in
one of the four categories of resilience. It is then possible to infer the
pragmatic behaviour after accidents, the limit of requirements that can
be reasonably put on this system, and certain conditions that clearly
announce the looming need to transition to the next category of
resilience.
     With the information presented in the following section of the
paper, it will be possible to go beyond the instant classification and
create a perspective of the dynamic evolution and the long time
evolution of the system resiliencies. Four successive periods seems to
characterise the life cycle of most systems (see Figure 16.4).
     A short, initial period corresponds to the pioneering efforts. This is
typical of the pre-industrial time where the master coupling paradigm is
elaborated. At that stage, the specimens of the system are very few and
confined to laboratories. Accident are very frequent (relative to the low
number of existing systems), but safety is not a central concern, and
pioneers are likely to escape justice when making errors.
     A long period of optimisation can be termed the ‘hope period’.
Hughes (1983, 1994) says that pioneers are fired at that stage and
replaced by businessmen and production engineers. The system enters
into a long continuous momentum of improvement of the initial master
coupling paradigm to fit the growing commercial market demand.
Safety is systematically improved in parallel with the technical changes.
It is time for hope: ‘The upgraded version of the system already
planned and available for tomorrow will certainly avoid the accident of
today’. Despite remaining accidents, very few victims sue the
268                                                                           Resilience Engineering

professionals. As long as clients share the perception that the
progresses are rapid, they tend to excuse loopholes and accept that
errors and approximations are definitively part of this momentum of
hope and innovation. The safer a system is, the more likely it is that
society will seek to blame someone or seek legal recourse when injuries
occur. For example, it is only in recent times that there has been an
acceleration of patients suing their doctors. In France, for example, the
rate of litigation per 100 physicians has increased from 2.5% in 1988 to
4.5% in 2001 (source MACSF).

Safety level
                      System under growing
                      media and legal scrutiny
                                                       4. BIG ONE & NEW CYCLE
                       3.TIME OF JUSTIFICATION            END OF THE CYCLE
                                                                           TECHNOLOGY BREAKDOWN
                                                                BIG ONE
                                                                              EMERGENCE OF A NEW
                                        RISK MANAGEMENT,                       COUPLING PARADIGM
                                        arbitration,
                                                                          0 10 20   30   40   50   60
                       RISK EMERGENCE, transparency                       NEXT INDUSTRIAL CYCLE

                    2.TIME OF HOPE

                    RISK PRODUCTION, quality



        1.HEROIC TIME


                                                              Years
 0 10   20     30     40   50   60    70   80    90   100 110 Order of magnitude

Figure 16.4: Evolution of risk acceptance along the life cycle of
systems

     The third period of the life cycle corresponds to the ‘safety period’.
The perception of the public is now that the system is reaching an
asymptotic level of knowledge corresponding to a high level of
potential performance. The customers expect to reap the benefits of
this performance and do not hesitate any longer to sue workers. They
particularly sue failing workers and institutions any time they consider
that these people have failed to provide the expected service owing to
an incorrect arbitration of priority in applying the available knowledge.
A step further in this escalation of people suing workers is the shift
Optimum System Safety                                                 269

from requirements for means to requirements for ends. People require
good results.
     The increase of legal pressure and media scrutiny is a paradoxical
characteristic of systems at that stage. The safer they get, the more they
are scrutinised. The first paradox is that the accidents that still occur
tend to be more serious on account of the enhanced performance of
the systems. Such accidents in safe systems are often massively more
expensive in terms of compensation for the victims, to such an extent
that in many sectors they can give rise to public insurance crises.
Accidents therefore become intolerable on account of their
consequences rather than their frequency. The skewing of policy caused
by the interplay of technical progress and the increasing intolerance of
residual risks is problematic. On the one hand the system experiences
higher profits and better objective safety, but, on the other hand,
infrequent, but serious, accidents cause an overreaction among the
general public, which is capable of censoring and firing people,
sweeping away policies, and sometimes even destroying industries. It is
worth noticing that these residual safety problems can often bias
objective risk analysis, assigning a low value to deaths that are sparsely
distributed though they may be numerous, and assigning a high value to
cases where massive concentration of fatalities occur even if they are
scarce, such as aircraft accidents, problems of blood transfusion in
France, or fire risks in hospitals. In essence, 100 isolated, singular
deaths may have far less emotional impact than 10 deaths in a single
event.
     The consequence of this paradox is, for example, that patient
injuries that occur tend to be massively more expensive in terms of
patient compensation, and thus fuel the liability crisis.
     The very last period of the life cycle is the death of the present
coupling paradigm, and the re-birth of the system with a new coupling
paradigm. The longer the life cycle of a system has lasted, the smaller
will be the event causing its death. The last event that causes the system
to die can be termed the ‘big one’. The social life cycle of a system and
of a paradigm can be extended for years when the conditions to shift
and adopt a new system are not met. The two basic prerequisites for
the change are the availability of a new technical paradigm and an
acceptable cost of the change (balance between insurance and social
crisis associated to the aging present system vs. cost of deployment of
future system). Paradoxically, the adoption of the new coupling
270                                                              Resilience Engineering

paradigm starts a new cycle and gives new tolerance to accidents, with a
clear step back in the resilience space, associated with a relative
degradation of safety.

Changing the Type of Resilience, Changing the Model of an Accident. When the
safety of a system improves, the likelihood of new accidents decreases
(see Table 16.2). The processing of in-service experience needs an
increasingly complex recombination of available information to imagine
the story of the next accident (Amalberti, 2001; Auroy et al., 2004).
     The growing difficulties in foreseeing the next accident create room
for inadequate resilience strategies as the system becomes safer and
safer. To rephrase, the lack of visibility make resilience in safe systems
much more difficult than in unsafe systems. This is also a factor that
explains the usual short duration of the last stage of resilience in the
system’s life cycle. When systems have become ultra safe, the absence
of ultimate visibility on a risk system may lead them towards their own
death.


Table 16.2: Evolution of the prediction model based on past
accidents
         -3       -3           -5               -6
Up to 10        10 to up to 10                 10 or better
The next        The next accident is a         The next accident has never been
accident will   recombination of part of       seen before. Its decomposition may
repeat the      already existing accidents or invoke a series of already seen micro
previous        incidents, in particular using incidents, although most have been
accidents       the same precursors            deemed inconsequential for safety



Conclusion: Adapt the Resilience – and Safety – to the
Requirements and Age of Systems

The important messages of this chapter can be summarised by the
following five points:

•     Forcing a system to adopt the safety standards of the best
      performers is not only a naïve requirement but could easily result in
      accelerating the collapse of the system.
Optimum System Safety                                                  271

•    Respect the ecology of resilience instead of systematically adopting
     forcing functions; the native or spontaneous resilience corresponds
     to well performing but unsafe systems, at least in the sense that
     safety is not a first priority.
•    All systems will transition from their native resilience to new stages
     with much better associated safety. However, the ultimate stage will
     be so constraining that it will lead the system to die.
•    It is crucial to have a good knowledge of the characteristics and the
     causal events announcing the transition for one resilience stage to
     another. These factors are external and internal.
•    Smart safety solutions depend on the stage of resilience.
     Standardise, audit, and supervise are three key families of solutions
     that have to be successively deployed according to the safety level.
     Continuing standardisation beyond necessity will result in either no
     effect or in negative consequences.
This page intentionally left blank
Part III: Challenges for a
Practice of Resilience
Engineering
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 17
Properties of Resilient
Organizations: An Initial View
John Wreathall




Concept of Resilience

While formal definitions of resilience, and its associated field of
application, resilience engineering, have yet to be developed, one of the
simplest explanations is contained in the following description. Other
equally valid definitions are discussed in other sections of this book. I
do not claim primacy of this over others, but for this discussion, it suits
my purpose.

    Resilience is the ability of an organization (system) to keep, or
    recover quickly to, a stable state, allowing it to continue
    operations during and after a major mishap or in the presence
    of continuous significant stresses.

     The property in question of the organization is often safety, but
should also include financial performance, and any other vital goal for
the organization’s well being.
     From this description, we can see a significant difference from the
more traditional techniques of safety management, like probabilistic
safety assessment (PSA), accident root-cause investigations, and so on.
First, PSA and similar methods are concerned with identifying and
defending against a prescribed set of hazards using techniques that have
significant limitations in terms of their ability to represent human and
organizational influences appropriately – often the most important
influences on safety performance. Second, many of the methods
involve the analysis of events to identify ‘causal’ factors from root-
276                                                       Resilience Engineering

cause analyses, fractions of events resulting from ‘human errors’ and so
on.
     While there are several techniques that allow these kinds of
analyses, all suffer from various weaknesses. One is that the
identification of causes of accidents tends to be a social as well as a
technical process (in terms of what causes are considered ‘acceptable’
by the owners of the system). Another, that they are built around rather
limited models of safety that ignore the roles of cultural and
organizational influences, and, many times, rely on only partially
recalled knowledge of events by participants. Most importantly, models
describing the control of safety are built in isolation from other
management activities, as if there was no connection, rather than them
being integrally entwined.
     The concepts of resilience and the anticipated tools for resilience
engineering are intended to address these weaknesses head on. Thus,
resilience engineering is a new management discipline that encompasses
both safety management and other types of management, particularly
process and financial management.


Approach of Resilience Engineering

If resilience is to ensure the organization keeps (or recovers to) a safe
stable state, there are several processes that must go on to accomplish
this goal. The purpose of resilience engineering is to develop and
provide the tools for these processes. While the development of these
is yet to be specified in detail, the following are the kinds of tools that
would be developed.

Tools to Reveal Safety Performance

Organizations constantly struggle to understand how they are
performing with regard to safety. ‘Too much’ safety is thought to limit
the potential for operational profits, and too little will result in harm to
the workers, lost production, and even loss of expensive facilities.
While, in practice, safety and production are not necessarily in
opposition – seeking to eliminate unwanted deviances in operation will
improve both safety and production, for example – a lack of knowledge
of the current levels of safety performance can lead organizations to
Properties of Resilient Organizations                                 277

take more conservative decisions than would be appropriate about
production activities, or the organization’s safety performance can
‘drift’ with a consequence that surprising accidents happen – as has
been cited in the Challenger Shuttle accident.
     Of course, organizations try to measure their safety performance,
both in terms of industrial (worker) safety and process safety (accidents
affecting the public and the environment). While many industries use
different processes, some high-performing facilities (for example, in the
nuclear industry) use essentially the same approach for both. Regardless
of the processes used, both areas of safety require management
processes based on performance data. Some of the most common
processes involve trending safety outcomes like worker fatal accidents
and lost-time injuries, costs of damage to process equipment, releases
to the environment, and so on. Other industries, with which I am most
familiar, such as nuclear power and chemical process industries, use
safety modeling techniques such as probabilistic safety assessments to
identify likely contributors to accidents (such as failures of protection
equipment) and then trend the frequencies and durations for which
such equipment is not operational. Some industries use techniques that
involve some kinds of formal performance models and data-based
evaluations of safety performance, including the aviation and defense
sectors (although PSA is used in both of these, too). However, these are
all very limited as sources of operational management information.
     First, historic data from accidents will always be out-of-date as a
measure of today’s performance since data are from relatively rare events
and almost always aggregated over long periods of time. They represent
the consequences of decisions usually made significantly (years) earlier.
The interpretation of these types of data is often uncertain, often biased
by inevitable pressures to find simple explanations that are ‘politically
acceptable’ and based on overly simple ‘models of safety’ that seek to
identify one or two ‘root causes’ of accidents, neglecting the complexity
of workplace pressures – see discussions by Hollnagel (1998; 2004),
Dekker (2002) and others.
     Second, PSA and similar models are very static interpretations of
how accidents occur, focusing usually on simple descriptions of how
combinations of hardware faults combine to cause bad outcomes and
neglect the complexity and interactions seen in complex accidents.
Reviews of PSAs, when compared with major accidents, show that they
typically fail to identify underlying organizational processes that
278                                                       Resilience Engineering

override the usual assumptions of independence of failures, and neglect
the complexities of human behaviors usually involved in accidents,
often treating humans as if they were simple machines.
     This is not to say the PSA is of no use – it is often an excellent tool
for evaluating designs and selecting between alternatives. Additionally,
serious efforts are underway to remove some of the poor modeling of
human performance, such as the development of the ATHEANA
method (NRC, 2000). However, as a source of information about
making operational decisions now, these methods, even the improved
ones, are critically limited.
     What are required are data that allow the organization’s
management to know the current ‘state of play’ of the safety
performance within the organization, without suffering the problems
outlined above.
     Work has started to identify different data types and sources to
provide the needed management information. An example is the work
to develop leading indicators of organizational performance (see, for
example, Wreathall, 1998, 2001; Wreathall & Merritt, 2003) that has
been undertaken in several industries, including US nuclear power,
aviation and oil exploration. This approach looks for data both at the
working level (such as factors causing safety problems now for
workers) and in organizational behaviors that can set them up to have
vulnerabilities. These methods contribute to ensure the convergence of
resilience at different levels of the organization in the management of
uncertainties.
     There are two tools that are used in a complementary manner in
other industries that are used to measure the leading indicators
associated with performance at the ‘sharp end.’ The first tool is
intended to measure currently the kinds of problems commonly found
in event investigations and near-miss reports. In most applications we
have found 8–12 workplace and task factors typically encapsulate the
dominant contributions to performance problems (Reason et al., 1998);
these are identified by reviews of event reports and interviews with
front-line workers. Typical examples seen across other industries
include interfaces with other groups, lack of (or deficiencies in) relevant
and timely input information, shortages of tools or other specific
resources, and inadequate staffing. These problems are assessed
proactively so that the organization does not have to wait for, and then
suffer, the various costs of even partial failures in mission performance.
Properties of Resilient Organizations                                    279

Rather, the accumulation of data allows management to take
countermeasures before the problems cause failures. This tool simply
solicits data via a web server from samples of workers on a periodic
basis about how much each of these factors has been a problem in
getting work done in a recent period of time.
     The second tool is based on models of organizational effectiveness
that focus on the core processes by which an organization accomplishes
its mission. This will be based on the approach we have developed for
other industries, the nuclear industry initially and more recently the rail
and medical industries. This approach is based on work by Reason, who
performed a review of about 65 different models that describe in
various ways the relationship of organizational processes for successful
and safe outcomes. The results of this review were to identify a set of
common themes that collectively encompass the kinds of processes that
are critical to organizational success in both safety and production
through proactive risk management, as described by Wreathall &
Merritt (2003).
     The themes identified in the review are management commitment,
awareness, preparedness, flexibility, reporting culture, learning culture,
and opacity. Each of these themes has a particular meaning or
significance in a different application domain. By customizing each of
these themes for a particular domain, we can identify the potential
sources of data from which managers at different levels (but aimed
particularly at senior management) can assess the levels of performance
and riskiness within their organization. It is important to note that, in
most applications, very few (if any) new sources of data are needed;
rather, it is a question of selecting the existing data that are particularly
cogent for each of the themes and their customized form in a single
domain.
     The seven themes in highly resilient organizations are:

•     Top-level commitment: Top management recognizes the human
      performance concerns and tries to address them, infusing the
      organization with a sense of significance of human performance,
      providing continuous and extensive follow-through to actions
      related to human performance, and is seen to value human
      performance, both in word and deed.
•     Just culture: Supports the reporting of issues up through the
      organization, yet not tolerating culpable behaviours. Without a just
280                                                        Resilience Engineering

      culture, the willingness of the workers to report problems will be
      much diminished, thereby limiting the ability of the organization to
      learn about weaknesses in its current defences.
•     Learning culture: A shorthand version of this theme is ‘How much
      does the organization respond to events with denial versus repair
      or true reform?’
•     Awareness: Data gathering that provides management with insights
      about what is going on regarding the quality of human performance
      at the plant, the extent to which it is a problem, and the current
      state of the defences.
•     Preparedness: ‘Being ahead’ of the problems in human performance.
      The organization actively anticipates problems and prepares for
      them.
•     Flexibility: It is the ability of the organization to adapt to new or
      complex problems in a way that maximizes its ability to solve the
      problem without disrupting overall functionality. It requires that
      people at the working level (particularly first-level supervisors) are
      able to make important decisions without having to wait
      unnecessarily for management instructions.
•     Opacity: The organization is aware of the boundaries and knows
      how close it is to ‘the edge’ in terms of degraded defenses and
      barriers.

    An example is provided at the end of this chapter of how a product
of work performed to develop leading indicators of organizational
performance can be adapted to reflect the kinds of issues of interest in
the development of resilience engineering.
    Other techniques have been developed to measure safety culture
within organizations and their impact on safety. See, for example, work
by Flin et al., relating to such work in the oil industry (Mearns et al.,
1998; Mearns et al., 2003). The need is now to tie this approach to the
concepts of resilience, to provide knowledge inside the organization
about what its levels of safety are now.

Resources and Defenses

As well as knowing what is the present state of safety in the
organization, it is important that the organization has available
Properties of Resilient Organizations                                281

appropriate levels of resources (particularly reserves) that can react to
sudden increasing challenges or the sudden onset of a major hazard –
Reason has referred to this capability as providing ‘harm absorbers’ –
analogous to shock absorbers in mechanical systems. These resources
can be material, such as providing additional staff to cope with
significant challenges (e.g., dedicated emergency response teams), or
they can be design-oriented, such as building in additional times for
people to react (some have called this ‘white time’) so that plant and
management personnel have time to reflect on the nature of the
challenge and take appropriate responses.
     While appealing in the abstract, these concepts need development
to answer appropriate management questions, like ‘What kinds of
resources to I really need?’, ‘How much in the way of resources, and at
what cost?’, ‘When do I decide to deploy these resources?’, ‘What is the
trigger?’, ‘How do I know my design ‘white time’ is adequate, and what
am I giving up?’
     Accompanying these questions is the overriding operational
question: ‘When and how do I decide I should sacrifice productivity for
safety?’ For example, it is when the production pressures are increasing
that the need for greater safety questioning becomes more important.
How can this be accomplished appropriately? How can the knowledge
gained from the measures discussed above become useful?
     On the matter of defenses, of course one class of defenses exists in
the form of all the barriers that are built in to the design, and are
represented in PSA models and the like. These have been extended by
people such as Hollnagel (2004) to include more abstract (non-visible)
barriers, such as standards, codes of conduct and procedures, and the
like. However, equally important in the context of resilience is the role
of people to act as positive promoters of safety. An example that has
been identified in the world of medicine is where practices have
evolved over time to cope with crises through changes in performance
that are subtle (almost non-observable to the untrained eye). For
instance, in observing a high-risk operation where the patient was
suffering massive bleeding (a liver transplant), the anesthesiology team
transformed from a routine of monitoring blood pressure and
maintaining a regular blood transfusion supply, to a crisis response
team that added staff to the team (resources discussed above),
coordinated their efforts to add substantial amounts of blood in a short
time (without jeopardizing safety by [e.g.,] skipping blood type checks)
282                                                       Resilience Engineering

with virtually no orders or commands, and, when the patient was stable,
relaxing back to the earlier behavior. This was all accomplished in a
quiet, low-key manner.
     From a safety perspective, the behavior avoided what in PSA terms
would have been an initiating event. This positive performance was the
result of the constant challenges faced in surgery (this procedure is
notorious for the amount of blood loss and therefore people are not
surprised by the need for response), and involved well practised
performance in the face of a substantial challenge (with roles and duties
well understood). However, the positive side of human performance, of
which this is one example, is rarely or never factored into formal safety
analyses and little forethought is given in preparing for such
performance. How can the organization prepare and take credit for
such performance? What infrastructure is needed? What needs to take
place for this behavior to be ‘normal’? Work is needed to provide
formalisms to understand how to use this kind of behavior in safety
analyses. Resilience provides a framework to explore this approach.

Understanding of Work as Performed, Not as Imagined

All of the above concepts are concerned with designing and monitoring
the work in the organization. What seems to be a key factor in each of
these examples of resilience engineering, is to have a realistic
understanding of how work is actually performed, and then engineering
all the tools and processes to exploit the beneficial features of that work
(as with the case of the anesthesiologists in the transplant event), and to
remove systems, processes and artifacts that get in the way of work
being performed safely and effectively – the data gathering from the
workers about ‘things that get in the way of working safely’ is one
example. This same need applies at the organizational levels as well as
the workers’ level. How does the organization actually accomplish its
work and how does that impact safety? Hence the need for measures of
organizational behavior. This was already identified above as a needed
area for work in resilience. How can this be accomplished?
     Systems engineering techniques exist for describing formally the
behavior of organizations and how in reality the organization manages to
accomplish its goals. Many of these techniques stem from the work of
the soft systems modelers in the late 1970s and 1980s, such as the work
by Checkland (Checkland, 1981; Checkland & Scholes, 1990). Key
Properties of Resilient Organizations                                283

elements of this approach involve systematic analysis of certain key
facets of the organization’s behavior, such as its how its commercial
and regulatory environments affect its processes and standards, and
associated decision-making. Leveson, Wreathall and others are looking
at how this approach is being connected to resilience, and how it
interacts with elements like the use of safety performance measures and
cultural dimensions, for example.
     At the levels of the individual workers, there is a need to consider
the role of new technologies and how they may affect safety, such as
creating new forms of hazards. Cook, Woods, Hollnagel, Wreathall and
many others have written about examples of where new technologies
have been introduced in the belief that they will eliminate known
‘human errors’ only to find that the potential for new error types has
been overlooked, and that the new ‘error’ is possibly worse than the
ones being eliminated.


Summary

Creating resilience engineering involves the development of several
elements to create a set of tools that can, together, be used to enhance
safety in the face of constant stresses and sudden threats. Work has
already started on many of these tools, though not necessarily within
the framework of resilience. This includes:

•     the development of organizational and other performance
      indicators that provide current and leading information on safety
      performance;
•     data analysis related to safety culture and climate, and an
      understanding of how they relate to performance;
•     observations about how work is carried out in the real world, both
      at the worker level and for the organization as a whole;
•     the timing and extent of resources that are necessary for ‘harm
      absorption’;
•     how work processes and human behavior act to make safety better
      through individual and small team activities, as well as act as
      sources of failures;
284                                                          Resilience Engineering

•     improved understanding of decision-making when it relates to
      sacrificing production goals to safety goals, how to accomplish it,
      and what resources are involved.

     What is needed now is multidisciplinary efforts to integrate these
activities to provide an integrated body of knowledge and tools for
management to take advantage of these ideas.


Example: Adaptation of Leading Indicators of Organizational
Performance to Resilience Engineering Processes

Concrete examples of some of the seven top-level issues used in the
development of these indicators associated specifically with resilience
are:

•     Flexibility: The stiffness of the decision-making in the organization,
      and its failures to respond in a timely manner to an increasing need
      for revising its response to the pressures of production to allow
      increased protection, is typical of an organization that will have
      safety-related problems. Such a problem has been seen in several
      major incidents where the organization has maintained its fixation
      on production when the indications of a safety concern have been
      clear. Examples include the repeated violations at the Millstone
      nuclear power plant that led to the Nuclear Regulatory
      Commission issuing a fine of over $2 million in 1997 – see NY
      Times “Owner of Connecticut Nuclear Plant Accepts a Record Fine”
      September 28, 1997.1
•     Opacity (and its corollary, observability): The extent to which
      information about safety concerns are kept closely held by a few
      individuals has been identified by analysts as a characteristic of
      organizations that are being set up for problems. For instance,
      Weick et al. (1999) refers to ‘collective mindfulness’ as a
      characteristic of highly reliable organizations: collective




1
       Available at http://www.state.nv.us/nucwaste/news/nn10210.htm
Properties of Resilient Organizations                                  285

      mindfulness includes that fact that safety issues and concerns are
      widely distributed throughout the organization at all levels.
•     Just Culture (also openness): The degree to which the reporting of
      safety concerns and problems is open and encouraged provides a
      significant source of resilience within the organization. The justice
      embedded in the just culture leads to the organization not penalizing
      the bearers of bad news – the opposite from what has been seen in
      the Millstone example above.
•     Management Commitment: The commitment of the management to
      balance carefully the acute pressures of production with the chronic
      pressures of protection is a true measure of resilience. Their
      willingness to invest in safety and to allocate resources to safety
      improvement in a timely, proactive manner is a key factor in
      ensuring a resilient organization.


Acknowledgments

The author wishes to acknowledge the support provided by NASA
Ames Research Center under grant NNA04CK45A to develop
resilience engineering concepts for managing organizational risk, and
for the support of many in the nuclear power industry for the evolution
of ideas described herein.
This page intentionally left blank
Remedies
Yushi Fujita




    Knowing the existence of mismatches between reality and
    formality is the first step for better remedy. Enforcing rules
    without understanding the mismatches is not an effective
    remedy. Appropriate monitoring mechanisms are a prerequisite
    for knowing the existence of mismatches. So are appropriate
    evaluation mechanisms for understanding mismatches. These
    mechanisms should maintain independence from and authority
    over administrative mechanisms.


    Respecting humans at the front end (e.g., operators,
    maintenance persons) is also a useful step towards better
    remedy. They are the ones who best know the demanding
    reality, and how to cope with it. Overall safety has to be
    ensured by evaluating their behaviors, and corrective actions
    must be taken if their reactions are too risky.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 18
Auditing Resilience in Risk
Control and Safety Management
Systems
Andrew Hale
Frank Guldenmund
Louis Goossens




Introduction

Discussion of the need for resilience in organisations is only of
academic value, if it is not possible to assess in advance of accidents
and disasters whether an organisation has those qualities, or how to
change the organisation in order to acquire or improve them, if it does
not already have them. Proactive assessment of organisations relies on
one form or other of management audit or organisational culture
assessment. In this chapter we look critically at the ARAMIS risk
assessment approach designed for evaluating high-hazard chemical
plants, which contains a management audit (Duijm et al., 2004; Hale et
al., 2005). We ask the question whether such a tool is potentially
capable of measuring the characteristics that have been identified in this
book as relevant to resilience. In an earlier paper (Hale, 2000) a similar
question was asked in a more specific context about the IRMA audit
(Bellamy et al., 1999), a predecessor of the tool that will be assessed
here. That paper asked whether the audit tool could have picked up the
management system and cultural shortcomings which ultimately led to
the Tokai-mura criticality incident in Japan (Furuta et al., 2000), if used
before the accident happened. That analysis concluded that there were
at least eight indicators in the management system that the hazards of
290                                                             Resilience Engineering

criticality had become poorly controlled, which such an audit, if carried
out thoroughly, should have picked up. It is of course then a valid
question whether these signals would have been taken seriously enough
to take remedial action, which would have led to sufficient change to
prevent the accident. Responding effectively to signals from audits is
also a characteristic of a resilient organisation; but this in turn can be
assessed by an audit, if it looks, as did the IRMA audit, at the record of
action taken from previous audit recommendations.
     The IRMA audit and its close relation, the ARAMIS risk
assessment method, have been developed during studies in which the
group in Delft has participated, in collaboration with a number of
others.1 These studies have tried to develop better methods of
modelling and auditing safety management systems, particularly in
major hazard companies falling under the Seveso Directives. Whilst the
term ‘resilience engineering’ has never been used in these projects, there
are many overlaps in the thinking developed in them with the concepts
expressed in the chapters of this book and in the High Reliability
Organisation and Normal Accident literatures, which have fed the
discussions about resilience.
     It seems valuable to ask the same question again here, but now in a
more general context and not in relation to one particular accident
sequence. We therefore present a critical assessment of our audit tool in
relation to the generic weak signals of lack, or loss of resilience that are
discussed in this book. We confine ourselves in this chapter to an audit
tool as a potential measuring instrument for resilience and do not
consider tools for measuring organisational culture. This reflects partly
the field of competence of the principal author, partly the fact that
other authors in this book are more competent to pose and discuss that
question. It also reflects, however, a more fundamental proposition
that, if resilience is not anchored in the structure of management



1
      Relatively constant in these consortia have been the Dutch Ministry of Social
      Affairs and Employment, The Dutch Institute for Public Health, Environment
      and Nature, the British Health & Safety Executive, the Greek Institute
      Demokritos and Linda Bellamy, working for a number of different
      consultancies. Other institutes which have taken part include INERIS in
      France and Risø in Denmark. The consortia have worked under a succession
      of European projects, including PRIMA, I-Risk and ARAMIS.
Auditing Resilience                                                   291

systems, which audits measure, it will not have a long life.
Organisational culture measuring instruments tend to tap into the
aspect of group/shared attitudes and beliefs, which may rest largely in
the sphere of the informal operation of the management system.
Culture will, in this formulation, always be a powerful shaper of practice
and risk control, but a lack of anchoring in structure may mean that
culture can change unremarked, causing good performance to become
lost. We believe that measuring instruments for resilience will need to
be derived from both traditions. This chapter only assesses the
contribution of one of them, the audit.
     In the next section a brief summary of the ARAMIS risk
assessment and audit tool is given, followed by a discussion of the way
in which such a tool could provide some proactive assessment of the
factors identified as providing resilience in the organisation.


Structure of the ARAMIS Audit Model

The model used in the ARAMIS project (Duijm et al., 2004) can be
summarised as follows.

Technical Model of Accident Barriers: Hardware and Behaviour

The technical modelling of the plant identifies all critical equipment and
accident scenarios for the plant concerned and analyses what barriers
the company claims to use to control these scenarios. It is essential that
this identification process is exhaustive for all potential accidents with
major consequences, otherwise crucial scenarios may be missed, which
may later turn out to be significant. All relevant accident scenarios need
to be defined not only for the operational phase, but also for non-
nominal operation, maintenance and emergency situations. In the
ARAMIS project only some of these scenarios were worked out in
detail, but the principles of the model could be applied to all of them.
In the audits of chemical companies under the Seveso Directive, the
major consequences covered are those which arise from loss of
containment of toxic and flammable chemicals, and which result in the
possibility of off-site deaths. If we were to lower the threshold of what
we consider to be major consequences, to single on-site deaths, or even
serious injuries, the task of identifying the relevant scenarios becomes
292                                                      Resilience Engineering

rapidly larger, but the principles do not alter. A major project funded by
the Dutch Ministry of Social Affairs & Employment is currently
extending this approach to develop generic scenarios for all types of
accident leading to serious injury in the Netherlands (Hale et al., 2004).
     The scenarios are represented in the so-called bowtie model (Figure
3.2) as developments over time. Inherent hazards such as toxic and
flammable chemicals, which are essential to the organisation and cannot
be designed out, are kept under control by barriers, such as the
containment walls of vessels, pressure relief valves, or the procedure
operators use to mix chemicals to avoid a potential runaway reaction.
     If these barriers are not present, or kept in a good operating state,
the hazard will not be effectively controlled and the scenario will move
towards the centre event, the loss of control. This is usually defined for
chemicals as a loss of containment of the chemical. To the right of this
centre event there are still a number of possible barriers, such as bunds
around tanks to contain liquid spills, sprinkler systems to prevent or
control fire, and evacuation procedures to get people out of the danger
area. These mitigate the consequences. In this modelling technique
barriers consist of a combination of hardware, software and
behavioural/procedural elements, which must be designed, installed,
adjusted, used, maintained and monitored, if they are hardware, or
defined, trained, tested, used and monitored if they are
behavioural/procedural. These management tasks to keep the barriers
functioning effectively throughout their life cycle are represented in the
three blocks at the base of Figure 18.1.
     It is already common practice in chemical design to assign a SIL
(Safety Integrity Level) value for safety hardware. These SIL values give
nominal maximum effectiveness values for the barriers, which can only
be achieved if the barriers are well managed and kept up to the level of
effectiveness which is assumed to be the basis of their risk reduction
potential. In the ARAMIS project equivalent SIL values were assigned
to behavioural barriers in order to use the same approach. The audit is
designed to assess whether the specific barriers chosen by the company
are indeed well managed. The modelling of the scenarios and barriers
themselves also gives insight into how good the choice of barriers is
which the company has made, and whether another choice could
provide more intrinsic safety, e.g. to eliminate the hazard entirely by
using non-toxic substitute chemicals. In other words it assesses the
inherent safety of the whole system.
Auditing Resilience                                                           293

Modelling the Management of the Barriers

The management model on which the audit is based is structured
around the life cycle of these barriers or barrier elements (Figure 18.1).
                               Barrier life cycle: from
      1. Risk (scenario)                                  2. Monitoring, feedback,
                              design or task definition
    identification, barrier                                  learning & change
                                   to review and
  selection & specification                                     management
                                   improvement


                                  Barriers with
    Hardware barriers or                                   Behavioural barriers or
                                 combination of
         elements                                                elements
                              hardware & behaviour


  3. Design specification,                                 5. Procedures, plans,
  purchase, construction,                                     rules and goals
   installation, interface
 design/layout and spares
                                                          6. Availability, manpower
                                                                   planning
   4. Inspection, testing,
  performance monitoring,
  maintenance and repair                                      7. Competence,
                                                                 suitability
   If deeper auditing of
   hardware life cycle is
  needed, treat each life                                 8. Commitment, conflict
   cycle step as a task,                                        resolution
  examine resources &
controls provided for them,
     using behavioural                                        9. Coordination,
         protocols                                            communication

Figure 18.1: ARAMIS outline model of the barrier selection and
management system

    The life cycle begins in block 1 with the risk analysis process, which
leads to the choice of what the company believes to be the most
effective set of barriers for all its significant scenarios. Auditing the
management process here assesses how well the company’s own choice
of barriers is argued, and so provides a check on the technical
modellers’ assessment of the barrier choice. In order that the life cycle
should be optimally managed, the company needs to carry out a range
of tasks, which will differ slightly depending on whether the barriers
294                                                       Resilience Engineering

consist of hardware and software, of behaviour, or of a combination of
both. These are detailed below the central block at the top of Figure
18.1 and we return to them below. Box 2 represents the vital process of
monitoring the state and effectiveness of the barriers and taking
corrective, or improvement action, if that performance declines, or new
information about hazards or the state of the art of control measures, is
found from inside or outside the company.
    The life cycle tasks for hardware and software are shown to the left
of Figure 18.1 (boxes 3 and 4) and these for behaviour and procedures
are shown on the right in boxes 5 to 9. These two sets of tasks are,
however, in essence fulfilling the same system functions. The barrier
(technical or behavioural) must be

•     specified (design specification or procedural or goal-based task
      description);
•     it must be installed and adjusted (construction, layout, installation
      and adjustment, or selection, training, task allocation and task
      instruction);
•     it must operate, a relatively automatic process for pure
      hardware/software barriers, but a complex one for behavioural
      barriers, since motivation/commitment and communication and
      coordination play a role, alongside competence, in determining
      whether the people concerned will show the desired behaviour; and
•     it must be maintained in an effective state (inspection &
      maintenance, or supervision, monitoring, retraining).

     Each step in ensuring the effectiveness of the hardware barriers
(installation, maintenance, etc.) is itself a task carried out by somebody.
If we want to go deeper into the effectiveness of this task we can ask
whether the task has been defined properly (a procedure or set of
goals), the person assigned to it has been selected and trained for it, is
motivated to do it and communicates with all other relevant people, etc.
In fact we are then applying the boxes 5 to 9 at a deeper level of
iteration to these hardware life cycle tasks. Figure 18.1 shows this
occurring for a deeper audit of the tasks represented by the boxes 3 and
4, the two halves of the life cycle for hardware/software barriers and
barrier elements. If this iteration is carried out, boxes 5 – 9 are applied
this time to tasks such as managing the spares ordering, storage and
Auditing Resilience                                                   295

issuing for maintenance or modifications, or managing the competence
and manpower planning for carrying out the planned inspection and
maintenance on safety-critical hardware barriers.
     In theory we could also take the same step for the tasks to select
and train people or motivate them to do the tasks. We end up then with
a set of iterations that can go on almost for ever – a set of Russian
dolls, each identical inside each other. This would make auditing
impossibly cumbersome. Again we could ask the question how far such
iterations should go in a safe (or resilient) company, and at what point
the company loses its way in the iteration loops and becomes confused
or rigid. We return to some aspects of this in the discussion of the risk
picture below.

Dissecting Management Tasks: Control Loops

We call the sets of tasks described in the preceding section as ‘delivery
systems’, because they deliver to the primary barriers the necessary
hardware, software and behaviour to keep the system safe. Each
delivery system can be seen as having a series of steps, which can be
summarised as closed loop processes such as in Figure 18.2 (the
delivery process for procedures and rules), which deliver the required
resources for the barrier life cycle functions and the criteria against
which their success can be assessed and ensure that the use of the
resources is monitored and correction and improvement is made as
necessary. Such protocols were developed for each of the nine
numbered boxes in Figure 18.2 (Guldenmund & Hale, 2004). Table
18.1 gives more detail of the topics covered by the protocols for the
nine boxes. The monitoring and improvement loops described in these
protocols must be linked to those represented in box 2 of Figure 18.1,
but we do not show the lines and arrows there, in order to avoid
confusing the picture.
     The processes and the protocols of steps within each process can
be formulated generically, as in Figure 18.1. However, in the audit they
are applied specifically to a representative sample of the actual barriers
identified in the technical model. Hence questions are not asked about
maintenance in general, but about the specific maintenance schedule for
a defined piece of hardware, such as a pressure indicator, identified
specifically as a barrier element in a particular scenario. The audit then
verifies performance against that specific schedule. Similarly, training
296                                                      Resilience Engineering

and competence of specific operators in carrying out specified
procedures related to, for example, emergency plant shutdown is
audited, not just safety training and quality of procedures in general.
When the audit approach is used by the company itself, the idea is that,
over time, all scenarios and barriers would be audited on a rotating
basis, to spread the assessment load.

                      1. Define processes,
  Proposed new
                      scenarios, barriers &
    processes
                     controls for the activity

                        8. Evaluate rule                 2. Define where
       Existing
                         effectiveness                       rules are
      processes
                       (errors/violations)                  necessary

                                                           3. Develop
  Existing rules                       9. Modify rules
                                                         applicable rules


 6. Monitor use of      7. Enforce use of                   4. Write &
      rules                   rules                       approve rules

                         5. Promulgate,
  New/changed
                         train, execute
     rules
                              rules

Figure 18.2: Example of management delivery process:
procedures and rules

     The audit tool provides checklist protocols based on the models
outlined above. It has not been developed to the level of giving detailed
guidance or extensive questions and checkpoints for the auditors. The
assumption is made that it will be used by experienced auditors familiar
with the safety management literature and able to locate the lessons and
issues from that within the framework offered.
     Further details of how the audit was used to rate management
performance and to modify the SIL value of the chosen barriers can be
found elsewhere (see Duijm et al., 2004. A description of all of the
steps in the ARAMIS project will be published in 2006 in a special issue
of the Journal of Hazardous Materials).
Auditing Resilience                                                                  297

Table 18.1: Coverage of audit protocols

Protocol              Contents
Risk identification & Modelling of processes within system boundary, development
barrier selection     of scenarios, (semi) quantification & prioritisation, selection of
                      type and form of barrier, identification of barrier management
                      needs, assessment of barrier functioning & effectiveness
Monitoring,           Performance monitoring & measurement, on-line correction,
feedback, learning feedback & improvement locally and across the system, design
& change              & operation of the learning system inside & outside the
management            company, technical & organisational change management
Procedures, rules, Definition & translation of high level safety goals to detailed
goals                 targets, design & production of rules relevant to safety, rule
                      dissemination & training, monitoring, modification &
                      enforcement
Availability,         Defining manpower needs & manning levels, recruitment,
manpower planning retention, planning for normal & exceptional (emergency)
                      situations, coverage for holidays, sickness, emergency call-out,
                      project planning & manning (incl. major maintenance)
Competence,           Task & job safety analysis, selection & training, competence
suitability           testing & appraisal, job instruction & practice, simulators,
                      refresher training, physical & health assessment & monitoring
Commitment,           Assessment of required attitudes & beliefs, selection,
conflict resolution motivation, incentives, appraisal, social control of behaviour,
                      safety culture, definition of safety goals & targets, identification
                      of conflicts between safety & other goals, decision-making fora
                      and rules for conflict flagging and resolution
Communication,        On-line communication for group/collaborative tasks, shift
coordination          changeovers, handover of plant & equipment (production –
                      maintenance), planning meetings, project coordination
Design to             Barrier design specification (incl. boundaries to working),
installation          purchase specification, supplier management, in-house
                      construction management, type testing, purchase, storage &
                      issues (incl. spares), installation, sign-off, adjustment
Inspection to repair Maintenance concept, performance monitoring, inspection,
                      testing, preventive & breakdown maintenance & repair, spares
                      issue & checking, equipment modification



Does the Model Encompass Resilience?

As in our chapter about the resilience of the railway system (Chapter 9),
we have defined eight criteria of resilience, which would require, as a
minimum, to be measured by a management audit. These criteria are
given below. After each criterion we indicate where in the ARAMIS
audit system we believe it could, or should be addressed.
298                                                            Resilience Engineering

Table 18.2: Eight resilience criteria

1. Defences erode under production pressure.              Commitment & conflict
                                                          resolution
2. Past good performance is taken as a reason for         Performance monitoring
future confidence (complacency) about risk control.       & learning.
3. Fragmented problem-solving clouds the big picture – Risk analysis & barrier
mindfulness is not based on a shared risk picture.        selection, whole ARAMIS
                                                          model
4. There is a failure to revise risk assessments          Learning
appropriately as new evidence accumulates.
5. Breakdown at boundaries impedes communication          Communication &
and coordination, which do not have sufficient richness coordination
and redundancy.
6. The organisation cannot respond flexibly to (rapidly) Risk analysis.
changing demands and is not able to cope with             Competence.
unexpected situations.
7. There is not a high enough ‘devotion’ to safety above Commitment & conflict
or alongside other system goals.                          resolution
8. Safety is not built as inherently as possible into the Barrier selection
system and the way it operates by default.

     For the purposes of this discussion we group these points in a way
that links better with the ARAMIS model and audit. We use the
following headings (numbers in brackets indicate where each of the
above criteria is discussed):

A. Clear picture of the risks and how they are controlled (3, 8,
   elements of 5 and 6)
B. Monitoring of performance, learning & change management
   (elements of 1, 2 and 4)
C. Continuing commitment to high safety performance (1, 7)
D. Communication & coordination (elements of 5)

     Of these, A and B are the most important and extensively
discussed.
     We shall conclude that the audit can cover many of the eight
criteria in Table 18.2, but is weakest in addressing 2, 4 and 6.
     In the sub-sections that follow we discuss the degree to which that
assessment is indeed found and how the case studies used to test and
evaluate the audit illustrated assessment of those aspects (see also Hale
et al., 2005). We also discuss some of the problems of using the model
and audit. These often raise the question whether the approach implicit
Auditing Resilience                                                    299

in this assessment model is one that is compatible with the notion of
resilience. As will be clear to the readers who have ploughed there way
through the rather theoretical exposé in the description of the ARAMIS
audit model, the model we use is complex, with many iterations.
Resilience, on the other hand, often conjures up images of flexibility,
lightness and agility, not of ponderous complexity. Our only response is
to say that the management of major hazards is inescapably a complex
process. Our models imply that we can only be sure that this is being
done well if we make that complexity explicit and transparent.

Clear Picture of Risks and How they are Controlled

The essence of the ARAMIS method is that it demands a very explicit
and detailed model of the risks present and the way in which they are
controlled. It also provides the tools to create this. We believe that this
modelling process is an essential step in creating a clear picture of how
the safety management system works, which can then be communicated
to all those within the system. Only then can they see clearly what part
they each play in making the whole system work effectively. Trials with
the approach (e.g. Hale et al., 2005) have shown that the explicitation of
the scenarios and barriers, if done by the personnel involved in their
design, use and maintenance, helps create much clearer understanding
of what is relevant and crucial to the control of which hazards. This was
a comment also made by the management of the companies audited in
the ARAMIS case studies. They said they learned more from
undergoing this audit than they had from other more generic system
audits based on ISO-standards.
     We devote considerable attention to this issue here, because we
believe it is the most fundamental requirement for safe operation and
for resilience. Without a clear picture of what is to be controlled, the
other elements of resilience have no basis on which to operate.

Understanding How Barriers Work and Fail: How Complete is the Model? What
the ARAMIS technique contains is explicit attention to the step from
the barriers themselves to the management of their effectiveness,
through their life cycle and the resources and processes needed to keep
the barriers of different types functioning optimally. This direct linking
of barriers to specific parts of the management system is unique in risk
300                                                      Resilience Engineering

assessment and system modelling. We believe it provides a fundamental
increase in the clarity of the risk control picture.
     Of course the model is only as useful as it is complete. We know
that a risk model can never be complete in every detail. We can hope
that logical analysis of the organisation’s processes, coupled with
experience with the technology, can provide an exhaustive set of
generic ways in which harm can result from loss of control of the
technology. When we look at the major disasters that are often used to
illustrate the discussion of high reliability or resilience, we do not see
very often that the scenarios which eventually led to the accident were
unknown. Loss of tiles on Columbia, the by-passing of the O-rings on
Challenger, the starting of pumps on Piper Alpha with a pressurised
safety valve missing, the mix of chemicals and water resulting in the gas
cloud from Bhopal, etc. were all known routes to disaster, which had
barriers defined and put in place to control them. What was lacking was
enough clarity about the functioning of the barriers and about the
commitment to their management to ensure that their effectiveness
could be, and was, monitored effectively. At the level of the detail of
how control is lost there will always be gaps in our model of the risk
control system, as some of these disasters show. Sometimes these gaps
are in the technical understanding of failure, such as of steel
embrittlement at Flixborough, but more often the gaps are in our
understanding of how people and organisations can fail in the conduct
of their tasks. These failures sit in the delivery systems feeding the
hardware and behavioural barriers. Vaughan’s analysis (Vaughan, 1996)
of the normalisation of deviance fits into this category, whereby subtle
processes occur of becoming convinced that signals initially thought of
as warnings are in fact false alarms. Normalisation of deviance is a
failure in the monitoring and learning system (box 2 in Figure 18.1),
which had previously not been clearly identified. Another example is
the analysis of the classic accident at Three Mile Island nuclear reactor,
in which operators misdiagnosed the leak in the primary cooling circuit,
due to a combination of misleading or unavailable instrument readings
and an inappropriate set of expectations about what were likely and
serious failures. Until this accident, the modelling of human error had
paid insufficient attention to such errors of commission, whose
management falls under the design of instrumentation (box 3 in Figure
18.2) and the competence and support of operators (boxes 5 and 7).
Auditing Resilience                                                    301

     The only recourse in the case of gaps in the model at this detailed
level is then to rely on efficient learning (see ‘Monitoring of
performance, learning and change management’ below); as new detailed
ways of losing control of hazards are discovered within the organisation
or comparable ones elsewhere, they need to be added to the model, as a
living entity, reflecting the actual state of the system it models. This
builds in resilience.

Functional Thinking. The ARAMIS models and the auditing techniques
developed have a strong emphasis on functional process analysis.
Functions are generic features of systems. How those functions are
fulfilled in one specific company may be very different from another.
Barriers also are defined functionally in the models, with the choice of
how the barrier is implemented in a specific case left to the individual
company. The quality of that choice is part of the audit process. To
make the audit technique complete it will be necessary to build up and
make available better databases of experience, indicating which choices
of barriers in which circumstances are most likely to be effective
(Schupp et al., 2005). Thinking in terms of functions provides a clearer
picture of the essence of the risk control system, which does not get
bogged down in the details of implementation. However, the audit
must descend into these details to check that the function is well
implemented in a particular company. It checks whether the managers
and operators involved can see clearly not only what they specifically
have to do (inspect a valve, monitor an instrument, follow up a change
request, etc.) but how that fits functionally into the whole risk control
system.

Control Loops & Dynamic Analysis. The idea of the life cycle of the barrier
and the management of its effectiveness through the delivery of
resources subject to their own control loops, introduces a dynamic
element into the model, because these are processes with feedback.
Resilience is essentially linked to a dynamic view of risk control. In this
respect the Aramis model and audit matches the approach developed in
Leveson’s accident model (Leveson, 2004) and in the control-loop
model of system levels put forward by Rasmussen & Svedung (2000).
The emphasis of the dynamic modelling in the ARAMIS model has,
however, been at the management level, a system level above the
human-technology interactions which are the ones most described by
302                                                          Resilience Engineering

Leveson. Dynamic feedback loops at the management level are of
course not new. The Deming circle has been a concept advocated for
several decades and incorporated into the ISO management standards
and their national forerunners. However, these standards and their
auditors can be criticised for the fact that they have usually not paid
enough attention to the detailed content of the feedback loops and the
way they articulate with the primary processes to control risk. They
have been too easily satisfied with the existence of bureaucratic and
paper proof that planning and feedback loops exist, without checking
whether their existence results in actual dynamic risk control and
positive adaptation to hazard-specific new knowledge, experience and
learning opportunities.
     The use of dynamic models for the management processes presents
problems of interfacing with the static fault and event tree models used
by the technical modellers to quantify risk. A challenge for the future is
to make technical risk modelling more dynamic, so that it can accept
input from the control loops envisaged in such tools as ARAMIS.
These are needed to get over to risk assessors and managers that risk is
constantly varying due to changes in the effectiveness of the
management and learning processes. A static picture of risk levels,
established once and for all by an initial safety study, is an incorrect
one, which encourages a lack of flexibility in thinking about risk control
and hence of resilience.

Conceiving of Barriers as Dynamic. In ARAMIS and the more recent Dutch
project looking at risk control in ‘common or garden’ accidents in
industry2, the control loop is linked with the functioning, and hence the
effectiveness, of the barriers introduced to control the development of
scenarios represented in the bowties. The link with barriers appears,
according to the feedback from the case studies, to be one which can
easily be communicated to people in the companies who are actually
operating the processes and keeping the scenarios under control.
     The original concept of barriers comes from the classic work of
Haddon (1966) and has been used primarily in the old static, deviation



2
      This project is called Workplace Occupational Risk Model or WORM (Hale et
      al., 2004) and involves the core participants mentioned in note 1.
Auditing Resilience                                                   303

models, typically codified in such approaches as MORT (Johnson,
1980). Barriers were originally conceived of largely as physical things in
the path of energy flows. However, the concept has now been extended
to procedural, immaterial and symbolic elements (Hollnagel, 2004), in
other words everything that keeps energy (or more recently
information) flows and processes from deviating from their desired
pathways. In the work of the ARAMIS project we have extended this
definition and given it a control-loop aspect. Barriers are defined as
hardware, software or behaviour, which keeps the critical process
within its safe limits. In other words, barriers are seen more as the
frontier posts guarding the safe operating envelope, than as preventing
deviation from the ‘straight and narrow’. They are also defined as
control devices, which must have three functions in order to be called
effective barriers:

•    Detect the need to operate,
•    Diagnose what that control action is, and
•    Carry out the control action.

     We therefore do not see a warning sign or instrument reading as a
barrier in its own right, only as a barrier element, since it is only
effective if somebody responds to it and carries out the correct control
action. In this sense we differ from Hollnagel (2004) by calling his
symbolic and immaterial barriers only barrier elements. We therefore
place behavioural responses more centrally in the definition of barriers,
which we believe contributes to clearer thinking about them and to
more resilience of the barriers themselves. A preliminary classification
of 11 barrier types then indicates how each of these barrier functions is
operationalised by an element of the barrier, either in the form of
hardware/software, or of human perception, diagnosis or action (Hale
et al., 2005), see Table 18.3.
     This classification allows a direct link to be made between the
choice of barrier type, the hardware, software and behavioural elements
essential to its effective operation and the management functions
needed to keep it functioning effectively (see Figure 18.1). A different
choice of the type of barrier to achieve a given function can then be
seen in the light of the management effort it brings with it, and the
degree to which it can be thought of as inherently safe (criterion 8 of
304                                                               Resilience Engineering

the resilience criteria in Table 18.2). By making the relative roles of
hardware, software and behaviour very explicit, the technique forces the
system controllers to think clearly about the prerequisites for effective
functioning and to realise that all barriers depend for that effectiveness
on human actions, either in direct use, or indirect installation,
inspection, maintenance, etc. The issue of the resilience of the different
barriers is therefore brought centre stage in the decision process of
barrier selection and in auditing. At this point a judgement can be made
as to how inherently safe the process is with its given barriers, or how
narrow and fragile the margins are of the safe operating envelope.


Table 18.3: Classification of different barrier types.

      Barrier        Examples from chemical       Detect     Diagnose/      Act
                     industry                                Activate
1     Permanent – Pipe/hose wall, anti-           None       None           Hardware
      passive.       corrosion paint, tank
      Built into     support, floating tank lid,
      process        viewing port in vessel
2     Permanent – Bund, dyke, drainage sump, None            None           Hardware
      passive.       railing, fence, blast wall,
      Add-on barrier lightning conductor,
3     Temporary – Barriers round repair work, None           None          Hardware
      passive        blind flange over open pipe,            (human must
      Put in place   helmet/gloves/safety                    put them in
      (and removed) shoes/goggles, inhibitor in              place, or put
      by person      mixture                                 them on)
4     Permanent – Active corrosion protection, None          None          Hardware
      active         heating/cooling system,                 (operator
                     ventilation, explosion                  may need to
                     venting, inerting system,               activate them
                     bursting disc                           for certain
                                                             processes)
5     Activated –    Pressure relief valve,         Hardware Hardware      Hardware
      hardware on    interlock with “hard” logic,
      demand         sprinkler installation,
                     p/t/level control
6     Activated –    Programmable automated         Hardware Software       Hardware
      automated      device, control system or
                     shutdown system
Auditing Resilience                                                              305

    Barrier         Examples from chemical         Detect    Diagnose/     Act
                    industry                                 Activate
7 Activated –       Manual shutdown or             Hardware Human          Human/
   manual           adjustment in response to                (S/R/K)       remote
   Human action instrument reading or alarm,                               control
   triggered by     evacuation, putting on
   active           breathing apparatus or
   hardware         calling fire brigade on alarm,
   detection        action triggered by remote
                    camera, drain valve,
                    close/open (correct) valve
8 Activated –       Wearing protective             Hardware Human (R) Human
   warned           equipment in danger area,
   Human action refraining from smoking,
   based on         keeping within white lines,
   passive          opening labelled pipe,
   warning          keeping out of prohibited
                    areas
9 Activated –       Using an expert system to Hardware Software –          Human/
   assisted         assist diagnosis, alarm                  human (R/K) remote
   Software         suppression system                                     control
   presents
   diagnosis to
   the operator
10 Activated –      (Correctly) follow start       Human     Human (S/R) Human/
   procedural       up/shutdown/batch process                              remote
   Observation of procedure, adjust setting of                             control
   local            hardware, warn others to act
   conditions not or evacuate, (un)couple
   using            tanker from storage, empty
   instruments      & purge line before opening,
                    lay down water curtain
11 Activated –      Response to unexpected         Human     Human (K) Human/
   emergency        emergency, improvised jury-                            remote
   Ad-hoc           rig during maintenance, fight                          control
   observation of fire using own initiative
   deviation +
   improvisation
   of response
The coding S, R, K against human actions means the following:
S = skill-based, routine, well-learned responses which people carry out without
needing to reflect or decide. They are triggered by well-known situations or signals.
R = rule-based, known and practised actions which have to be chosen more or less
consciously from a repertoire of skills that have been learned in advance
K = knowledge-based improvisation when faced with situations not met before, or
ones where there is no prescribed or learned response available to the person
concerned and they have to make up a response as they go along.
306                                                       Resilience Engineering

Central or Distributed Control. All of these modelling efforts are designed
to answer the need of the controllers in any system to have a model of
the system they are trying to control, which shows them the levers they
need to operate to influence the risks. In making these attempts at
defining a central (umbrella) system model, we are of course in danger
of falling into the trap that we are implying or even encouraging the
view that control should also be situated centrally. Such a conclusion is
not inevitable from building such an overall model. It is also possible
that the functions in the total models are, in practice, carried out by
many local controllers working in response to local signals and
environments, but within one overall set of objectives. If control is
distributed or local, there is, however, a need to ensure that the
different actors communicate, either directly in person, or through
observation of, and response to the results of other’s actions. A central
overview is essential for monitoring and learning, but not necessarily so
for exercising control.
     We need to resist the tendency to believe that central control is
essential, since many studies have shown that decentralised control can
be better and safer. An example of this was a recent study by Hoekstra
(2001) of the possible implementation of the ‘free flight’ approach to
ATM, in which control in certain parts of the air space is delegated
from a central air traffic control centre to individual aircraft with
relatively simple built-in avoidance algorithms. He showed that these
could cope easily with traffic densities two orders of magnitude higher
than the current maximum densities (which are already worrying en-
route controllers) and could resolve even extreme artificial situations,
such as a single aircraft approaching a solid wall of aircraft at the same
altitude (with vertical resolution algorithms disabled), or ‘super-
conflicts’ involving 16 aircraft approaching the same point in airspace
from mutually opposing directions. (See also Chapter 4 by Pariès.) We
need to distinguish the need for resilient systems to have both central
overview and clarity for the purpose of system auditing, and local
control for the purpose of rapid response.
     The explicit risk control model may also be a help in coping with
the ability to respond to unexpected situations and rapid changes,
where distributed response is an essential element. However, this will
only be so if the inventory of scenarios strives for completeness and
extends to emergency situations and non-nominal system states. We
have discussed above the impossibility of being fully comprehensive in
Auditing Resilience                                                       307

detailed scenarios and the need for learning loops to be built in. The
ARAMIS assessment methods are currently weak in dealing with the
area of non-nominal situations, since there is nothing that forces the
analyst to include these in the total model.

Monitoring of Performance, Learning and Change Management

In all of the management processes audited as ‘delivery systems’ in the
ARAMIS audit there is an explicit step included, which is about
monitoring the effectiveness of the resource or control delivered by
that system. These are collected together in the learning and change
management system in the ARAMIS model (Figure 18.3).

                       1. Define processes,
  Proposed new
                       scenarios, barriers &
    processes
                      controls for the activity

                         8. Evaluate rule                   2. Define where
      Existing
                          effectiveness                         rules are
     processes
                        (errors/violations)                    necessary

                                                              3. Develop
   Existing rules                       9. Modify rules
                                                            applicable rules


 6. Monitor use of      7. Enforce use of                     4. Write &
      rules                   rules                          approve rules

                          5. Promulgate,
   New/changed
                          train, execute
      rules
                               rules

Figure 18.3: Management of learning and change

    The ARAMIS audit emphasises the importance throughout the
management system of having performance indicators attached to each
step of all of the processes, both as indicators of state and performance
(boxes 2 and 4) and of failure (box 3). Performance indicators are
essential as the basis for deciding if defences are being eroded under
pressure of production, routine violation or loss of commitment. The
audit will indicate whether those performance indicators are in place,
308                                                        Resilience Engineering

and also whether they are used, or whether a blind eye is being turned
and performance is being allowed to slip.
     Closely related to this are the systems for responding to changes in
the external world (box 1: risk criteria, state of the art risk control
knowledge, good practice) and for assessing proposed technical and
organisational changes inside the organisation (boxes 6/7 and 8/9).
     The audit also considers how all of the signals are used in the
central boxes (5, 7, 9, 10), which assesses performance and proposed
changes. At that point it is necessary that there is no complacency in
interpreting good performance in the past as a guarantee of good
performance in the future. The sensitivity of the learning system will
also determine whether risk assessments are revised appropriately to
take account of new evidence and signals about performance coming
in. These are both resilience criteria in the original list of eight given in
Table 18.2. It is critical here that the feedback loops contain enough
data about relevant precursors to failure that the shifts in performance
can be picked up. A crucial balance needs to be found between so
much data that the significant signals cannot be sorted from the noise,
and too little data, leading to blindness to trends. These elements have
to be fed into the audit in order for it to pick up these clues to
resilience.

The Two Faces of Change. Many studies and many of the discussions
during the workshop identify that these feedback loops are essential for
learning and adaptation in a ‘good’ sense, but also that the mechanism
that drives the processes of normalisation of deviance are also learning
processes. These have led to some of the highly publicised disasters,
such as Challenger and Columbia (Vaughan, 1996, Gehman, 2003). The
dilemma is how to distinguish these two applications of the same basic
principles. The key to resilience is to be able to change flexibly to cope
with unexpected or changed circumstances, but change itself can
destroy tried and tested risk control systems.
     The occurrence of violations of procedures is an example of a
learning process gone wrong. Either the violations are unjustified and
should have been corrected, or they are improvements in ways of
coping, which should be officially accepted. In the specific protocol for
assessing procedure management (Figure 18.2) there is a place for
asking how this process of monitoring and changing rules is controlled.
The only mechanism which we have come across, which explicitly
Auditing Resilience                                                   309

addresses this issue, takes a leaf out of the book of technical change
management and applies it to the management of procedural and
organisational change. In one chemical company with an excellent
safety record we found a mechanism in place whereby experienced
specialists were available to modify standard procedures to cope with
each application that deviated at all from standard, and in which the
boundaries of that ‘safe operation’ of the procedures were very clearly
defined. Within those boundaries operators and maintenance staff had
freedom to adapt their controlling/operating behaviour. As soon as the
boundary was reached the experts were called in to make the change,
with an approval process involving more senior management at further
defined boundaries of change. This process is reminiscent of the
method of rule modification found by Bourrier in her study of a US
nuclear plant (Bourrier, 1998). It operationalises a conclusion which we
have reached from a number of our own studies that the crucial core of
a rule management system is the system for rule monitoring and
modification, not the steps of initial rule making. Such a view is proving
to be a major culture shock when proposed in our railway studies,
where the actors in the system are used to seeing rules as fixed truths to
be carved in stone. Introducing an explicit rule change system is
designed to make change more explicit and considered, so turning a
smooth slide of rule erosion into a bumpy ride of explicit rule change.

Controlling Organisational Change. The chemical company mentioned
above was also in the process of implementing a similar procedure for
all organisational changes, such as manning changes, reorganisations,
shifts of staff in career moves, etc. The idea of imposing an explicit
control of organisational change also comes as a major culture shock in
most organisations, even those operating in high hazard environments.
They are used to seeing such reorganisations as unstoppable processes,
which roll over them and cannot be questioned. The British Nuclear
Installations Inspectorate has now imposed a rule requiring plants to
present a detailed assessment of such organisational changes before
they are approved (Williams, 2000). In order to implement such a rule,
the company has to have a clear organisational picture of its risk control
and management system. Then it can assess whether the reorganisation
will leave any crucial tasks in that system unallocated. Reorganisation
can also result in tasks being allocated to people not competent or
empowered to fulfil them. It can also cut, distort or overload
310                                                             Resilience Engineering

communication or information channels essential for local or overall
control. The control of organisational change presents a challenge to
industries and activities that have traditionally had an implicit risk
control system and management (railways, ATM, etc.). Their picture of
how their control system works may not be explicit enough to act as a
basis for evaluating change (see also Chapter 3). This issue returns to
the discussion raised in the section dealing with the ‘clear picture of
risks and how they are controlled’.
     If we wish to evaluate organisational change in advance, this
immediately raises the same questions as those which technical change
management processes raise, namely when is a procedural or
organisational change large enough to subject it to explicit scrutiny and
demand a safety case to justify it? The chemical company mentioned
above had begun to tackle this by making explicit such things as the
(methods of calculating) minimum levels of manning3 and competence
for a range of activities, with an explicit approval process involving
higher management if these were to be breached. This was a move
appreciated by the operational and supervisory staff as a means to
strengthen their hand in resisting subtle pressure from above to bend
the rules informally. However, this is still largely unexplored territory
for such companies and the lessons from accidents such as Challenger
and Columbia show that the similar boundary posts and formal waiver
procedures in place in those cases failed to stop the deviance
normalisation processes there.

Continuing Commitment to High Safety Performance

The ARAMIS audit and its predecessor, the IRMA audit of I-Risk
(Bellamy et al., 1999), have an explicit delivery system devoted to the
delivery of commitment. This is combined in ARAMIS with the
delivery of conflict resolution, a process separated out in the IRMA



3
      Earlier experience in posing this question to the association of chemical
      companies in the Rotterdam area of the Netherlands had led to a firm refusal
      to make such methods explicit and transparent or to develop common
      approaches to establishing them, with the argument that this was a matter for
      each company to decide in its own way and with professional secrecy, since it
      was linked to relative profitability.
Auditing Resilience                                                  311

audit. The difference between the two processes is as follows.
Commitment applies particularly at the level of individuals and groups
in the organisation and failures in it are concerned with violation of
procedures, short cuts, neglect of routine checks, etc. This is the focus
of the ARAMIS audit, which zooms in on on-line barrier performance.
Conflict resolution deals much more with the conflicts emerging and
controllable at the level of first-line, middle and senior management.
These are concerned with such things as the decisions to curtail
maintenance shutdowns for reasons of production, to reward managers
on their quality or production figures despite poor safety figures, or to
transfer resources for training from safety to security as a result of
terrorist threats. They condition the choices at individual and group
level, as does the individual commitment of the senior and top
managers. Since these are the drivers behind the erosion of defences
and the subordination of safety to other organisational goals, they are
crucial protocols in assessing resilience. Unlike the management
processes for managing the life cycle of hardware, or delivering
manpower, competence or procedures, these delivery systems are much
more diffuse in companies and therefore more difficult to audit. They
approach most closely the traditional areas of safety culture, which can
only be unravelled and understood by a combination of observation,
interview and discussion. In the ARAMIS audit they are assessed by
looking for explicit analysis of potential conflicts, by examining how
safety is incorporated into formal and informal appraisal and reward
systems, by looking for explicit instruments to monitor and discuss
good and poor safety behaviour (violations), and by assessing senior
management visibility and involvement in workplace safety. However,
we accept that this is an area of the audit tool which is weak and which
needs support from assessment methods drawn from research on
culture and safety climate.

Communication and Coordination

What emerges from the studies of high reliability and resilience is a
central emphasis on intensive communication and feedback, either for
the individual or for and within the group which is steering the system
within the boundaries of its safe envelope. It seems necessary to audit,
or study in detail what it is that is taking place within this
communication and feedback, in order to understand if it contains the
312                                                       Resilience Engineering

requisite information and models to cope with the range of situations it
will meet. What we are looking for is a better understanding of how this
commonly described or demanded aspect of a culture of safety works
in detail. What is observed? How is it interpreted? What is
communicated, how and with whom? What are signals indicating a
movement towards the boundaries of control? How are they
distinguished from other signals? In the ARAMIS audit this aspect
receives specific attention in the delivery system relating to
communication and coordination. This concentrates on the
communication within groups, particularly when their tasks are
distributed in time or space. It therefore assesses the operation of
barriers where combined action by control room and field staff is
necessary, the transfer of control at shift changeovers and between
operations and maintenance in isolating, making safe and opening plant
for maintenance and reassembling, testing and returning it to service.


Conclusions and General Issues

In the previous sections we have indicated that a number of the major
criteria for assessing or recognising resilience, which were listed in
Table 18.2, are potentially auditable by a system such as the ARAMIS
audit. The audit and its underlying modelling techniques pay a lot of
attention to establishing a clear picture of the risks to be controlled and
how they are eliminated, minimised or managed. The full range of
possible scenarios, the well-chosen barriers, the well-managed barrier
life cycles, the functioning feedback loops and the critically reviewed
learning and adaptation processes are explicitly covered in the auditing
system. So is attention to commitment, conflict resolution and
communication.

Dependence on Auditor Quality

However, the assessment of all of these factors, as in all audit systems,
depends very much on the quality and knowledge of the auditor and
whether the relevant aspects are picked up and assessed. This depends
in turn on the auditor’s willingness and ability to judge the quality of
arguments offered by the companies in justifying their approach to risk
control and its management. Only highly experienced auditors,
Auditing Resilience                                                      313

knowledgeable about the industry being audited can make such
judgements. In the five case studies carried out to test the ARAMIS
audit this issue was highlighted. The structure of the audit and its
support is not mature enough yet to provide acceptable reliability in the
assessments. The issue of the quality and experience of auditors
presents problems for the regulators, whether these are government
inspectorates or commercial certification bodies. Where can they attract
such knowledgeable and valuable people from and how can they afford
to pay them? The companies themselves, if they use such scenario-
based auditing techniques, also need to commit themselves to putting
high quality staff into these functions. These need to be people who can
step back far enough from the familiar surroundings of the plant and its
risk controls to assess them independently and critically. The central
audit teams employed by a number of international chemical
companies, who travel to company sites for audits lasting several days
at regular intervals, seem to come close to fulfilling this essential role as
critical testers of the resilience of the organisations they visit.

Marrying Auditing and Culture Assessment

The ARAMIS audit, but undoubtedly other audit tools, can provide the
hooks on which to hang the questions that can attempt to assess the
resilience of companies according to the criteria we have listed in Table
18.2. However, we have to admit that the questions to probe those
issues are not always made explicit in the audits. If we wish to ensure
that the questions do get asked in ways which will produce revealing
answers, we will need to adapt the audit protocols to provide a much
more explicit focus. In the ARAMIS project an attempt was made to
start on this process, which would require a closer coupling between
the traditionally separate areas of safety management structure and
safety culture. Discussions to try to link specific dimensions of safety
culture to specific aspects of safety management structure were carried
out, but this failed to lead to any consensus. Further attempts are
necessary to marry these two areas of work, which have arisen from
separate traditions, one rooted in psychology and attitude measurement
and the other in management consultancy, so that we can devise
effective audit tools to assess both in an acceptable period of time.
314                                                      Resilience Engineering

What if Resilience is Measured as Poor?

An audit tool should, according to our arguments, be able to recognise
at least a number of the weak signals indicating that an organisation is
not resilient. The question then is how to improve matters. What the
audit tells the organisation is which of the performance indicators is
off-specification. If these performance indicators are widely spread
throughout the risk control system, they should tell the company where
the improvements must take place. Is that in the monitoring and review
of performance? Is it in tackling significant amounts of violation of
procedures? Is it in convincing staff that better performance is
possible? Is it in the design and layout of user and maintenance friendly
plant and equipment? Or is it in a move to risk-based maintenance?
What an audit cannot say is how to achieve that change. The processes
of organisational change, of achieving commitment and of modifying
organisational culture require a very different set of expertise than that
of the auditor. We leave the analysis of those change processes to other
experts.
Chapter 19
How to Design a Safety
Organization: Test Case for
Resilience Engineering
David D. Woods



In the aftermath of the Columbia space shuttle accident (STS-107), the
investigation board found evidence of an organizational accident as
NASA failed to balance safety risks with intense production pressure
(Gheman, 2003). Ironically, a previous investigation examining a series
of failures in Mars exploration missions also focused on breakdowns in
organizational decision-making in their recommendations (Stephenson
et al., 2000). Both reports diagnosed a process where the pressure for
production to be ‘faster, better, cheaper’, combined with poor feedback
about eroding safety margins, led management inadvertently to accept
riskier and riskier decisions.
     Woods (2005a) links these accident analyses to patterns derived
from previous results and argues that organizational accidents represent
breakdowns in the processes that produce resilience. Balancing the
competing demands for very high safety with real-time pressures for
efficiency and production is very difficult. As pressure on acute
efficiency and production goals intensifies, first, people working hard to
cope with these pressures make decisions that consume or ‘sacrifice’
tasks related to chronic goals such as safety. As a result, safety margins
begin to erode over time – buffering capacity decreases, system rigidity
increases, the positioning of system performance relative to boundary
conditions becomes more precarious (cf., Chapter 2). Second, when
margins begin to erode as a natural response to production pressure, it
is very difficult to see evidence of increasing or new risks. Processes
that fragment information over organizational boundaries and that
316                                                       Resilience Engineering

reduce cross-checks across diverse teams leave decision makers unable
to recognize the big picture, that is, unable to reframe their situation
assessment as evidence of a drift toward safety boundaries accumulates
(until a failure occurs and with the benefit of hindsight the evidence of
new dangers seems strong and unambiguous).
     How do people detect that problems are emerging or changing
when information is subtle, fragmented, incomplete or distributed
across the different groups involved in production processes and in
safety management? Many studies have shown how decision makers in
evolving situations can get stuck in a single problem frame and miss or
mis-interpret new information that should force re-evaluation and
revision of the situation assessment (e.g., Johnson et al., 2001; Patterson
et al. 2001). A recent synthesis of research on problem detection by
professional decision makers (Klein et al., 2005) found that reframing is
a critical but difficult skill. Reframing starts with noticing initial signs
that call into question ongoing models, plans and routines. How do
these discrepancies lead people to question the current frame? When do
they become suspicious that the current interpretation of events is
incomplete and perhaps incorrect?
     The initial signs are always uncertain and open to other
interpretations. These indicators can easily be missed or rationalized
away rather than lead to questioning and revision of the current frame.
For example, studies have shown that a skilled weather forecaster
comes in to work searching for the problems of the day, which
comprise the unsettled parts of the scene that will need to be closely
monitored (Pliske et al., 2004). In other words, the expert adopts a
highly suspicious stance to notice and pursue small discrepancies
despite the workload pressures and attentional demands. Less-skilled
forecasters are much more reactive given other demands and do not
reserve time to pursue these small (usually unimportant) discrepancies.
As this example indicates, factors related to expertise, workload, and
attentional focus can all contribute to a tendency to become stuck in a
single view or frame, even as evidence is accumulating that suggests
alternate situation assessments (Klein et al., 2005).
     A resilience perspective on accidents such as Columbia allows one
to step away from linear causal analyses that become stuck on the
proximal events in themselves, on red herrings such as human error, or
vague ‘root causes’ such as communication. Major accidents, like
Columbia, are late indicators of a system that became brittle over time,
How to Design a Safety Organization                                  317

of a safety management process that could not see the increasing
brittleness, and of safety management that was in no position to help
line management respond to increasing brittleness. As a result, failures
of safety management in the face of pressure to be ‘faster, better,
cheaper’ reveal that more effective techniques should provide the
ability:

•    to revise and reframe the organization’s assessment of the risks it
     faced and the effectiveness of its countermeasures against those
     risks as new evidence accumulates.
•    to detect when safety margins are eroding over time (monitor
     operating points relative to boundaries as noted in Cook &
     Rasmussen, 2005), in particular, to monitor the organization’s
     model of itself – the risk that the organization is choosing to
     operate nearer to safety boundaries than it realizes.
•    to monitor risk continuously throughout the life-cycle of a system,
     so as to maintain a dynamic balance between safety and the often
     considerable pressures to meet production and efficiency goals.

    The organizational reforms proposed by the Columbia Accident
Investigation Board try to meet these criteria, which makes this accident
report the first to recommend a resilience strategy as a fundamental
mechanism to prevent future failures.


Dilemmas of Safety Organizations

Using a resilience approach to safety, I provided some input to the
Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) which seemed
consistent with the Board’s own analysis and recommendation
directions. Later Congress, as NASA’s supervisor, wanted to check on
NASA’s plans to implement the CAIB’s recommendations, especially
the modifications to NASA’s safety office. Congressional staffers asked
several people to comment on the changes. As background I circulated
a draft of my input to the board (what later evolved into Woods,
2005a). The staffers were very interested in this perspective, but to my
surprise asked a simple and challenging question – how does one design
a safety organization to meet these criteria? I was caught completely off
guard, but immediately recognized the centrality of the question.
318                                                      Resilience Engineering

Resilience engineering, if it is a meaningful and practical advance in
safety management, should be able to specify the design of safety
organizations as a work-a-day part of the organization’s activities.
     The staffers’ question put me on the spot. As always when
confronted with a conceptual surprise my mind shifted to a diagnostic
search mode: why is the job of a safety organization hard? The
resilience paradigm suggested organizations needed a mechanism that
questions the organization’s own model of the risks it faces and the
countermeasures deployed. Such a ‘fresh’ or outside perspective is
necessary for reframing in cognitive systems in general. A review and
reassessment was necessary to help the organization find places where it
has underestimated the potential for trouble and revise its approach to
create safety. A quasi-independent group is needed to do this –
independent enough to question the normal organizational decision-
making but involved enough to have a finger on the pulse of the
organization (keeping statistics from afar is not enough to accomplish
this).
     Why is developing and maintaining this questioning role difficult
and unstable? Because organizations are always under production
pressure (though sometimes the pressure on these acute goals can be
stronger or weaker), the dilemma for safety organizations is the
problem of ‘cold water and an empty gun.’ Safety organizations, if they
assess the organization’s own models of how it is achieving safety, raise
questions which stop progress on production goals – the ‘cold water.’
Yet when line organizations ask for help on how to address the factors
that are eroding or reducing resilience, while still being realistic and
responsive to the ever-present production constraints, the safety
organization has little to contribute – the ‘empty gun.’ As a result, the
safety organization fails to better balance the safety/production trade-
off in the long run and tends to be shunted aside. In the short run and
following a failure, the safety organization is emboldened to raise safety
issues (sacrifice production goals), but as time flows on, the memory of
the previous failure fades, production pressures dominate, and the drift
processes operate unchecked (as has happened in NASA before
Challenger and before Columbia, and can happen again).
     From the point of view of managing resilience, a safety
organization should monitor and dynamically re-balance the trade-off
of production pressure and risk. The safety organization should see
‘holes’ in the organization’s decision processes, reframe assessments of
How to Design a Safety Organization                                    319

how risky the organization has been acting, to question the
organization’s assumptions about how it creates safety. How could a
safety organization be designed to meet these ambitious goals since
these are rather difficult cognitive functions to support in any
distributed systems? Even worse, in order to avoid the trap of ‘cold
water and empty guns,’ I was in effect asking the leadership of an
organization to authorize and independently fund a separate group
whose role was to question those leaders’ decisions and priorities.
     And then, if the safety organization was authorized and provided
with an independent set of significant resources, it was committed to
offer positive action plans sensitive to the limited resources and larger
pressures imposed from outside. To accomplish this requires a means
for safety management to escape the fundamental paradox of
production/safety conflicts: safety investments are most important
when least affordable. It is precisely at points of intensifying production
pressure and higher organizational tempo that extra investments are
required in sources of resilience to keep production/safety trade-offs
from sliding out-of-balance. What does Resilience Engineering offer as
guidance to better balance this trade-off?


The 4 ‘I’s of Safety Organizations: Independent, Involved,
Informed, and Informative

At this point I had used a resilience perspective to provide common
ground for an exchange on the dilemmas of safety organizations. But I
was still on the spot and the staffers were insistent, how can safety
organizations be designed to cope with these dilemmas? How did
successful organizations confront these dilemmas?
    To help organizations balance safety/production trade-offs, a
safety organization needs the resources and authority to achieve
independence, to be involved, informed and informative. My response
was that safety organizations are successful when they:

•    provide an independent voice that challenges conventional
     assumptions about safety risks within senior management,
•    have constructive involvement in targeted but everyday
     organizational decision-making (for example, ownership of
320                                                      Resilience Engineering

      technical standards, waiver granting, readiness reviews, and
      anomaly definition),
•     actively generate information about how the organization is actually
      operating and the vectors of change that influence how it will
      operate (informed),
•     use information about weaknesses in the organization and the gap
      between work as imagined and work as practised in the
      organization to reframe and direct interventions (informative).

     These four ‘I’s provide a simple mnemonic that concisely captures
the difficulty in designing a safety organization: these four requirements
are in conflict! At best, the relationship between the safety organization
and senior/line management will be one of constructive tension. Safety
organizations must achieve independence enough to question the
normal organizational decision-making, provide a ‘fresh’ point of view,
and help the parent organization discover its own blind spots.
Challenging conventional assumptions of senior management limits the
voice as fresh views bring unwelcome information and seem to distract
from making definitive decisions or building support for current
management plans. Inevitably, there will be periods where senior
management tries to dominate the safety organization. The design of
the organizational dynamics needs to provide the safety organization
with the tools to resist these predictable episodes by providing funding
directly and independent from headquarters. Similarly, to achieve
independence, the safety leadership team needs to be chosen and
accountable outside of the normal chain of command.
     Safety organizations must be involved in enough everyday
organizational activities to have a finger on the pulse of the
organization and to be seen as a constructive participant in the
organization’s activities and decisions that affect the balance across
safety and production goals. In general, safety organizations are at great
risk of becoming information-limited as they can be shunted aside from
real organizational decisions, kept at a distance from the actual work
processes, and kept busy tabulating irrelevant counts when their
activities are seen as a threat by line or by upper management (for
example, the ‘cold water’ problem). Simply by being positioned to have
a voice at the top can leave the safety organization quite disconnected
from operations and exacerbate information limits. By being informed,
the safety organization can be informative, and the strongest test of this
How to Design a Safety Organization                                   321

criterion is the ability to identify targets for investments to enhance
aspects of resilience and to prioritize across these targets of
opportunity. To be constructive, a safety organization needs to control
a significant set of resources and have the authority to decide how to
invest these resources to help line organizations increase resilience and
enhance safety while accommodating production goals. For example,
the safety organization could decide to invest and develop new anomaly
response training and rehearsal programs when it detects holes in
organizational decision-making processes. Involvement, balanced with
independence, allows the safety organization to provide technical
expertise and enhance coordination across the normal chain of
command. In other words, the involvement focuses on creating
effective overlap across different organizational units (even though
such overlap can be seen as inefficient when the organization is under
severe cost pressure).
     Balancing the four ‘I’s means that a safety organization is more
than an arm’s length tabulator, does more than compile a trail of
paperwork showing the organization meets requirements of ‘safety’ as
defined by regulators or accreditors, is more than a cheerleader for past
safety records, and more than a cost center that occasionally slows
down normal production processes. Being involved and informed
requires connections to the character and difficulties of operations (the
evolving nature of technical work as captured e.g., in the studies in
Nemeth, Cook & Woods, 2004). Being independent and informative
requires a voice that is relevant and heard at the senior management
level. By achieving each pair and making them mutually reinforcing,
safety management becomes a proactive part of the normal conduct of
the organization.
     The safety organization’s mission then is to monitor the
organization’s resilience including the ability to make targeted
investments to restore resilience and reduce brittleness. In reaching for
the four ‘I’s, the safety organization functions as a critical monitor of
the gap between work as imagined and work as practised and generates
tactics to reduce that gap. As a result, the safety organization becomes a
contributor to all of the organization’s goals – by enhancing resilience
both safety and production are balanced and advance together as new
capabilities arise and as the organization faces new pressures.
322                                                     Resilience Engineering

Safety as Analogous to Polycentric Management of Common Pool
Resources

The analysis above and the four ‘I’s as a potential solution to the
challenge case parallels analyses of how complex systems avoid the
tragedy of the commons (Ostrom, 1990; 1999). The tragedy of the
commons concerns shared physical resources (among the most studied
examples of common pools are fisheries management and water
resources for irrigation). The tragedy of the commons is a name for a
baseline adaptive dynamic whereby the actors, by acting rationally in the
short term to generate a return in a competitive environment, deplete
or destroy the common resource on which they depend in the long run.
In the usual description of the dynamic, participants are trapped in an
adaptive cycle that inexorably overuses the common resource; thus,
from a larger systems view the local actions of groups are
counterproductive and lead them to destroy their livelihood or way of
life in the long run.
      Organizational analyses of accidents like Columbia seem to put
production/safety trade-offs in a parallel position to tragedies of the
commons. Despite organizations’ attempts to design operations for
high safety and the large costs of failures in money and in lives, line
managers under production pressures make decisions that gradually eat
away at safety margins, undermining the larger common goal of safety.
In other words, maybe safety can be thought of as an abstract common
pool resource analogous to a fishery. Or, alternatively, dilemmas that
arise in managing physical common pool resources are a specific
example of a general type of goal conflict where different groups are
differentially responsible and affected by different sub-goals, even
though there is one or only a couple of commonly held over-arching
goals (Woods et al., 1994, Chapter 4).
      Developing the analogy further, the standard view of how to
manage common pool resources is to create a higher level of
organization responsible for the resource over its entire range and over
longer periods of time. This organization then needs authority to
compel individuals or local groups to modify their behavior sacrificing
short term return and autonomy in order for the higher level
organization to analyze and plan behaviors that sustain or grow the
resource over the long term – a command organization. Safety
management theory often seems to make similar assumptions and
How to Design a Safety Organization                                  323

propose similar responses, i.e., a command structure is needed from
regulators to companies or from management to line operations that
takes a broader view and compels workers and line managers to modify
behavior for a long term common good.
     Ostrom (1999) reviews the empirical results on how people actually
manage common pool resources and finds the standard view
unsupported by the evidence. Basically, she found that overuse by local
actors is not inevitable and that command style relationships across
levels of organizations do not work well. Instead, she finds from
research on co-adaptive systems that common pool resources can be
effectively managed through polycentric governance systems.
Polycentric systems provide for multiple levels of governance with
overlapping authority in a dynamic balance but where there is no single
governance center which directs or ‘commands’ unilaterally. Her
synthesis of research identifies a variety of conditions and properties
for polycentric management of common resources (such as cross-
communication, shared norms, trust, and reciprocity; Ostrom, 2003).
     The proposed four ‘I’s of safety organization design can then be
seen as additional policy guidance for how to build effective polycentric
management to balance multiple interacting goals. Achieving a dynamic
balance across multiple centers of governance – some closer to the
basic processes but with narrower field of view and scope of action and
others farther removed but with larger fields of view and scopes of
action, would seem to require a quasi-independent, intersecting
organization that can cross connect these different levels of
organization to be both informed and informative. By being outside a
nominal chain of command, such groups can question and help revise
assessments as evidence and situations change, as well as intervene with
targeted investments to help resolve short term dilemmas (independent
and involved).
     Recent research on distributed cooperative systems made possible
by new computer technology also seems to support the analogy, for
example studies of the change to ‘free flight’ in managing the national
air transport system support and extend Ostrom’s findings (see Smith
et al., 2004). The tools that have proved necessary to make
collaboration work between air carriers and FAA authorities given new
capabilities for communication at a distance and given the demands for
adaptive behavior as congestion and weather change also provide other
ideas for the design of polycentric management systems. Similarly,
324                                                      Resilience Engineering

studies of how military organizations delegate authority to adapt plans
to surprising situations provide lessons that also can be applied to guide
polycentric management (e.g., Woods & Shattuck, 2000).
     The analogy suggests that findings from managing physical
common pool resources and findings from how goal conflicts between
safety versus production are resolved (Woods et al., 1994, chapter 4)
may converge and mutually reinforce or stimulate each other. For
example common pool research may benefit from examining the
reframing processes which are central to the resilience approach to
safety under different management structures.


Summary

Organizations in the future will balance the goals of both high
productivity and ultra-high safety given the uncertainty of changing
risks and certainty of continued pressure for efficient and high
performance. This organization will be able to (a) find places where the
organization itself has missed or underestimated the potential for
trouble and revise its approach to create safety, (b) recognize when the
side effects of production pressure may be increasing safety risks and,
(c) develop the means to make targeted investments at the very time
when the organization is most squeezed on resources and time.
     To carry out this dynamic balancing act, a new safety organization
will emerge – designed and empowered to be independent, involved,
informed, and informative. The safety organization will use the tools of
Resilience Engineering to monitor for ‘holes’ in organizational decision-
making and to detect when the organization is moving closer to failure
boundaries than it is aware. Together, these processes will create
foresight about the changing patterns of risk before failure and harm
occur.


Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by grant NNA04CK45A from NASA
Ames Research Center to develop resilience engineering concepts for
managing organizational risk. I particularly thank the congressional
staffers who provided an opportunity to review NASA’s post-Columbia
How to Design a Safety Organization                               325

reform plans and who challenged the concepts for achieving resilience.
The ideas here benefited greatly from the inputs, reviews, and
suggestions of my colleagues Geoff Mumford and Emily Patterson.
The remaining gaps are my own.
This page intentionally left blank
Rules and Procedures
Yushi Fujita




    Work rules and operating procedures are much less effective
    than they are normally believed to be. Trying to fix the system
    at an optimal point for extended time with work rules and
    procedures may be a feeble idea. “Situated Cognition,” a
    school of sociology, argues that the idea of controlling work
    with rules and procedures is only an administrative view. Often
    times, critical decisions are (or need to be) governed by social
    convenience and common sense. Work rules and procedures
    that are tuned to prescribed scenarios may be too specific and
    rigid, while those that can flexibly absorb fluctuating reality
    may be too general and loose. What matters more is not the
    way rules and procedures are specified, but the way in which
    humans actually behave. Observation is a prerequisite for
    knowing actual human behaviors and understanding the
    background.
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter 20
Distancing Through
Differencing: An Obstacle to
Organizational Learning
Following Accidents
Richard I. Cook
David D. Woods


    The future seems implausible; the past seems incredible.
    Woods & Cook (2002)


Introduction

A critical component of a high resilience in organizations is continuous
learning from events, ‘near miss’ incidents, and accidents (Weick et al.,
1999; Ringstad & Szameitat, 2000). As illustrated by the many cases
referenced in this book, incidents and failures provide information
about the resilience or brittleness of the system in the face of various
disruptions. This chapter explores some of the barriers that can limit
learning even by generally very high quality organizations.
     Despite terrible consequences, accidents, as fundamentally
surprising events, offer an opportunity for learning and change as there
is a profound sense among many that the usual concepts and policies
are insufficient to cope with what has happened (Woods et al., 1994).
The immediate aftermath of a serious failure produces an atmosphere
of inquiry and frees up resources normally dedicated to production,
which are refocused on the accident and its consequences. The lines
that divide participants, management, regulators, and victims from each
other are momentarily thin. As one National Transportation Safety
Board observer put it, “when the vividness of the tragedy is fresh in
330                                                       Resilience Engineering

everyone’s mind, and the broken wreckage is still smoldering ... people
... have only one pressing goal, and that is to determine precisely what
happened and see that it does not happen again” (NTSB, Accident
Investigation Symposium, 1983, page 8). This period of cooperation
and focus makes it possible to ask questions that are not usually asked,
gather data not usually gathered, and probe issues not usually open to
inquiry.
     Not all stakeholders are in the same position relative to the
surprising event. Some are closer; others more distant in knowledge,
point of view, and in experiencing the consequences. Distance from the
work context where an accident occurs appears to alter what is learned
from incidents and accidents. Those people who are at the epicenter of
high consequence accidents are usually devastated and entirely caught
up in the consequences and reactions to failure (Dekker, 2003b).
Conversely, people who are far distant from the epicenter are too
divorced from the complex context of technical work and accept
skeletal descriptions of the events that reach them (the first stories in
Cook et al., 1998). As a result, those distant from the technical work
area tend to fall back on oversimplified sterile responses.
     But near the epicenter are people who have both a detailed
understanding of the context of work yet are sufficiently distant from
the consequences. Because their technical work corresponds closely to
conditions of work at the epicenter, the event has direct relevance.
Because they are some distance from the epicenter, their attention is
not captured by the need to react to the event itself and they have an
opportunity to extract deeper information (they can begin to explore
the second stories of Cook et al., 1998), i.e., to learn about how safety is
created.


Barriers to Learning

Learning in the aftermath of incidents and accidents is extraordinarily
difficult because of the complexity of modern systems. Layers of
technical complexity hide the significance of subtle human performance
factors. Awareness of hazard and the consequences of overt failure lead
to the deployment of (usually successful) strategies and defenses against
failure. These efforts create a setting where overt failures only occur
when multiple small faults combine. The combination of multiple
Distancing Through Differencing                                       331

contributors and hindsight bias makes it easy for reviewers after the fact
to identify an individual, group or organization as a culprit and stop.
These characteristics of complex systems tend to hide the real
characteristics of systems that lead to failures.
    When an organization experiences an incident, there are real,
tangible and sometimes tragic consequences associated with the event
which create barriers to learning:

•    The negative consequences are emotional and distressing for all
     concerned,
•    failure generates pressure from different stakeholders to resolve the
     situation,
•    a clear understandable cause and fix helps stakeholders move on
     from a tragedy, especially when they continue to use or participate
     in that system,
•    managing financial responsibility for ameliorating the consequences
     and losses from the failure,
•    desire for retribution from some stakeholders and processes of
     defense against punitive actions,
•    confronting dissonance and changing concepts and ways of acting
     is painful and costly in non-economic senses.

     In this chapter we present a case study of learning from incidents.
Analysis of the case reveals a discounting or distancing process whereby
reviewers focus on differences, real and imagined, between the place,
people, organization and circumstances where an incident happens and
their own context. By focusing on the differences, they see no lessons
for their own operation and practices or only narrow well bounded
responses. We call this pattern-distancing through differencing.
     Examining how this particular organization struggled to recognize
and overcome distancing through differencing also provides useful
insights on how to support the organizational learning process.


An Incident

A chemical fire occurred during maintenance on a piece of process
machinery in the clean room of a large, high technology product
332                                                      Resilience Engineering

manufacturing plant. The fire was detected and automatically
extinguished by safety systems that shut off the flow of reactants to the
machine.
     The reactant involved in the fire was only one of many hazards
associated with this expensive machine and the machine was only one
of many arranged side by side in a long bay. Operation and
maintenance of the machine also involved exposure or potential
exposure to thermal, chemical, electrical, radio frequency, and
mechanical hazards. Work in this environment was highly
proceduralized and the site had repeatedly undergone ISO 9000
certification and review. Both the risks of accident and the high value of
the machine and its operation had generated elaborate formal
procedures for maintenance and required two workers (buddy system)
for most procedures on the machine.
     The manufacturer had an extensive safety program that required
immediate and high level responses to an incident such as this, even
though no personal injury occurred and damage was limited to the
machine involved. High level management directed immediate
investigations, including detailed debriefings of participants, reviews of
corporate history for similar events, and a ‘root cause’ analysis.
Company policy required completion of this activity within a few days
and formal, written notification of the event and related findings to all
other manufacturing plants in the company. The cost of the incident
may have been more than a million dollars (and the plant’s score card
suffered significantly).
     Two things prompted the company to engage outside consultants
for a broader review of the accident and its consequences. First, a
search for prior similar events in the company files discovered a very
similar accident at a manufacturing plant in another country earlier in
the year. Second, one of the authors (RIC) recently had been in the
plant to study the use of a different machine where operator ‘error’
seemed prevalent but only with economic consequences. He had
identified a systemic trap in this other case and provided some
education about how complex systems failed a few weeks earlier.
During that visit, he pointed out how other systemic factors could
contribute to future incidents that threatened worker safety in addition
to economic losses and suggested the need for broader investigations of
future events.
Distancing Through Differencing                                        333

     Following the incident the authors returned, visited the accident
scene, and debriefed the participants in the event and those involved in
its investigation. They studied operations involving the machine in
which the fire occurred. They also examined the organizational
response to this accident and to the prior fire.


Organizational Learning in this Case

The obstacles to learning from failure are nearly as complex and subtle
as the circumstances that surround a failure itself. Because accidents
always involve multiple contributors, the decision to focus on one or
another of the set, and therefore what will be learned, is largely socially
determined.
     In the incident just described, the formal process of evaluating and
responding to the event proceeded along a narrow path. The
investigation concentrated on the machine itself, the procedures for
maintenance, and the operators who performed the maintenance tasks.
For example, they identified the fact the chemical reactant lines were
clearly labeled outside the machine but not inside it where the
maintenance took place. These local deficiencies were corrected quickly.
In a sense, the accident was a ‘normal’ occurrence in the company; the
event was regretted, undesirable, and costly but essentially the sort of
thing for which the company’s incident procedures had been designed
and response teams created. The main findings of this formal, internal
investigation were limited to these rather concrete, immediate, local
items.
     A broader review, conducted in part by outsiders, was based on
using the specific incident as a wedge to explore the nature of technical
work in context and how workers coped with the significant hazards
inherent in the manufacturing process. This analysis yielded a different
set of findings regarding both narrow human engineering deficiencies
and organizational issues. In addition to the relatively obvious human
engineering deficiencies in the machine design discovered by the formal
investigation, the event pointed to deeper issues that were relevant to
other parts of the process and other potential events.
     There were significant limitations in procedures and policies with
respect to operations and maintenance of the machine. For example,
although there were extensive procedural specifications contained in
334                                                       Resilience Engineering

maintenance ‘checklists’, the workers had been called on to perform
multiple procedures at the same time and had to develop their own task
sequencing to manage the combination. Similarly, although the primary
purpose of the buddy system was to increase safety by having one
worker observe another to detect incipient failures, it was impossible to
have an effective buddy system during critical parts of the procedures
and parts of this maintenance activity. Some parts of the procedures
were so complex that one person had to read the sequence from a
computer screen while the other performed the steps. Other steps
required the two individuals to stand on opposite sides of the machine
to connect or remove equipment, making direct observation
impossible.
     Surprisingly, the formal process of investigating accidents in the
company actually made deeper understanding of accidents and their
sources more difficult. The requirement for immediate investigation
and reporting contributed to pressure to reach closure quickly and led
to a quick superficial study of the incident and its sources. The intense
concern for ‘safety’ had led the company to formally lodge
responsibility for safety in a specific group of employees rather than the
production and maintenance workers themselves. Treating safety as an
abstract goal generated the need for these people as a separate entity
within the company. These ‘safety people’ had highly idealized views of
the actual work environment, views uninformed by day to day contact
with the realities of clean room work conditions. These views allowed
them to conceptualize the accident as flowing from the workers rather
than the work situation. They were captivated in their investigation by
physical characteristics of the workplace, especially those characteristics
that suggested immediate, concrete interventions that could be applied
to ‘fix’ the problems that they thought led to the accident.
     In contrast, the operators regarded the incident investigation and
proposed countermeasures as derived from views that were largely
divorced from the realities of the workplace. They saw the ‘safety
people’ and their work as being irrelevant. They delighted in pointing
out, for example, how few of them had any practical experience with
working in the clean room. Privately, the workers said that production
pressures were of paramount importance in the company. This view
was communicated clearly to the workforce by multiple levels of
management. Only after accidents, they noted, was safety regarded as a
primary goal; during normal operations, safety was always a background
Distancing Through Differencing                                     335

issue, in contrast to the primary need to maintain high rates of
production. The workers themselves internalized this view. There were
significant incentives provided directly to workers to obtain high
production and they generally sought high levels of output to earn more
money.
     During the incident investigation, it was discovered that a very
similar incident had occurred at another manufacturing plant in another
country earlier in the year – a precursor event or rehearsal from the
point of view of this manufacturing facility. Within the company, every
incident, including the previous overseas fire, was communicated within
the company to safety people and then on to other relevant parties.
However, the formal report writing and dissemination about this
previous incident had been slow and incomplete, relative to when the
second event occurred. Part of the recommendations following from
the second incident addressed faster production and circulation of
reports (in effect, increasing the pressure to reach closure when
investigating incidents).
     Interestingly, the relevant people at the plant knew all about the
previous incident as soon as it had occurred through more informal
communication channels. They had reviewed the incident, noted many
features that were different from their plant (non-US location, slightly
different model of the same machine, different safety systems to
contain fires). The safety people consciously classified the incident as
irrelevant to the local setting, and they did not initiate any broader
review of hazards in the local plant. Overall they decided the incident
“couldn’t happen here.”
     This is an instance of a discounting or distancing process whereby
reviewers focus on differences, real and imagined, between the place,
people, organization and circumstances where an incident happens and
their own context. By focusing on the differences, they see few or no
lessons for their own operation and practices.
     Notice how speeding up formal notification does nothing to
enhance what is learned and does nothing to prevent or mitigate
discounting the relevance of the previous incident. The formal review
and reports of these incidents focused on their unique features. This
made it all the easier for audiences to emphasize what was different and
thereby limit the opportunity to learn before they experienced their
own incident.
336                                                       Resilience Engineering

     It is important to stress that this was a company taking safety
seriously. Within the industry it had an excellent safety record and
invested heavily in safety. Its management was highly motivated and its
relationships with workers were good, especially because of its strong
economic performance that led to high wages and good working
conditions. It recognized the need to make a corporate commitment to
safety and to respond quickly to safety-related events. Strong pressures
to act quickly to ‘make it safe’ provided incentives to respond
immediately to each individual accident. But these demands in turn
directed most attention after an accident towards specific
countermeasures designed to prevent recurrence of that specific
accident. This, in turn, led to the view that accidents were essentially
isolated, local phenomena, without wider relevance or significance.
     The management of the company was confronted with the fact that
the handling of the overseas accident had not been effective in
preventing the local one, despite their similarities. They were
confronted by the effect of social processes working to isolate accidents
and making them seem irrelevant to local operations. The prior fire
overseas was noticed but regarded as irrelevant until after the local fire,
when it suddenly became critically important information. It was not
that the overseas fire was not communicated. Indeed it was observed by
management and known even to the local operators. But these local
workers regarded the overseas fire not as evidence of a type of hazard
that existed in the local workplace but rather as evidence that workers
at the other plant were not as skilled, as motivated and as careful as they
were after all, they were not Americans (the other plant was in a first
world country). The consequence of this view was that no broader
implications of the fire overseas were extracted locally after that event.
     Interestingly (and ominously) this distancing through differencing
that occurred in response to the external, overseas fire, was repeated
internally after the local fire. Workers in the same plant, working in the
same area in which the fire occurred but on a different shift, attributed
the fire to lower skills of the workers on the other shift. (Workers and
managers of other parts of the manufacturing process also saw little
relevance or potential to learn from the event.) They regarded the
workers to whom the accident happened as inattentive and unskilled.
Not surprisingly, this meant that they saw the fire as largely irrelevant to
their own work. After all, their reasoning went, the fire occurred
because the workers to whom it happened were less careful than we
Distancing Through Differencing                                       337

are. Despite their beliefs, there was no evidence whatsoever that there
were significant differences between workers on different shifts or in
different countries (in fact, there was evidence that one of the workers
involved was among the better skilled at this plant).
     Contributing to this situation was, paradoxically, safety. Over a
span of many years, the incidence of accidental fires with this particular
chemical and in general had been reduced. But as a side effect of
success, personnel’s sensitivity to the hazard the chemical presented in
the workplace was reduced as well. Interviews with experienced ‘old
hands’ in the industry indicated that such fires were once relatively
common. New technical and procedural defenses against these events
had reduced their frequency to the point that many operators had no
personal experience with a fire. These ‘old hands’ were almost entirely
people now in management positions, far from the clean room floor
itself. Those working with the hazardous materials were so young that
they had no personal knowledge of these hazards, while those who did
have experience were no longer involved in the day to day operations
of the clean room.
     In contrast with the formal investigation, the more extensive look
into the accident that the outside researchers’ visit provoked produced
different findings. Discussion of the event prompted new observations
from within the plant. Two examples may be given. One manager
observed that the organization had extensive and refined policies for
the handling of the flammable chemical delivery systems (tanks, pipes,
valves) that stopped at the entrance to the machine. Different people,
policies, and procedures applied to the delivery system. He made an
argument for carrying these rules and policies through to the machine
itself. This would have required more extensive (and expensive)
preparation for maintenance on the machine than was currently the
case, but would have eliminated the hazardous chemical from within
the machine prior to beginning maintenance. Another engineer
suggested that the absence of appropriate labeling on the machine
involved with the accident should prompt a larger review of the labeling
in all places where this chemical was used or transported.
     These two instances are examples of using a specific accident to
discover characteristics of the overall system. This kind of reasoning
from the specific to the more general is a pronounced departure from
the usual approach of narrowly looking for ways to prevent a very
specific event in a specific place from occurring or reoccurring.
338                                                       Resilience Engineering

    The chemical fire case reveals the pressures to discount or distance
ourselves from incidents and accidents. In this organization, effective
by almost all standards, managers, safety officers, and workers took a
narrow view of the precursor event. By narrowing in on local, concrete,
surface characteristics of the precursor event, the organization limited
what could be learned.


Extending or Enhancing the Learning Opportunity

An important question for resilience management is a better
understanding of how the window of opportunity for learning can be
extended or enhanced following incidents. The above case illustrates
one general principle that could be put into action by organizations –
do not discard other events because they appear on the surface to be
dissimilar. At some level of analysis, all events are unique; while at other
levels of analysis, they reveal common patterns.
     Promoting means for organizations to look for and consider
similarities between their own operation and the organization where an
incident occurred could reduce the potential for distancing through
differencing. This will require shifting analysis of the case from surface
characteristics to deeper patterns and more abstract dimensions (Cook
et al., 1998). Each kind of contributor to an event then can guide the
search for similarities.
     When this process of learning moved past the obstacle of
distancing through differencing in this case, the organizational response
changed. The organization derived and shared with us a new lesson –
safety is a value of an organization, not a commodity to be counted or a
priority set among many other goals.
Chapter 21
States of Resilience
Erik Hollnagel
Gunilla Sundström




Introduction

A resilient system, or, organisation is able to withstand the effects of
stress and strain and to recover from adverse conditions over long time
periods. One way of describing that is to think of a system as being in
one of several states, where a state can be defined as ‘any well-defined
condition or property that can be recognised if it occurs again’ (Ashby,
1956, p. 25). The set of possible states constitutes the so-called state
space, and each state has a set of associated conditions that specify
whether the system changes to another state. The state space
description is ubiquitous and can be applied to almost any type of
system. The simplest possible case is, of course, a system that can be in
either of two states or conditions. This applies to an uncomplicated
device such as an electrical switch, which can be either ‘on’ or ‘off’, but
also to a complex system such as a national economy that can be either
growing or receding. A car engine might be described by means of
three states, namely ‘stopped’, ‘idle’, or ‘running’. Even a mighty nation
can – from one perspective – be characterised as being in one of five
states according to the threat condition, such as ‘green: low’, ‘blue:
guarded’, ‘yellow: elevated’, ‘orange: high’, and ‘red: severe’.
     In Chapter 15, a business system was described as being in a
healthy, an unhealthy or a catastrophic state with the possible
transitions being shown in Figure 15.2. Note that the state space in this
case, as well as the case of the five ‘threat’ states, is one-dimensional,
which means that it is only possible to make transitions between
340                                                     Resilience Engineering

adjacent states. To take a slightly more complex example, consider the
following description of the state space of a power plant. Here there are
six different states, as well as the possible transitions between them.
Without going into any details, the diagram in Figure 21.1 shows that
while some transitions are bi-directional, e.g., between ‘normal
operation’ and ‘disturbance’, others are not reversible but require that
the system passes through one or more intermediate states. For
instance, once the system has gone to a state of ‘emergency’ it can only
return to ‘normal operation’ via an ‘idle’ state.


                                                     Hold,
                        Maintenance
                                                   stand-by




                                                    Normal
                            Idle
                                                   operation




                        Emergency                Disturbance




Figure 21.1: State-space diagram for power production



Resilience and State-space Transitions

The terminology used in Figure 21.1 is typical for systems that produces
something physical, matter or energy, where the focus is on operations
rather than services. The same principles can, however, be used to
characterise various kinds of organisations, such as financial services
firms, government departments, regulatory entities, rescue
organisations, etc. Even if we disregard the extreme periods of a
system’s life, hence exclude embryonic and decaying organisations, it is
States of Resilience                                                  341

easily possible to recognise characteristic states that are more detailed
than the triad used in Chapter 15 (healthy, unhealthy, catastrophic), cf.
Figure 21.2. There must clearly always be a state of normal functioning,
where the system provides or produces what it is intended to do in a
reliable and, if required, in a profitable manner. There will usually also
be a state of regular reduced functioning, for instance during night time
or holidays, as well as a state of irregular reduced functioning due to a
lack of internal resources (illness among staff, equipment failures,
industrial actions, and the like). The transitions between normal and
regular reduced functioning are scheduled, whereas the transitions
between normal and irregular reduced functioning usually are
unexpected and represent a temporary loss of control. Since even the
most sanguine managers know that things can go wrong, a state of
irregular reduced functioning has usually also been anticipated and
adequate recovery functions are therefore hopefully in place.




Figure 21.2: State-space diagram for service organisations

    There will, unfortunately, also always be a state of disturbed
functioning, corresponding to the unhealthy or even catastrophic states
of Chapter 15. Figure 21.2 only shows one state of disturbed
functioning, but there may of course be several. Indeed, it may be the
342                                                        Resilience Engineering

mark of a resilient organisation that it has a number of different modes
of functioning whenever a disturbance happens. The transition to a
state of disturbed functioning clearly represents a loss of control. The
return to a state of normal functioning may either be through a direct
recovery, or in the case of severe disturbances via a state of repair. In
extreme cases there is, of course, the possibility that the system ceases
to exist after a severe disturbance, as the case of Barings PLC
demonstrated. The state transitions described here are representative
but not complete; under unusual circumstances other transitions may
become possible.

The Sumatra Tsunami Disaster

To illustrate how a state space description can be used to understand
the nature of resilience, consider how an organisation responds to a
severe event. A resilient organisation should clearly be able to respond
appropriately and as fast as possible in order not to lose control.
Examples of how that happens – or rather, how it does not happen –
are often seen in the case of major disasters, either natural or man-
made. Some of the more spectacular cases in recent years are the fire in
the Mont Blanc tunnel on March 26 1999 or the tsunami in Asia on
December 26, 2004. (One might also mention the collapse of Barings
plc described in Chapter 15.) While resilience is a quality that is essential
for the response to all disturbances, be they large or small, the
determining characteristics are often easier to note in the case of events
of an unusual scale or severity. The example chosen here is the
response of the Swedish Foreign Department to the tsunami that
followed the earthquake off Sumatra on Sunday December 26 2004.
The reason for using that is not that the Foreign Department was
particularly inept in its handling of the situation, but merely that the
information about this case is easily accessible. (Although the Swedish
Foreign Department in the aftermath of the disaster was severely
criticised at home, foreign departments in several other European
countries got a similar treatment from their national press.)
     A tsunami following a major earthquake is the type of event that
requires a fast and appropriate response. It is, however, also a type of
event that is very unusual and one that was not specifically foreseen in
the procedures of the Foreign Department. Although the Foreign
Department received information about the disaster around 5 o’clock in
States of Resilience                                                  343

the morning of December 26, it did not begin to respond effectively
until the next day. In the aftermath the Secretary of Foreign Affairs
openly admitted that no one at the Foreign Department understood the
scope of the disaster, and that she herself did not even know where
Phuket was. (As it happened, the Phuket area was a popular destination
for Swedish travellers. Several thousand visitors from Sweden were
there during the 2004 Christmas holidays and 544 of them either died
or went missing after the tsunami.) Partly because of that, and partly
because of the holidays, the Foreign Department was not fully staffed
and therefore responded very slowly. In contrast to that, both the
charter companies that were responsible for the tourists in Thailand,
the Swedish police, and the Swedish Rescue Services Agency went into
a state of high alert within hours. Indeed, one of the travel companies
had posted information about the tsunami around 7 o’clock in the
morning, i.e., about two hours after they received the information from
Thailand.
     In terms of the concepts described above, the Foreign Department
remained for too long in the regular reduced functioning state
(probably somewhat due to the Christmas holiday season). There were
no clear routines or procedures for what to do, and because of that
offers of assistance, e.g., from the police, were turned down. The
situation was further aggravated by the department’s utter failure to
realise what was going on, despite the fact that the TV channels had
extra newscasts throughout the day. When finally the magnitude of the
disaster was realised, there was little capability to do anything.
     If we consider the experiences from this disaster in terms of a state
transition description, resilience can be seen to require three things: an
ability to recognise that conditions have changed and that there is a
need to respond, a set of transition rules (procedures or routines that
allow the system to transition from one state to the other by changing
its mode of operation), and a readiness or capability for getting on with
the tasks at hand once the new state has been entered. To that may be
added a fourth, namely the ability to maintain normal operations
throughout. This is, however, not an absolute requirement, but depends
on the type of organisation. For a foreign department it is clearly
desirable to maintain normal operations even when an emergency
arises; for the charter companies it was possible to shift the whole
organisation into a new mode and suspend all normal functions as long
as it lasted.
344                                                      Resilience Engineering

Conclusions

It is a common view that delays in changes or transitions often are due
to fossilised organisational structures or inadequate and/or conflicting
policies. Many organisations develop a cumbersome bureaucracy with
built-in social conflicts where people at various levels are unable to, or
incapable of, making the appropriate decisions. Decisions cannot be
made on the spot but have to be passed through organisational layers
until they reach a proper level, often at the top of the hierarchy. The
resulting decisions and their translation into actions then have to go
through the reverse process – although this often is considerably faster,
partly because the decision resulted in a state change. Decision makers
may with hindsight often state that they did not fully appreciate the
seriousness of the situation, or that procedures were not in place for the
required action. Yet from the point of view of resilience engineering it
simply means that the organisation was not sufficiently resilient.
     A resilient organisation must, however, not only be able to change
from one state to a more appropriate one in time, but also be able to
return to normal functioning when the alerting or unusual conditions
are over. This does not necessarily mean that it should go back to what
were normal procedures before the events, since the world may have
changed. But it means that it should be able to resume durable and
sustainable performance, in the sense of attaining at least the same
quantity and quality of whatever it produces, as it did before the
disrupting events.
     The ability to rebound or recover again requires that the cessation
of the abnormal state is detected, that there are proper procedures for
returning or reverting to ‘normal’, and that the functions and
capabilities required for a normal – or a revised normal – operation are
in place. In cases when the emergency and normal operations run in
parallel, returning to normal conditions is fairly simple. The normal
system state must, however, allow the organisation somehow to absorb
the resources that are released when the emergency operation comes to
an end, possibly by keeping them idle.
     In summary, the state transition analogy offers a number of
concrete (potential) measures and procedures for the resilience
engineering toolbox.
States of Resilience                                                    345

•     First, there is the issue of being able to recognise the changed
      situation, i.e., the triggering conditions for the transition. Here a
      host of organisational, psychological, and social factors may work
      against that – ignorance, biases and vested interests – in addition to
      more ‘simple’ technical problems such as lack of sufficient data.
      The associated measure is the organisation’s ability to diagnose,
      assess or understand the situation and anticipate the consequences.
      This ability is typically documented by rules and procedures, time
      and resources allocated to this task, etc.
•     Second, there is the issue of procedures or routines (i.e., change
      management processes) for the transition. Do people in the
      organisation know what to do? Are command lines defined and
      generally understood? Is it known who has responsibility, and
      whether the normal roles change? Is there a script or scenario, a set
      of guidelines or even a set of instructions that can be applied?
•     Third, does the ‘new’ (i.e., receiving) state provide the resources
      and capabilities needed for the desired functionality? Is there
      perhaps a back-up organisation ready? Do physical and
      communication facilities exist? Are required supplies and resources
      available? Are there sufficient human resources, human capital and
      experience? The associated measure is whether the organisation is
      ready to respond when a new state is entered, i.e., whether
      strategies, policies, procedures, resources, capabilities, and so on
      exist. Are there regular exercises? Do people know their roles and
      responsibilities?
•     A possible fourth issue is whether the transition is directly
      reversible in principle and/or in practice, or whether the
      organisation must pass through a repair or reconstruction state. At
      issue here is whether the organisation is able to stop or dismantle
      and/or significantly re-engineer an operation, i.e., to return from an
      abnormal to a normal state. Related to that is the issue of whether
      the cessation of a condition can be detected when it happens, but
      not too early.

    In relation to the first step, recognising the changed situation, one
additional issue is how obvious the change must be. This relates to the
discussion elsewhere (Chapter 1) about being reactive or proactive. In
the reactive case, which is the most common, a time lag necessarily
346                                                       Resilience Engineering

exists between the change and its detection, but a resilient organisation
will ensure that it is as small as possible. In the proactive case, the time
lag is reduced or perhaps even eliminated. Yet even in this case the
response is based on some cues; and the uncertainty of the outcome is
increased in the sense that the action(s) taken may be inappropriate.
Epilogue: Resilience
Engineering Precepts
Erik Hollnagel
David D. Woods




Safety is Not a System Property

One of the recurrent themes of this book is that safety is something a
system or an organisation does, rather than something a system or an
organisation has. In other words, it is not a system property that, once
having been put in place, will remain. It is rather a characteristic of how
a system performs. This creates the dilemma that safety is shown more
by the absence of certain events – namely accidents – than by the
presence of something. Indeed, the occurrence of an unwanted event
need not mean that safety as such has failed, but could equally well be
due to the fact that safety is never complete or absolute.
     In consequence of this, resilience engineering abandons the search
for safety as a property, whether defined through adherence to standard
rules, in error taxonomies, or in ‘human error’ counts. By doing so it
acknowledges the danger of the reification fallacy, i.e., the tendency to
convert a complex process or abstract concept into a single entity or
thing in itself (Gould, 1981, p. 24). Seeing resilience as a quality of
functioning has two important consequences.

•   We can only measure the potential for resilience but not resilience
    itself. Safety has often been expressed by means of reliability,
    measured as the probability that a given function or component
    would fail under specific circumstances. It is, however, not enough
    that systems are reliable and that the probability of failure is below
    a certain value (cf. Chapter 16); they must also be resilient and have
    the ability to recover from irregular variations, disruptions and
    degradation of expected working conditions.
348                                                      Resilience Engineering

•     Resilience cannot be engineered simply by introducing more
      procedures, safeguards, and barriers. Resilience engineering instead
      requires a continuous monitoring of system performance, of how
      things are done. In this respect resilience is tantamount to coping
      with complexity (Hollnagel & Woods, 2005), and to the ability to
      retain control.


Resilience as a Form of Control

A system is in control if it is able to minimise or eliminate unwanted
variability, either in its own performance, in the environment, or in
both. The link between loss of control and the occurrence of
unexpected events is so tight that a preponderance of the latter in
practice is a signature of the former. Unexpected events are therefore
often seen as a consequence of lost control. The loss of control is
nevertheless not a necessary condition for unexpected events to occur.
They may be due to other factors, causes and developments outside the
boundaries of the system.
     An unexpected event can also be a precipitating factor for loss of
control and in this respect the relation to resilience is interesting.
Knowing that control has been lost is of less value than knowing when
control is going to be lost, i.e., when unexpected events are likely. In
fact, according to the definition of resilience (Chapter 1), the
fundamental characteristic of a resilient organisation is that it does not
lose control of what it does, but is able to continue and rebound
(Chapter 13).
     In order to be in control it is necessary to know what has happened
(the past), what happens (the present) and what may happen (the
future), as well as knowing what to do and having the required
resources to do it. If we consider joint cognitive systems in general,
ranging from single individuals interacting with simple machines, such
as a driver in a car, to groups engaged in complex collaborative
undertakings, such as a team of doctors and nurses in the operating
room, it soon becomes evident that a number of common conditions
characterise how well they perform and when and how they lose
control, regardless of domains. These conditions are lack of time, lack of
knowledge, lack of competence, and lack of resources (Hollnagel & Woods,
2005, pp. 75-78).
Epilogue: Resilience Engineering Precepts                                          349

     Lack of time may come about for a number of reasons such as
degraded functionality, inadequate or overoptimistic planning, undue
demands from higher echelons or from the outside, etc. Lack of time is,
however, quite often a consequence of lack of foresight since that
pushes the system into a mode of reactive responding. Knowing what
happens and being able to respond are not by themselves sufficient to
ensure control, since a system without anticipation is limited to purely
reactive behaviour. That inevitably incurs a loss of time, both because
the response must come after the fact and therefore be compensatory,
and because the resources to respond may not always be ready when
needed but first have to be marshalled. In consequence of that, a
system confined to rely on feedback alone will in most cases sooner or
later fall behind the pace of events and therefore lose control.
     Knowledge is obviously important both for knowing what to
expect (anticipation) and for knowing what to look for or where to
focus next (attention, perception). The encapsulated experience is
sometimes referred to as the system’s ‘model of the world’ and must as
such be dynamic rather than static. Knowledge is, however, more than
just experience but also comprises the ability to go beyond experience,
to expect the unexpected and to look for more than just the obvious.
This ability, technically known as requisite imagination (Westrum, 1991;
Adamski & Westrum, 2003), is a sine qua non for resilience.
     Competence and resources are both important for the system’s
ability to respond rationally.1 The competence refers to knowing what
to do and knowing how to do it, whereas the resources refer to the
ability to do it. That the latter are essential is obvious from the fact that
control is easily lost if the resources needed to implement the intended
response are missing. This is, for instance, a common condition in the
face of natural disasters such as wildfires, earthquakes, and pandemics.
     Figure E.1 illustrates three qualities that a system must have to be
able to remain in control, and therefore to be resilient, with time as a
fourth, dependent quality. The three main qualities are not linked in the
sense that anticipation precedes attention, which in turn precedes
response. Although this ordering in some sense will be present for any



1
        Being rational is not used in the traditional, normative meaning, but rather as
        the quality of being anti-entropic, cf. Hollnagel (2005).
350                                                       Resilience Engineering

specific instance that is described or analysed, the whole point about
resilience is that these qualities must be exercised continuously. The
system must constantly be watchful and prepared to respond.
Additionally, it must constantly update its knowledge, competence and
resources by learning from successes and failures – its own as well as
those of others.




Figure E.1: Required qualities of a resilient system

     It is interesting to note that Diamond (2005) in his book on how
societies collapse and go under, identifies three ‘stops on the road to
failure’ (p. 419). These are: (1) the failure to anticipate a problem before
it has arrived, (2) the failing to perceive a problem that has actually
arrived, and (3) the failure to attempt to solve a problem once it has
been perceived (rational bad behaviour). A society that collapses is
arguably an extreme case of lack of resilience, yet it is probably no
coincidence that we find the positive version of exactly the same
characteristics in the general descriptions of what a system – or even an
individual – needs to remain in control. A resilient system must have
the ability to anticipate, perceive, and respond. Resilience engineering
must therefore address the principles and methods by which these
qualities can be brought about.
Epilogue: Resilience Engineering Precepts                             351

Readiness for Action

It is a depressing fact that examples of system failures are never hard to
find. One such case, which fortunately left no one harmed, occurred
during the editing of this book. As everybody remembers, a magnitude
9.3 earthquake occurred in the morning of December 26, 2004, about
240 kilometers south of Sumatra. This earthquake triggered a tsunami
that swept across the Indian Ocean killing at least 280,000 people. One
predictable consequence of this most tragic disaster was that coastal
regions around the world became acutely aware of the tsunami risk and
therefore of the need to implement well-functioning early warning
systems. In these cases there is little doubt about what to expect, what
to look for, and what to do. So when a magnitude 7.2 earthquake
occurred on June 14, 2005, about 140 kilometres off the town of
Eureka in California, the tsunami warning system was ready and went
into action.
      As it happened, not one but two tsunami warning centres reacted.
The first warning, covering the US and Canadian west coast, came from
a centre in Alaska. Three minutes later a second warning was issued by
a centre in Hawaii. The second warning said that there was no risk of
tsunami, but excluded the west coast north of California from the
warning. Rescue workers, missing this small but significant detail, were
predictably confused (Biever & Hecht, 2005, p. 24).
      Tsunami warnings are broadcast via radio by the US National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Unfortunately,
some locations cannot receive the NOAA radio signals because they are
blocked by mountains. They are therefore contacted by phone from
Seattle. On the day in question, however, a phone line was down so
that the message did not get through, effectively leaving some areas
without warning. This glitch was, however, not noticed. As it happened,
the earthquake was of a type that could not give rise to a tsunami, and
the warning was cancelled after one hour.
      This example illustrates a system that was not resilient, despite
being able to detect the risk in time. While precautions had been made
and procedures put in place, there was no awareness of whether they
actually worked and no understanding of what the actual conditions are.
The specific shortcoming was one of communication, issuing
inconsistent warnings and lacking feedback, and the consequence was a
partial lack of readiness to respond. Using the terminology proposed in
352                                                             Resilience Engineering

Chapter 21, the communication failure meant that some districts did
not go into the required state of high alert, as a preparation for an
evacuation. While the tsunami warning system was designed to look for
specific factors in the environment, it was not designed to look at itself,
to ensure that the ‘internal’ functions worked. The system was designed
to be safe by means of all the technology and procedures that were put
in place, but it was not designed to be resilient.


Why Things Go Wrong

It is a universal experience that things sooner or later will go wrong,2
and fields such as risk analysis and human reliability assessment have
developed a plethora of method to help us predict when and how it
may happen. From the point of view of resilience engineering it is,
however, at least as important to understand why things go wrong. One
expression of this is found in the several accident theories that have
been proposed over the years (e.g., Hollnagel, 2004), not least the many
theories of ‘human error’ and organisational failure. Most such efforts
have been engrossed with the problems found in technical or socio-
technical systems. Yet there have also been attempts to look at the
larger issues, most notably Robert Merton’s lucid analysis of why social
actions often have unanticipated consequences (Merton, 1936).
     It is almost trivial to say that we need a model, or a frame of
reference, to be able to understand issues such as safety and resilience
and to think about how safety can be ensured, maintained, and
improved. A model helps us to determine which information to look
for and brings some kind of order into chaos by providing the means
by which relationships can be explained. This obviously applies not
only to industrial safety, but to every human endeavour and industry.
To do so, the model must in practice fulfil two requirements. First, that



2
      This is often expressed in terms of Murphy’s law, the common version of
      which is that ‘everything that can go wrong, will’. A much earlier version is
      Spode’s law, which says that ‘if something can go wrong, it will.’ It is named
      after the English potter Josiah Spode (1733-97) who became famous for
      perfecting the transfer printing process and for developing fine bone china –
      but presumably not without many failed attempts on the way.
Epilogue: Resilience Engineering Precepts                                           353

it provides an explanation or brings about an understanding of an event
such that effective mitigating actions can be devised. Second, that it can
be used with a reasonable investment of effort – intellectual effort, as
well as time and resources. A model that is cumbersome and costly to
use will, from an academic point of view, from the very start be at a
disadvantage, even if it provides a better explanation.3 The trick is
therefore to find a model that at the same time is so simple that it can
be used without engendering problems or requiring too much
specialised knowledge, yet powerful enough to go beneath the often
deceptive surface descriptions.
     The problem with any powerful model is that it very quickly
becomes ‘second nature’, which means that we no longer realise the
simplifications it embodies. This should, however, not lead to the
conclusions that we must give up on models and try to describe reality
as it really is, since that is a philosophically naïve notion. The
consequence is rather that we should acknowledge the simplifications
that the models bring, and carefully weigh advantages against
disadvantages so that a choice of model is made knowingly.
     Several models have been mentioned in the chapters in this book.
The most important models in the past have been the Domino model
and the Swiss cheese model (Chapter 1). Both are easy to comprehend
and have been immensely helpful in improving the understanding of
accidents. Yet their simplicity also means that some aspects cannot be
easily described – or described at all, and that explanations in terms of
the models therefore may be incomplete. (Strictly speaking, the two
models are metaphors rather than models. In one, accidents are likened
to a row of dominoes falling, and in the other, to harmful influences
passing through a series of holes aligned.)
     In the case of the Domino model, it is clear that the real world has
no domino pieces waiting to fall. There may be precariously poised



3
        ‘Better’ is, of course, a rather dangerous term to use since it implies that some
        objective criterion or standard is available. Although there is no truth to be
        used as a point of reference, it is possible to show that one explanation –
        under given conditions – may be better than another, e.g., in providing more
        effective countermeasures. Changes are, however, never contemplated sub specie
        aeternatis but are always subject to often very mundane or pecuniary
        considerations.
354                                                         Resilience Engineering

systems or subsystems that suddenly may change from a normal to an
abnormal state, but that transition is rarely as simple as a domino
falling. Likewise, the linking or coupling between dominoes is never as
simple as the model shows. Similarly, the Swiss cheese model does not
suggest that we should look for slices of cheeses or holes, or measure
the size of holes or movements of slices of cheese. The Swiss cheese
model rather serves to emphasise the importance of latent conditions
and illustrate how these in combination with active failures may lead to
accidents.
     The Domino and Swiss cheese models are useful to explain the
abrupt, unexpected onset of accidents, but have problems in accounting
for the gradual loss of safety that may also lead to accidents. In order to
overcome this problem, a model of ‘drift to danger’ has been used, for
example in Chapter 3. Although the metaphor of drift introduces an
important dynamic aspect, it should not be taken literally or as a model,
for the following reasons:

•     Since the boundaries or margins only exist in a metaphorical sense
      or perhaps as emergent descriptions (Cook & Rasmussen, 2005),
      there is really no way in which an organisation can ‘sail close’ to an
      area of danger, nor ways in which the ‘distance’ can be measured.
      ‘Drift’ then only refers to how a series individual actions or
      decisions have larger, combined and longer term impacts on system
      properties that are missed or underappreciated.
•     The metaphor itself oversimplifies the situation by referring to the
      organisation as a whole. There is ample practical experience to
      show that some parts of an organisation may be safe while others
      may be unsafe. In other words, parts of the organisation may ‘drift’
      in different directions. The safety of the organisation can
      furthermore not be derived from a linear combination of the parts,
      but rather depends on the ways in which they are coupled and how
      coordination across these parts is fragmented or synchronized (cf.
      Perrow, 1984). This is also the reason why accidents in a very
      fundamental sense are non-linear phenomena.
•     Finally, there are no external forces that, like the wind, push an
      organisation in some direction, or allow the ‘captain’ to steer it clear
      of danger. What happens is rather that choices and decisions made
      during daily work may have long-term consequences that are not
Epilogue: Resilience Engineering Precepts                               355

     considered at the time. There can be many reasons for this, such as
     the lack of proper ‘conceptual’ tools or a shortage of time.

     It is inevitable that organisational practices change as part of daily
work, one simple reason being that the environment is partly
unpredictable, changing, or semi-erratic. Such changes are needed either
for purposes of safety or efficiency, though mostly the latter. Indeed,
the most important factor is probably the need to gain time in order to
prevent control from being lost, as described by the efficiency-
thoroughness trade-off (ETTO; Hollnagel, 2004). There is never
enough time to be sufficiently thorough; finishing an activity in time
may be important for other actions or events, which in turn cannot be
postponed because yet others depend on them, etc. The reality of this
tight coupling is probably best illustrated by the type of industrial action
that consists in ‘working to rule.’ This also provides a powerful
demonstration of how important the everyday trade-offs and shortcuts
are for the normal functioning of a system.
     Changed practices to improve efficiency often have long-term
consequences that affect safety, although for one reason or another
they are disregarded when the changes are made. These consequences
are usually both latent and have latency and therefore only show
themselves after a while. Drift is therefore nothing more than an
accumulated effect of latent consequences, which in turn result from
the trade-off or sacrificing decisions that are required to keep the
system running.


A Constant Sense of Unease

Sacrificing decisions take place on both the individual and the
organisation levels – and even on the level of societies. While they are
necessary to cope with a partly unpredictable environment, they
constitute a source of risk when they become entrenched in
institutional or organisational norms. When trade-offs and sacrificing
decisions become habitual, they are usually forgotten. Being alert or
critical incurs a cost that no individual or organisation can sustain
permanently and is therefore only used when necessary. Norms qua
norms are for that reason rarely challenged. Yet it is important for
resilience that norms remain conspicuous, not in the sense that they
356                                                        Resilience Engineering

must constantly be scrutinised and revised, but in the sense that their
existence is not forgotten and their assumptions take for granted.
     Resilience requires a constant sense of unease that prevents
complacency. It requires a realistic sense of abilities, of ‘where we are’.
It requires knowledge of what has happened, what happens, and what
will happen, as well as of what to do. A resilient system must be
proactive; flexible; adaptive; and prepared. It must be aware of the
impact of actions, as well as of the failure to take action.


Precepts

The purpose of this book has been to propose resilience engineering as
a step forward from traditional safety engineering techniques – such as
those developed in risk analysis and probabilistic safety assessment
(PSA). Rather than try to force adaptive processes and organisational
factors into these families of measures and methods, resilience
engineering recognises the need to study safety as a process, provide
new measures, new ways to monitor systems, and new ways to
intervene to improve safety. Thinking in terms of resilience shifts
inquiry to the nature of the ‘surprises’ or types of variability that
challenge control.

•     If ‘surprises’ are seen as disturbances, or disrupting events, which
      challenge the proper functioning of a process, then inquiry centres
      on how to keep a process under control in the face of such
      disrupting events, specifically on how to ensure that people do not
      exceed given ‘limits.’
•     If ‘surprises’ are seen as uncertainty about the future, then inquiry
      centres on developing ways to improve the ability to anticipate and
      respond when so challenged.
•     If ‘surprises’ are seen as recognition of the need constantly to
      update definitions of the difference between success and failure,
      then inquiry centres on the kinds of variations which our systems
      should be able to handle and ways constantly to test the system’s
      ability to handle these classes of variations.
•     If ‘surprises’ are seen as recognition that models and plans are likely
      to be incomplete or wrong, despite our best efforts, then inquiry
Epilogue: Resilience Engineering Precepts                             357

     centres on the search for the boundaries of our assessments in
     order to learn and revise.

    Resilience engineering entails a shift from an over-reliance on
analysis techniques to adaptive and co-adaptive models and measures as
the basis for safety management. Just as it acknowledges and tries to
avoid the risks of reification (cf. above), it also acknowledges and tries
to avoid the risks of oversimplifications, such as:

•    working from static snapshots, rather than recognising that safety
     emerges from dynamic processes;
•    looking for separable or independent factors, rather than examining
     the interactions across factors; and
•    modelling accidents as chains of causality, rather than as the result
     of tight couplings and functional resonance.

     It is fundamental for resilience engineering to monitor and learn
from the gap between work as imagined and work as practised.
Anything that obscures this gap will make it impossible for the
organisation to calibrate its understanding or model of itself and
thereby undermine processes of learning and improvement.
Understanding what produces the gap can drive learning and
improvement and prevent dependence on local workarounds or
conformity with distant policies. There was universal agreement across
the symposium attendees that previous research supports the above as a
critical first principle. The practical problem is how to monitor this gap
and how to channel what is learned into organisational practice.


The Way Ahead

This book boldly asserts that sufficient progress has been made on
resilience as an alternative safety management paradigm to begin to
deploy that knowledge in the form of engineering management
techniques. The essential constituents of resilience engineering are
already at hand. Since the beginning of the 1990s there has been a
growing evolution of the principles for organisational resilience and in
the understanding of the factors that determine human and
organisational performance. As a result, there is an appreciable basis for
358                                                    Resilience Engineering

how to incorporate human and organisational risk in life cycle systems
engineering tools and how to build knowledge management tools that
proactively capture how human and organisational factors affect risk.
    While additional studies can continue to document the role played
by adaptive processes for how safety is created in complex systems, this
book marks the beginning of a transition in resilience engineering from
research questions to engineering management tools. Such tools are
needed to improve the effectiveness and safety of organisations
confronted by high hazard and high performance demands. In
particular, we believe that further advances in the resilience paradigm
should occur through deploying the new measures and techniques in
partnership with management for actual hazardous processes. Such
projects will have the dual goals of simultaneously advancing the
research base on resilience and tuning practical measurement and
management tools to function more effectively in actual organisation
decision-making.
Appendix

Symposium Participants

René Amalberti is doctor in Medicine (Marseille, 77), Professor of
Physiology and Ergonomics (Paris, 95), and a PhD in Cognitive
Psychology (Paris 92). He joined the French Air Force in 1977,
graduated in aerospace medicine, and is presently head of the cognitive
science department at IMASSA (Airforce Aerospace Medical Research
Institute).
     From 1980 to 1992, he was involved in four major research
programs as: (i) developer of the French Electronic co-pilot for fighter
aircraft, (ii) developer of an Intelligent-Training support system at
Airbus, (iii) team member of the EC Research project Model of Human
Activity at Work (MOHAWC), and (iv) co-developer of the first Air-
France Crew Resource Management course.
     In late 1992 he was detached half-time from the military to the
French ministry of transportation, to lead the human factors for Civil
Aviation in France, and in 1993 became the first chairman of JAA
human factors steering committee, a position he held until late 1999.
He has continued as a resource person for civil aviation authorities (HF
certification A380, A400M), and manages safety research in various
areas such as patient safety (co-writer of the accreditation reference
document at the High Agency for Healthcare), road safety (chairman
national research program), and the chemical industry (vice chairman of
the new National Foundation for Industrial Risk).
     René Amalberti has published and co-edited over 100 papers,
chapters, and books, most of them on the safety and the emerging
theory of Ecological safety.

Lars Axelsson is a Human Factors Specialist at the Swedish Nuclear
Power Inspectorate (SKI) in Stockholm, Sweden. He is a specialist in
organization and management issues and also works as a consultant for
the aviation industry, mostly with pilot assessment and selection, and
flight crew training.
360                                                      Resilience Engineering

Richard I. Cook (MD) is Associate Professor in the Department of
Anesthesia and Critical Care at the University of Chicago. His current
research interests include the study of human error, the role of
technology in human expert performance, and patient safety. Dr. Cook
is a founding member of the National Patient Safety Foundation and
sits on the Foundation’s Board. He is internationally recognized as a
leading expert on medical accidents, complex system failures, and
human performance at the sharp end of these systems. He has
investigated a variety of problems in such diverse areas as urban mass
transportation, semiconductor manufacturing, and military software
systems. He is often a consultant for not-for-profit organizations,
government agencies, and academic groups. Dr. Cook’s most often
cited publications are ‘Gaps in the Continuity of Patient Care and
Progress in Patient Safety,’ ‘Operating at the Sharp End: The
Complexity of Human Error,’ ‘Adapting to New Technology in the
Operating Room,’ and the report ‘A Tale of Two Stories: Contrasting
Views of Patient Safety.’

Vinh N. Dang has a PhD in Nuclear Engineering from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). In 1994, he joined the
Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI) in Switzerland, where he leads research
and regulatory support activities related to Human Reliability Analysis
(HRA). His research interests include the analysis and quantification of
personnel decision-making in accident scenarios, in the frame of
Probabilistic Safety Assessments (PSAs); the modeling of crew
performance in joint human-system simulations, aimed at developing a
dynamic risk assessment methodology to complement PSA; and the
development of PSA for applications outside the domain of nuclear
power plants. In this area, an on-going PSA study for PSI’s Proton
Therapy Facility is a notable case combining elements of (medical)
physics and the healthcare sector. Currently, he leads a task force on the
collection and exchange of data for HRA research and applications, in
the Working Group on Risk Assessment of the OECD Nuclear Energy
Agency. Recently, he contributed HRA expertise and drew conclusions
and recommendations for an IAEA Co-Ordinated Research Project
(2001-2003) dealing with exploratory applications of PSA for radiation
sources. He also served as Scientific Secretary for the 7th Probabilistic
Safety Assessment and Management Conference (PSAM7/ESREL04,
Berlin, June 2004).
Symposium Participants                                               361

Sidney Dekker is Professor of Human Factors and Aviation Safety,
and Director of Research at Lund University, School of Aviation,
Sweden. He received an M.A. in organizational psychology from the
University of Nijmegen and an M.A. in experimental psychology from
Leiden University, both in the Netherlands. He gained his Ph.D. in
Cognitive Systems Engineering from The Ohio State University, USA.
He has previously worked for the Public Transport Cooperation in
Melbourne, Australia; the Massey University School of Aviation, New
Zealand, British Aerospace, UK, and has been a Senior Fellow at
Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. His specialties and
research interests are system safety, human error, reactions to failure
and criminalization, and organizational resilience. He has some
experience as a pilot, type trained on the DC-9 and Airbus A340. His
books include ‘The Field Guide to Human Error Investigations’ (2002)
and ‘Ten Questions About Human Error: A New View of Human
Factors and System Safety’ (2005).

Arthur Dijkstra is a captain in KLM Royal Dutch Airlines on a Boeing
777 as well as a flight safety investigator. From 1982 to 1984 he
completed the Dutch Civil Aviation flying school and started in 1985 as
First Officer at the McDonnell Douglas DC 9, followed by Boeing
B747-300 and B747-400. On this aircraft he started as a flight instructor.
He later became captain on Airbus A310, followed by the Boeing B767
and Boeing B777. From 1998 he was also (Senior) Type Rating
examiner, which includes pilot and instructor training and examination.
In 2005 he started as flight safety investigator in the flight safety
department of KLM. From 2003 to June 2005 Arthur Dijkstra
completed a MSc study in Human Factors at Linköping University,
Sweden. In 2005 he started a PhD study in the field of Resilience
Engineering at the section of Safety Science at the University of
Technology in Delft in the Netherlands sponsored by the KLM.

Rhona Flin (BSc, PhD Psychology) is Professor of Applied
Psychology in the School of Psychology at the University of Aberdeen.
She is a Chartered Psychologist, a Fellow of the British Psychological
Society and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Rhona Flin
directs a team of psychologists working with high reliability industries
(especially the energy sector) on research and consultancy projects
362                                                      Resilience Engineering

concerned with the management of safety and emergency response.
The group has worked on projects relating to aviation safety (funded by
the EC and CAA), leadership and safety in offshore management
(funded by HSE and the oil industry), health management and safety in
the offshore oil industry (HSE), team skills and emergency management
(funded by the nuclear industry). She is currently studying anaesthetists’
and surgeons’ non-technical skills (funded by NES/RCS, Edinburgh)
and safety climate in hospitals (funded by GUHT). Her recent books
include ‘Incident Command: Tales from the Hot Seat’ (Ed. &
Arbuthnot, Ashgate, 2002); ‘Sitting in the Hot Seat: Leaders and Teams
for Critical Incident Management’ (Wiley, 1996), ‘Managing the
Offshore Installation Workforce’ (Ed. & Slaven, PennWell Books,
1996) and ‘Decision Making under Stress’ (Ed. & Salas, Strub & Martin,
Ashgate, 1997). See also www.abdn.ac.uk/iprc.

Yushi Fujita is a Specialist in the field of human – machine interfaces,
individual and organizational characteristics, human cognitive modelling
and human reliability analysis, who has over twenty-five years of
experience mainly in the nuclear industry. He is currently a managing
director at Technova Inc., a research organization in Japan. He received
a PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1992.

Andrew Hale has been Professor of Safety Science at the Delft
University of Technology since 1984. He worked in London and at
Aston University and pioneered the field of occupational accident
research, particularly as an occupational psychologist specialising in
human factors in safety, safety management and regulation. His early
research was centred on individual behaviour and training in the face of
danger. Since moving to the Netherlands he has focused more on the
modelling and measurement of safety management and culture and on
regulation of safety. He has conducted studies in the manufacturing,
process and construction industries and more recently in air, road and
rail transport.
      He is chairman of the Scientific Advisory Board of the Dutch
Traffic Safety Institute, member of the Safety Advisory Committee on
Schiphol Airport, member of the Executive Board of the Dutch
Association of Safety Engineers and editor of Safety Science.
      The department at Delft has three main research lines: the
incorporation of risk as a criterion in the design process of new
Symposium Participants                                                363

technology, processes and products; the development, assessment and
improvement of risk management systems; and the development and
evaluation of tools for risk assessment and modelling and for learning
from incidents and accidents.

Erik Hollnagel is since mid-2006 Industrial Safety Chair at Ecole des
Mines de Paris, after having been Professor of Human – Machine
Interaction at Linköping University (S) since 1999. He is an
internationally recognised expert in the fields of system safety, accident
analysis, cognitive systems engineering, cognitive ergonomics and
intelligent human – machine systems. He has worked at universities,
research institutes and private companies in several countries since
1971, and has experience from applications in nuclear power,
aerospace, software engineering, healthcare, and road vehicles. He has
published widely including ten books, the most recent titles being ‘Joint
Cognitive Systems: Foundations of Cognitive Systems Engineering’
(Taylor & Francis, 2005; co-authored with D. D. Woods) and ‘Barriers
and Accident Prevention’ (Ashgate, 2004), and is, together with Pietro
C. Cacciabue, Editor-in-Chief of the international journal of Cognition,
Technology & Work.

Nancy G. Leveson is Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics and
of Engineering Systems at MIT and Director of the Complex Systems
Research Lab. She has over 25 years experience working on system
safety, including cross-disciplinary research encompassing engineering,
cognitive psychology, and organizational sociology. She has published
almost 200 papers on system safety, human – computer interaction,
software engineering, and system engineering. She has also published a
book entitled Safeware (Addison-Wesley, 1995). Dr. Leveson is a
member of the National Academy of Engineering and has received
numerous awards for her research including the 1999 ACM Allen
Newell Award for outstanding computer science research, the 1995
AIAA Information Systems Award for ‘developing the field of software
safety and for promoting responsible software and system engineering
practices where life and property are at stake.’ In 2004 she received the
ACM Sigsoft Outstanding Research Award. Her research results are
currently being used by aerospace, automotive, nuclear power, and
defense companies and government agencies. In 1995, Dr. Leveson and
some of her former students started a company, Safeware Engineering
364                                                      Resilience Engineering

Corporation, that creates specification and system safety engineering
tools and consults on safety in a wide variety of industries.

Nick McDonald is Senior Lecturer in the Department of Psychology,
Trinity College Dublin. He chairs the Aerospace Psychology Research
Group, which has played a leading role in developing human factors
research in aviation within the European Commission’s 4th, 5th & 6th
Framework RTD Programmes, co-ordinating and participating in a
series of projects that have addressed human factors in the aircraft
maintenance industry, and in the wider aviation system. Other current
research addresses safety in commercial road transport and in process
industries. Through the European Transport Safety Council he has also
contributed to various forums and reports on transport safety policy in
Europe. His main research interests are in organisational aspects of
safety and efficiency and with problems of implementation, change and
innovation.

Jean Pariès is CEO of the Dédale SA company (Paris, France).
Dédale’s activity focuses on the Human Factors dimensions of safety,
across the domains of aviation, rail, nuclear power, shipping, road
tunnels, and health care. Jean is also Associated Research Director with
the Centre National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS).
     He graduated from ENAC, the French National School of Civil
Aviation, as an aeronautical engineer in 1973. He joined the French civil
aviation authority (DGAC), where he worked in a succession of roles
including airworthiness regulation, operational regulation, and pilot
licensing regulation. From 1988 he participated in the foundation of the
ICAO Flight Safety and Human Factors Working Group chaired by
Captain Daniel Maurino. In 1990, he joined the French air accident
investigation body, the Bureau Enquêtes Accidents (BEA) as Deputy
Head, and Head of Investigations. He led the investigation into the
A320 aircraft accident at Mont Saint-Odile, France (1992). He
contributed to the evolution of accident analysis methods and
particularly to the introduction of an organisational perspective into the
ICAO Annex 13 accident investigation guidelines. Jean left the BEA in
1994 and has, since that time, led the Dédale team on a wide variety of
applied human factors, training development, operational research and
organisational reliability consulting assignments. He has also taught
Symposium Participants                                                   365

Human Factors, Human Reliability and Organisational Reliability for
more than 15 years at several schools and universities.

Gunilla A. Sundström is Senior Vice President with Wachovia
Corporation leading Wachovia’s Outsourcing Governance & Program
Office. In this role she is responsible for development of governance
capabilities, processes and tools in support of outsourcing-related
decisions at an enterprise level. For more than 18 years, she has been
engaged in decision making research in complex systems in various
domains including industrial process control, telecommunications and
financial services. Her primary research interests include decision
modeling, analysis and design of decision support for complex systems.
She has authored more than 60 papers/book chapters and articles in
refereed journals, technical journals and magazines. She currently serves
on the editorial boards of the International Journal of Human – Computer
Studies and the International Journal of Cognition Technology & Work. She has
been awarded various leadership and teamwork commendations
including the IEEE-Systems Man Cybernetics Society’s outstanding
contributions award. Dr. Sundström holds a Dr. phil. degree from
University of Mannheim, Germany.

Ron Westrum is Professor of Sociology and Interdisciplinary
Technology at Eastern Michigan University. A specialist in the
sociology of science and technology and in systems safety, he has
lectured widely to the international community in aviation, medicine,
and nuclear power. He has numerous publications, including three
books, the last of which is ‘Sidewinder: Creative Missile Development
at China Lake’ (1999). He is a management consultant through his firm
Aeroconcept, LLC. A member of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society, he is writing a book on information flow. He lives in Ann
Arbor, Michigan, with his wife Deborah and two children, Max and
Piper.

David D. Woods is Professor at Ohio State University and past-
president of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. From his
initial work following the Three Mile Island accident in nuclear power,
to studies of coordination breakdowns between people and automation
in aviation accidents, to his work on to his role in today’s national
debates about patient safety, he has developed and advanced the
366                                                    Resilience Engineering

foundations and practice of Cognitive Engineering. David Woods was
President and is Fellow of the Human Factors and Ergonomic Society
as well as Fellow of the American Psychological Society, and the
American Psychological Association. He received the Kraft Innovators
award from the Human Factors and Ergonomic Society for developing
the foundations of Cognitive Engineering and shared the Ely Award for
best paper in the journal Human Factors (1994), as well as a Laurels
Award from Aviation Week and Space Technology (1995) for research on
the human factors of highly automated cockpits.

John Wreathall is a Specialist in the field of human and organizational
performance, who has worked for over 35 years in the fields of nuclear
power, medicine, aviation and aerospace, rail transport, chemical
process and pharmaceutical manufacturing. He has led the development
of two state-of-the-art human reliability analysis methods, and
participated in nine probabilistic safety assessments, mostly applied to
nuclear power, but most recently in the fields of transplant surgery and
bio-terrorism. In addition, a major activity he has led has been the
development of leading indicators of organizational behaviour as a
management tool for use in the nuclear and aerospace industries.
     Mr. Wreathall has degrees in nuclear engineering and systems
engineering from Queen Mary College, The University of London. He
is president of John Wreathall & co., Inc., based in Dublin, Ohio.
Contributing Authors                                                367

Contributing Authors

Dr. Betty Barrett, MIT Research Scientist based in the Center for
Technology, Policy and Industrial Development (CTPID), expertise in
the application of complexity principles in organizational settings,
workplace dynamics, and the operation of geographically distributed
teams.

John S. Carroll is Professor of Behavioral and Policy Sciences at the
MIT Sloan School of Management and the MIT Engineering Systems
Division and Co-Director of the MIT Lean Aerospace Initiative. He
taught previously at Carnegie-Mellon University, Loyola University of
Chicago, and the University of Chicago. He received a B.S. (Physics)
from MIT and a Ph.D. (Social Psychology) from Harvard. His research
has focused on decision-making and learning in organizational contexts.
Current projects examine organizational safety issues in high-hazard
industries such as nuclear power, aerospace, and health care, including
self-analysis and organizational learning, safety culture, leadership,
communication and systems thinking. He has published five books and
over 70 journal articles and book chapters.

Dr. Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld is a Senior Research Scientist in MIT’s
Sloan School of Management. He has over 20 years experience in
studying and leading large-scale systems change and institutional re-
alignment initiatives. Dr. Cutcher-Gershenfeld is co-author of Valuable
Disconnects in Organizational Learning Systems (Oxford University Press,
2005), Lean Enterprise Value (Palgrave/Macmillan, 2002), Knowledge-
Driven Work (Oxford University Press, 1998), Strategic Negotiations
(Harvard Business School Press, 1994) and three additional co-authored
or co-edited books, as well as over 60 articles on large-scale systems
change, new work systems, labor-management relations, negotiations,
conflict resolution, organizational learning, public policy and economic
development.

Nicolas Dulac is a Ph.D. student in the Aeronautics and Astronautics
Department at MIT. His research interests are in safety and
368                                                     Resilience Engineering

visualization. He is currently working on the design of advanced risk
management tools.

Louis Goossens is a Chemical Engineer by training. Since 1980 he has
been (senior) lecturer in Safety Science at Delft University of
Technology. He specializes in methods of risk assessment and the
modeling of risk, risk control and management. He has published
widely on the use of expert judgment for risk assessment and managed
a number of international projects, covering risks ranging from the
nuclear and process industry to environmental and transport. He has
also developed a number of inspection and audit systems. He is
associate editor of the Journal of Risk Research.

Frank Guldenmund studied psychology at Leiden University and
majored in cognitive psychology and methodology. Joining the Safety
Science Group in 1992 primarily as a methodologist his involvement
subsequently enlarged to include the modelling of safety management
systems and the role of organisational culture in relation to
(occupational) safety. He has been involved in projects regarding both
the modelling and the measurement of these variables. Being
quantitative by education his interest has gradually become more
qualitative and holistic.

Tom Heijer graduated as Control Engineer from Delft University of
Technology in 1975. He worked at the Dutch Institute for Road Safety
Research on crash simulation and human biomechanics and later on
long term safety research including the safety implications of telematics
applications. Since 1989 he has worked part time at the Safety Science
Group of the Delft University of Technology on a broad range of
transport safety projects in the road, rail and air traffic sectors. His
specialization is in system safety, risk modeling and feedback systems.

Dr. Christopher Nemeth is a Research Associate (Assistant
Professor) in the Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care at the
University of Chicago who studies human performance in complex
high hazard environments. Recent research interests include technical
work in high stakes settings, research methods in individual and
distributed cognition, and understanding how information technology
erodes or enhances system resilience. He has experience as a corporate
Contributing Authors                                                369

manager, design and human factors consultant, university instructor,
expert witness, and career active duty and reserve US Naval officer. His
book on human factors research methods, Human Factors Methods for
Design, is available from Taylor and Francis/CRC Press.

David Zipkin has a master’s degree in Technology and Policy from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Prior to MIT, he worked in the
software industry.
This page intentionally left blank
Bibliography
Adamski, A. & Westrum, R. (2003). Requisite imagination. The fine art
    of anticipating what might go wrong. In E. Hollnagel (Ed.),
    Handbook of cognitive task design (pp. 193-220). Mahwah, NJ:
    Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ale, B. J. M., Bellamy, L. J., Cooke, R. C., Goossens, L. H. J., Hale, A.
    R., Roelen, A. & Smith, E. (2004). Development of a causal model for air
    transport safety. Delft University of Technology: Safety Science
    Group.
Amalberti, R. (2001). The paradoxes of almost totally safe
    transportation systems. Safety Science, 37, 109-126.
Amalberti, R., Auroy, Y., Berwick, D. & Barach, P. (2005). Five system
    barriers to achieving ultrasafe health care. Ann. Intern. Med., 142(9),
    756-764.
Amalberti, R. & Hourlier, S. (2005). Human error reduction strategies,
    In P. Carayon (Ed.), Handbook of human factors and ergonomics in
    healthcare and patient safety. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
    Associates.
Ashby, W. R. (1956). An introduction to cybernetics. London: Methuen &
    Co.
Auroy, Y., Amalberti, R. & Benhamou, D. (2004). Risk assessment and
    control require analysis of both outcomes and process of care,
    editorial. Anesthesiology, 101, 815-817.
Baker, A. (2002). New York seeking better response to catastrophes.
    New York Times, 20 August, A1 & A19.
Banbury, S. & Tremblay, S. (2004). (Eds.) Situation awareness: A cognitive
    perspective. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Barabási, A.-L. & Bonabeau, E. (2003). Scale-free networks. Scientific
    American, 288, 60-69.
Bedau, M. A. (1997). Weak emergence. Philosophical Perspectives, 11, 375–
    399.
Bedau, M. A. (2002). Downward causation and the autonomy of weak
    emergence. Principia, 6, 5–50.
Bellamy, L. J., Papazoglou, I. A., Hale, A. R., Aneziris, O. N., Ale, B. J.
    M., Morris, M. I. & Oh, J. I. H. (1999). I-Risk: Development of an
    integrated technical and management risk control and monitoring methodology
372                                                           Resilience Engineering

    for managing and quantifying on-site and off-site risks (Contract ENVA-
    CT96-0243). Report to European Union. Ministry of Social Affairs
    and Employment. Den Haag.
Benner, L. J. (1978). Five accident theories and their implications for research.
    Joint International Meeting of the American Association for
    Automotive Medicine and the International Association for
    Accident and Traffic Medicine, July 10, 1978, Ann Arbor, MI:
    http://www.iprr.org/THEORY/AnnArbor78.htm.
Best, M. H. (2001). The new competitive advantage. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.
Biever, C. & Hecht, J. (2005). Alarm bells ringing over US response to
    tsunami scare. New Scientist, Issue No. 2505, 8-9.
Bigley, K. & Roberts. K. (2001). The incident command system: High-
    reliability organizing for complex and volatile task environments.
    Academy of Management Journal, 44, 1281-1299.
Boeing. How safe is flying? Website accessed 07-05-05.
    http://www.boeing.com/commercial/safety/pf/pf_howsafe.html
Bonabeau, E. & Théraulaz, G. (2000). Swarm smarts. Scientific American,
    March, 73-79.
Bonabeau, E., Dorigo, M. & Théraulaz, G. (1999). Swarm intelligence:
    From natural to artificial systems. Oxford University Press.
Borgenstam, C. & Sandström, A. (1995). Why Vasa capsized. Stockholm:
    AB Grafisk Press.
Bourrier, M. (1998). Elements for designing a self-correcting
    organisation: Examples from nuclear plants. In A. R. Hale & M.
    Baram (Eds.) Safety management: The challenge of change. Oxford:
    Pergamon.
Branscome, D. R. (1999). WIRE Mishap investigation board report. NASA,
    June 8.
Brinded, M. (2000). Perception vs. analysis. How to handle risk. The Lloyd’s
    Register Lecture. March. London: Royal Academy of Engineering.
Cabbage, M. & Harwood, W. (2004). Comm check: The final flight of shuttle
    Columbia. New York: Free Press.
Carlson, J. M. & Doyle, J. C. (2000). Highly optimized tolerance:
    Robustness and design in complex systems. Physical Review Letters,
    84(11), 2529-2532.
Carlson, J. M. & Doyle, J. C. (2002). Complexity and robustness. In:
    Proceedings of the A. M. Sackler Colloquium of the National Academy of
    Science; PNAS, 99(Suppl. 1), 2538-2545.
Bibliography                                                                    373

Carson, W. (1981). The other price of Britain’s oil. Safety and control in the
    North Sea. London: Martin Robertson.
Checkland, P. (1981). Systems thinking, systems practice. Chichester, UK:
    John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Checkland, P. & Scholes, J. (1990). Soft systems methodology in action.
    Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Cook, R. I. & O’Connor, M. (2005). Thinking about accidents and
    systems. In H. Manasse & K. Thompson (Eds.), Improving medication
    safety. American Society for Health-System Pharmacists, Bethesda
    MD.
Cook, R. I. & Rasmussen, J. (2005). Going solid: A model of system
    dynamics and consequences for patient safety. Quality & Safety in
    Health Care, 14(2), 130-134.
Cook, R. I., Render, M. L. & Woods, D. D. (2000). Gaps in the
    continuity of care and progress on patient safety. British Medical
    Journal, 320, 791-794.
Cook, R. I., Woods, D. D. & McDonald, J. S. (1991). Human performance
    in anesthesia: A corpus of cases. Cognitive Systems Engineering
    Laboratory Report, prepared for Anesthesia Patient Safety
    Foundation, April 1991.
Cook, R. I., Woods, D. D. & Miller, C. (1998). A tale of two stories:
    Contrasting views on patient safety. Chicago, IL: National Patient Safety
    Foundation.
Corrigan, S. (2002). Comparative analysis of safety management systems and
    safety culture in aircraft maintenance. Doctoral Thesis. Trinity College
    Dublin: Department of Psychology.
Corrigan, S., Morrison, R. & McDonald, N. (2004). Contributions to the
    safety and efficiency of the multi-drop or local/short haul operations. Progress
    Report June 2004. Centre for Transportation Research and
    Innovation for People (TRIP). Trinity College Dublin.
Coutu, D. (2002). How resilience works. Harvard Business Review, May,
    46-55.
Cox, S. & Flin, R. (1998). Safety culture. Philosopher’s stone or man of
    straw? Work & Stress, 12, 189-201.
Crichton, M., Flin, R. & Rattray, W. (2002). Training decision makers
    using tactical decision games. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis
    Management, 8, 208-217.
Csete, M. E. & Doyle, J. C. (2002). Reverse engineering of biological
    complexity. Science, 295, 1664-1669.
374                                                          Resilience Engineering

Cullen, D. (1990). The Piper Alpha disaster. London: HMSO.
Cutler, T. & James, P. (1996). Does safety pay? Work, Employment &
    Safety, 10, 755-765.
Davies, P. C. W. (2004). Emergent biological principles and the
    computational properties of the universe. Complexity , 10(2), 11-15.
Deighton, L. (1996). Fighter: The true story of the Battle of Britain. London,
    UK: Pimlico.
Dekker, S. W. A. (2002). The field guide to human error investigations.
    Bedford, UK: Cranfield University Press/Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
Dekker, S. W. A. (2003a). Illusion of an explanation. International Journal
    of Aviation Psychology, 13(2), 95-106.
Dekker, S. W. A. (2003b). When human error becomes a crime. Journal
    of Human Factors and Aerospace Safety, 3(1), 83-92.
Dekker, S. W. A. (2005). Ten questions about human error: A new view of
    human factors and system safety. Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Diamond, J. (2005). Collapse. How societies choose to fail or survive. London,
    UK: Allen Lane.
Dijkstra, G. & van Poortvliet, A. (2004). Veiligheid: Een veilige balans met
    kosten (Safety: A safe balance with costs). Essay. Prorail Strategy &
    Innovation. Utrecht.
Dominguez, C. O., Flach, J. M., McDermott, P. L., McKellar, D. M. &
    Dunn, M. (2004). The conversion decision in laparoscopic surgery:
    Knowing your limits and limiting your risks. In K. Smith, J.
    Shanteau & P. Johnson (Eds.), Psychological investigations of competence
    in decision making (pp. 7-39). Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Drogoul, F., Grau, J. Y. & Amalberti, R. (2003). Dialogues with the
    customer: The designer interface with operations personnel. Paper to the New
    Technology & Work Symposium, Blankensee. Bretigny sur Orge:
    Eurocontrol.
Duijm, N.-J., Hale, A. R., Goossens, L. H. J. & Hourtolou, D. (2004).
    Evaluating and managing safety barriers in major hazard plants. In
    C. Spitzer, U. Schmocker & V. N. Dang (Eds.), Probabilistic safety
    assessment & management. Berlin: Springer. 110-115.
Dupuy, J. P. & Teubner, G. (1990). Paradoxes of self references in the
    humanities, law, and the social sciences. Stanford: Anma Libri.
Dupuy, J. P. (2002). Pour un catastrophisme éclairé. Paris: Seuil.
Dwyer, J. (2002). A calamity unimaginable in scope, and unexamined in
    all its dimensions. New York Times, 12 September.
Bibliography                                                                 375

Elling, M. G. M. (1991). Veiligheidsvoorschriften in de industrie (Safety rules
     in industry). PhD Thesis. University of Twente, Netherlands:
     Faculty of Philosophy and Social Sciences Publication WMW No.8.
Endsley, M. & Garland, D. (2002). (Eds.) Situation awareness. Mahwah,
     NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
European Transport Safety Council. (2003). Transport safety performance in
     the EU: A statistical overview. Brussels.
Fields, C. (2002). Army delayed Joola Rescue Bid. Lloyds List, 8
     November.
Fischhoff, B. (1975). Hindsight ≠ foresight: The effect of outcome
     knowledge on judgment under uncertainty. Journal of Experimental
     Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1, 288-299.
Fiterman, C. (2003). Prévention et gestion des risques technologiques et
     industriels. Avis et rapport du Conseil Economique et Social, Editions des
     Journaux officiels, 7, 41103-0007.
Flin, R. (1996). Sitting in the hot seat. Leaders and teams for critical incident
     management. Chichester: Wiley.
Flin, R. (2003). Men behaving badly? Senior managers and safety.
     Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing, 13(4), 1-8.
Flin, R., Mearns, K., Fleming, M. & Gordon, R. (1996). Risk perception
     and safety in the offshore oil and gas industry. (HSE Research Report
     OTH 94454). London: HSE Books.
Flin, R., O’Connor, P. & Crichton, M. (in prep). Safety at the sharp end: A
     guide to non-technical skills. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Flin, R. & Slaven, G. (1994). The selection and training of offshore installation
     managers for crisis management. London: HSE Books.
Free, R. (1994). The role of procedural violations in railway accidents. PhD
     thesis. University of Manchester.
Furuta, K., Sasou, K., Kubota, R., Ujita, H., Shuto, Y. & Yagi, E.
     (2000). Human factor analysis of JCO criticality accident. Division of
     Human-Machine Systems Studies, Atomic Energy Society of Japan.
Galea, E. R. (2001). Simulating evacuation and circulation in planes,
     trains, buildings and ships using the EXODUS software. In M.
     Schreckenberg & S. D. Sharma (Eds.), Proceedings of the International
     Conference on Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics. Berlin: Springer.
Gehman, H. (2003). Columbia accident investigation report. Washington DC:
     U.S. Government Accounting Office, August. Available from
     www.caib.us/news/report/default.html.
Girard, R. (1961). Mensonge romantique et vérité Romanesque. Paris: Grasset.
376                                                       Resilience Engineering

Global Aviation Information Network (2003). Role of Analytical Tools in
    Airline Flight Safety Management GAIN WG B in June 2003.
    www.gainweb.org, accessed on 01-04-05.
Gould, S. J. (1981). The mismeasure of man. New York: Norton.
Greenwood, M. & Woods, H. M. (1919). The incidence of industrial accidents
    upon individuals with special reference to multiple accidents (British
    Industrial Fatigue Research Board, Report No. 4). London: HMS.
Griffiths, P. & Stewart, S. (2005). Presentations on Easyjet risk management
    programme. Trinity College Dublin.: Department of Psychology.
Guldenmund, F. W. & Hale, A. R. (2004). The ARAMIS audit manual.
    Version 1.2. Delft University of Technology: Safety Science Group.
Haddon, Jr. W. (1966). The prevention of accidents. In: Preventive
    medicine, p. 591-621. Boston: Little Brown.
Hale, A. R. (1989). Safety of railway personnel: An outsider’s view.
    Paper to the International Jubilee Congress of the Dutch Railways, 28-30
    June, Amsterdam. Delft University of Technology: Safety Science
    Group.
Hale, A. R. (2000). The Tokai-mura accident. Cognition Technology &
    Work, 2(4), 215-217.
Hale, A. R. (2001). Regulating airport safety: the case of Schiphol. Safety
    Science, 37(2-3), 127-149.
Hale, A. R., Goossens, L. H. J., Ale, B. J. M., Bellamy, L. A., Post, J.,
    Oh, J. I. H. & Papazoglou, I. A. (2004). Managing safety barriers
    and controls at the workplace. In C. Spitzer, U. Schmocker & V. N.
    Dang (Eds.), Probabilistic Safety Assessment & Management, pp. 608-
    613. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Hale, A. R., Guldenmund, F. W., Goossens, L. H. J., Karczewski, J.,
    Duijm, N.-J., Hourtolou, D., LeCoze, J.-C., Plot, E., Prats, F.,
    Kontic, B., Kontic, D. & Gerbec, M. (2005). Management
    influences on major hazard prevention: The ARAMIS audit. Paper
    to the ESREL conference on Safety & reliability, Gdynia.
Hale, A. R., Heijer, T. H. & Koornneef, F. (2002). Management van
    Veiligheidsregels bij de Nederlandse Spoorwegen. (Management of safety
    rules by the Dutch Railways) Report to Railned. Delft University
    of Technology: Safety Science Group.
Hale, A. R., Heijer, T. H. & Koornneef, F. (2003). Management of
    safety rules: The case of railways. Safety Science Monitor, 7(1).
    http://www.ipso.asn.au/vol7/vol7idx.htm.
Bibliography                                                               377

Hallahan, W. H. (1994). Misfire: The history of how America’s small arms have
    failed our military. New York: Scribners.
Hammond, P. & Mosley, M. (2002). Trust Me I’m a Doctor. London:
    Metro.
Hauser, C. (2004). At US hospital, Reflections on 11 hours and 91
    casualties. New York Times, Dec. 29.
Heijer, T. H. & Hale, A. R. (2002). Risk knows no bounds: How rational can
    we be? Paper to the New Technology & Work Workshop,
    Blankensee. Delft University of Technology: Safety Science Group.
Heinrich, H. W. (1931). Industrial accident prevention. New York: McGraw-
    Hill.
Heinrich, H. W., Petersen, D. & Roos, N. (1980). Industrial accident
    prevention (Fifth Edition). New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Helmreich, R. L. (2001). On error management: Lessons from aviation.
    British Medical Journal, 320, 781-784.
Helmreich, R. L. & Sexton, J. (2004). Managing threat and error to
    increase safety in medicine. In R. Dietrich & K. Jochum (Eds.),
    Teaming up: Components of safety under high risk. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Hoekstra, J. M. (2001). Designing for safety: The free flight air traffic
    management concept. PhD. Thesis. Delft University of Technology:
    Safety Science Group.
Hofmann, D. & Morgeson, F. (2004). The role of leadership in safety.
    In J. Barling & M. Frone (Eds.) The psychology of workplace safety.
    Washington: APA Books.
Holland, J. H. (1998). Emergence. Reading, MA: Helix.
Hollnagel, E. (1983). Position paper on human error. NATO Conference on
    Human           Error,      August        1983,       Bellagio,      Italy.
    http://www.ida.liu.se/~eriho/, accessed on 2005-06-15.
Hollnagel, E. (1993a). The phenotype of erroneous actions. International
    Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 39, 1-32.
Hollnagel, E. (1993b). Human reliability analysis: Context and control.
    Academic Press, London.
Hollnagel, E. (1998). Cognitive reliability and error analysis method
    (CREAM). New York: Elsevier Science Inc.
Hollnagel, E. (2004). Barriers and accident prevention. Aldershot, UK:
    Ashgate.
Hollnagel, E. (2005). The natural unnaturalness of rationality. Proceedings of
    7th International Conference on Naturalistic Decision Making, 15-
    17 June 2005, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
378                                                            Resilience Engineering

Hollnagel, E. & Woods, D. D. (2005). Joint cognitive systems: Foundations of
     cognitive systems engineering. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis/CRC
     Press.
Holt, L. T. C. (1955). Red for danger (4th Edition). Newton Abbott. David
     & Charles.
Hopkins, A. (2000). Lessons from Longford. Sydney: CCH.
Hopkins, A. (2005). Safety, Culture and Risk. The Organisational Causes of
     Disasters. Sydney: CCH.
Houtenbos, M., Hagenzieker, M., Wieringa, P. & Hale, A. R. (2004). The
     role of expectations in interaction behaviour between car drivers. Delft
     University of Technology: Safety Science Group.
Hudson, P. (1999). Safety culture – the way ahead? Theory and practical
     principles. Leiden University. Leiden:Centre for Safety Science.
Hughes, T. (1983). Networks of power electrification in western society.
     Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.
Hughes, T. (1994). System momentum and system adaptation (Personal
     communication).
Hutchins, E. (1996). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutter, B. (2001). Regulation and risk. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ICAO (2001). Annex 13: Aircraft accident and incident investigation (Ninth
     edition).
Institute of Medicine (1995). HIV and the blood supply: An analysis of crisis
     decision-making. Washington DC: National Academies Press.
Itoh, K., Andersen, H. B. & Seki, M. (2004). Track maintenance train
     operators attitudes to job, organisation and management, and their
     correlation with accident/incident rate. Cognition, Technology &
     Work, 6(2), 63-78.
Jackson, R. & Watkin, C. (2004). The resilience inventory: Seven
     essential skills for overcoming life’s obstacles and determining
     happiness. Selection and Development Review, 20, 6, 11-15.
Janis, I. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological study of policy decisions and fiascos.
     Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Johnson, P. E., Jamal, K. & Berryman, R. G. (1991). Effects of framing
     on auditor decisions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
     Processes, 50, 75-105.
Johnson, W. G. (1980). MORT safety assurance systems. New York: Marcel
     Dekker, Inc.
Bibliography                                                                 379

Kennedy, I. (2001). Learning from Bristol. The report of the public
    inquiry into children’s heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary
    1984-1995. Command Paper CM 5207. London: HMSO.
Kennis, P. & Marin, B. (Eds.) (1997). Managing AIDS: Organizational
    responses in six European countries. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Kessler, E., Bierley, P. & Gopalakrishnan, S. (2001). Vasa syndrome:
    Insights from a 17th century new product disaster. Academy of
    Management Executive, 15, 80-91.
Klampfer, B., Flin, R., Helmreich, R. L., Hausler, R., Sexton, B.,
    Fletcher, G., Field, P., Staender, S., Lauche, K., Dieckmann, P. &
    Amacher, A. (2001). Enhancing performance in high risk
    environments: Recommendations for the use of behavioural
    markers. Behaviour Markers Workshop, Zurich, July 5-6.
Klein, G., Pliske, R., Crandall, B. & Woods, D. D. (2005). Problem
    detection. Cognition, Technology & Work, 7(1), 14-28.
Klinect, J. R., Murray, P., Merritt, A. C. & Helmreich, R. L. (2003). Line
    operations safety audit (LOSA). Definition and operating
    characteristics. In proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on
    Aviation Psychology (pp. 663-668). Dayton, OH: The Ohio State
    University.
Kohn, L., Corrigan, J. & Donaldson, M. (1999). To err is human - building
    a safer health system. Committee on Quality in America. Washington
    DC, Institute of Medicine. National Academic Press.
Kolata, G. (2004). Program coaxes hospitals to see treatments under
    their noses. New York Times, Dec. 25, A1, C6.
Kranz, G. (2000). Failure is not an option: Mission control from Mercury to
    Apollo 13 and beyond. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Kube, C. R. & Bonabeau, E. (2000). Cooperative transport by ants and
    robots. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 30(1-2), 85-101.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions (2nd Ed.). Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press.
Kurpianov, A. (1995). Derivatives debacles. Economic Quarterly (Federal
    Reserve Bank of Richmond), 81, 1-24.
Lanir, Z. (1986). Fundamental surprise: The national intelligence crisis. Eugene,
    OR: Decision Research. (originally Tel Aviv: HaKibbutz
    HaMeuchad, 1983, Hebrew).
Laplace, P. S. (1814). Essai philosophique sur le fondement des probabilités. C.
    Bourgeois, Paris, 1986; Philosophical Essays on Probabilities.
    Translated by Truscott, F. W.; Emory, F. L. Dover, New York.
380                                                        Resilience Engineering

Larsen, L., Petersen, K., Hale, A. R., Heijer, T. H., Harms Ringdahl, L.,
    Parker, D. & Lawrie, D. (2004). A Framework for safety rule
    management (D2.8.1). SAMRAIL Final report Contract No.
    GMA2/2001/52053. Lyngby. Danish Traffic Institute.
Lawrence, P. R. & Dyer, D. (1983). Renewing American industry. The Free
    Press: New York.
LeMessurier, W. (2005). The fifty-nine story crisis. A lesson in professional
    behavior. http://onlineethics.org/moral/lemessurier. Accessed on
    1/11/05.
Leplat, J. (1987). Occupational accident research and systems approach
    in Rasmussen, J., Duncan, K. & Jacques Leplat, J. (Eds.), New
    Technology and Human Error, pp. 181-191, New York: John Wiley &
    Sons.
Leveson, N. G. (2002). A new approach to system safety engineering.
    Cambridge, MA: Aeronautics and Astronautics, MIT.
Leveson, N. G. (2004). A New Accident Model for Engineering Safer
    Systems. Safety Science, 42(4), 237-270.
Leveson, N. G., Cutcher-Gershenfeld, J., Dulac, N. & Zipkin, D.
    (2005). Phase 1 Final Report on Modeling, Analyzing and Engineering
    NASA’s Safety Culture. http://sunnyday.mit.edu/Phase1-Final-
    Report.pdf. [NL].
Leveson, N. G., Daouk, M., Dulac, N. & Marais, K. (2003). Applying
    STAMP in accident analysis. Workshop on the Investigation and
    Reporting of Accidents, Sept.
Link, D. C. R. (2000). Report of the Huygens Communications System Inquiry
    Board, NASA, December 2000.
Luthans, F. & Avolio, B. (2003). Authentic leadership development. In
    K. Cameron, J. Dutton & R. Quinn (Eds.) Positive organizational
    scholarship. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Marais, K. & Leveson, N. G. (2003). Archetypes for Organizational
    Safety, Workshop on the Investigation and Reporting of Accidents, Sept.
Mattila, M., Hyttinen, M. & Ratanen, E. (1994). Effective supervisory
    behaviour and safety at the building site. International Journal of
    Industrial Ergonomics, 13, 85-93.
McCurdy, H. (1993). Inside NASA: High technology and organizational change
    in the U.S. space program, Johns Hopkins University Press.
McDonald, H. (2000). Shuttle independent assessment team (SIAT) report,
    NASA, February.
Bibliography                                                                  381

McDonald, N. (Ed.) (1999). Human-centred management for aircraft
    maintenance. Deliverable report to the European Commission no.
    ADAMS-WP4A-D2 ADAMS Project N° BE95-1732. Trinity
    College Dublin: Department of Psychology.
McDonald, N., Corrigan, S. & Ward, M. (2002). Well-intentioned people in
    dysfunctional systems. Keynote paper presented at the 5th Workshop
    on Human error, safety and systems development, Newcastle,
    Australia.
McDonald, N., Ward, M., Corrigan, S., Mesland, M. & Bos, T. (2001).
    AMPOS evaluation – Pilot implementation. Deliverable to the
    European Commission no. 7.2. AMPOS Project N° 29053 (Esprit).
    Trinity College Dublin: Department of Psychology.
McLennan, J., Holgate, A. M., Omodei, M. M. & Wearing, A. J. (2005).
    Decision making effectiveness in wildfire incident management teams.
    Proceedings of 7th International Conference on Naturalistic
    Decision Making, 15-17 June 2005, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Mearns, K., Flin, R.., Fleming, M. & Gordon, R. (1997). Human and
    organisational factors in offshore safety. (HSE Research Report OTH
    543). London: HSE Books.
Mearns, K., Flin, R., Gordon, R. & Fleming, M. (1998). Measuring
    safety climate in the offshore oil industry. Work & Stress, 12, 238-
    254.
Mearns, K., Whitaker, S. & Flin, R. (2003). Safety climate, safety
    management practice and safety performance in offshore
    environments. Safety Science, 41, 641-680.
Merton, R. K. (1936). The unanticipated consequences of social action.
    American Sociological Review, 1, 894-904.
Mitroff, I. (1974). On systemic problem solving and the error of the
    third kind. Behavioral Science, 19(6), 383-393.
Morgan, G. (1986). Images of organization. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Morowitz, H. J. (2002). The emergence of everything; Oxford University
    Press, Oxford.
NASA/ESA Investigation Board (1998). SOHO Mission interruption,
    NASA, 31 August.
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks. (2004). 9/11 Report.
    Scranton, PA: W. W. Norton.
Nemeth, C. (2003). The master schedule: How cognitive artifacts affect distributed
    cognition in acute care. Dissertation Abstracts International 64/08,
    3990. (UMI No. AAT 3101124).
382                                                         Resilience Engineering

Nemeth, C., Cook, R. I. & Woods, D. D. (2004). Messy details: Insights
    from the study of technical work in healthcare. IEEE SMC Part A,
    34(6), 689-692.
Nichols, T. (1997). The sociology of industrial injury. London: Mansell.
Nonaka, I. (2002). A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge
    creation. In C. Choo & N. Bontis (Eds.), The strategic management of
    intellectual capital and organizational knowledge. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press (pp. 437-462).
Norman, D. A. (1990). The ‘problem’ with automation: Inappropriate
    feedback and interaction, not ‘over-automation’. Philosophical
    Transactions of the Royal Society of London, B 327, 585-593.
NRC. (2000). Technical basis and implementation guidelines for a technique for
    human event analysis (ATHEANA) (NUREG-1624, Rev. 1).
    Rockville, MD: U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
NTSB. (1983). Accident investigation symposium (Report RP-84/01).
    Springfield, Virginia April 26-28, 1983.
NTSB.         (2002).     http://www.ntsb.gov/Pressrel/2002/table01.pdf
    website accessed on 01-04-05.
Ohrelius, B. (1962). Vasa, The King’s ship. (Transl. Maurice Michael).
    London: Cassell.
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for
    collective action. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom, E. (1999). Coping with tragedies of the commons. Annual
    Review of Political Science, 2, 493-535.
Ostrom, E. (2003). Toward a behavioral theory linking trust,
    reciprocity, and reputation. In E. Ostrom & J. Walker (Eds.), Trust
    and reciprocity: Interdisciplinary lessons from experimental research. New
    York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Pate-Cornell, E. (1990). Organizational aspects of engineering system
    safety: The case of offshore platforms. Science, 250, 1210-1217.
Patterson, E. S. & Woods, D. D. (2001). Shift changes, updates, and the
    on-call model in space shuttle mission control. Computer
    supported cooperative work. The Journal of Collaborative Computing,
    10(3-4), 317-346.
Patterson, E. S., Cook, R. I., Woods, D. D. & Render, M. L. (2004a).
    Examining the complexity behind a medication error: Generic
    patterns in communication. IEEE SMC Part A, 34(6), 749-756.
Patterson, E. S., Roth, E. M., Woods, D. D., Chow, R. & Gomes, J. O.
    (2004b). Handoff strategies in settings with high consequences for
Bibliography                                                              383

     failure: Lessons for health care operations. International Journal for
     Quality in Health Care, 16(2), 125-132.
Pérezgonzález, J. D. (2004). Construction safety: A systems approach.
     Doctoral dissertation. University of La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain.
Pérezgonzález, J. D., Ward, M., Baranzini, D., Liston, P. & McDonald,
     N. (2004). Organisational and operational performance assessment.
     Deliverable to the European Commission no. 3.2.1, ADAMS-2
     project no. GRD1-2000-25751. Trinity College Dublin:
     Department of Psychology.
Perrow, C. (1984). Normal accidents: Living with high risk technologies. New
     York: Basic Books, Inc.
Pettigrew, A. & Whipp, R. (1991). Managing change for competitive success.
     Cambridge (Mass). Blackwell.
Pilon, N., Kirwan, B., Hale, A. R. & Pariés, J. (2001). EEC safety research
     & development strategy: Output of the “Comite des Sages” (Committee of
     wise men). Bretigny s/Orge: Eurocontrol.
Pliske, R., Crandall, B. & Klein, G. (2004). Competence in weather
     forecasting. In K. Smith, J. Shanteau & P. Johnson (Eds.),
     Psychological investigations of competence in decision making (pp. 7-39).
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Polet, P., Vanderhaegen, F. & Amalberti, R. (2003). Modelling the
     border-line tolerated conditions of use. Safety Science, 41(1), 111-136.
Porter, M. E. (1998). Clusters and the new economics of competition.
     Harvard Business Review, reprint 98609.
Prorail (2003). Prorail aan het werk in 2003: Jaarbericht 2003 (Prorail at
     work in 2003: Annual report 2003). Utrecht Prorail –
     www.prorail.nl.
Quinn, R. (1988). Beyond Rational Management: Mastering the Paradoxes and
     Competing Demands of High Performance. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Raad voor de Transportveiligheid (Dutch Transport Safety Board)
     (2003). Botsing in the lucht tussen de vliegtuigen PH-BWC en PH-BWD
     van de KLM Luchtvaartschool, beiden van het type Beech Bonanza A36,
     nabij Smilde op 8 Juni 2000 (Mid-air collision between aircraft PH-BWC
     and PH-BWD of the KLM Flight Academy, both Beech Bonanza A36’s,
     near Smilde (Netherlands), 8 June 2000. The Hague, NL: Author.
Rasmussen J. (1983). Position paper for NATO Conference on Human Error.
     August 1983, Bellagio, Italy.
384                                                            Resilience Engineering

Rasmussen, J. (1986). Information processing and human-machine interaction:
     An approach to cognitive engineering. New York: Elsevier Science
     Publishing.
Rasmussen J. (1990). The role of error in organizing behavior.
     Ergonomics, 33, 1185-1199.
Rasmussen, J. (1997). Risk Management in a Dynamic Society, Safety
     Science, 27(2), 183-213.
Rasmussen, J., Pejtersen, A. M. & Goodstein, L. P. (1994). Cognitive
     systems engineering. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Rasmussen, J. & Svedung, I. (2000). Proactive risk management in a dynamic
     society. Karlstad, Sweden: Swedish Rescue Services Agency.
Reason, J. T. (1990). Human error. Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press.
Reason, J. T. (1997). Managing the risks of organizational accidents.
     Aldershot, UK: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Reason, J. T., Parker, D. & Lawton, R. (1998). Organisational controls
     and safety: The varieties of rule-related behaviour. J. Occupational &
     Organisational Psychology, 71, 289-304.
Reivich, K. & Shatte, A. (2002). The resilience factor. Seven essential skills for
     overcoming life’s inevitable obstacles. New York: Bantam Books.
Ringstad, A. J. & Szameitat, S. A. (2000). Comparative Study of
     Accident and Near Miss Reporting Systems in the German Nuclear
     Industry and the Norwegian Offshore Industry. Proceedings of the
     Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 44th annual meeting, 380-384.
Rochlin, G. I. (1999). Safe operation as a social construct. Ergonomics,
     42(11), 1549-1560.
Rogers, W. R. (1987). The Rogers’ Commission Report on the Space Shuttle
     Challenger Accident, U.S. Government Accounting Office.
Sarter, N. B., Woods, D. D. & Billings, C. (1997). Automation
     Surprises. In G. Salvendy (Ed.), Handbook of human factors/ergonomics
     (Second Ed). New York: Wiley, pp. 1926-1943.
Schupp, B., Hale, A. R., Pasman, H. J., Lemkovitz, S. M. & Goossens,
     L. H. J. (2005). Design for safety: Systematic support for the
     integration of risk reduction into chemical process design. Safety
     Science – in press.
Seligman, M. (2003). Authentic happiness: Using the new positive psychology to
     realise your potential for lasting fulfilment. New York: Nicholas Brearley.
Senge, P. M. (1990). The fifth discipline: The art and practice of the learning
     organization. New York: Doubleday Currency.
Bibliography                                                               385

Sheridan, T. B. (1992). Telerobotics, automation and human supervisory control.
    MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Shrivastava, P. (1987). Bhopal: Anatomy of a crisis. Cambridge: Ballinger.
Smith, P. J., McCoy, E. & Orasanu, J. (2004). Distributed cooperative
    problem-solving in the air traffic management system. In Klein, G.
    & Salas, E. (Eds.), Naturalistic decision making. Mahwah, NJ:
    Erlbaum, 369-384.
Spear, A. (2000). NASA FBC Task Final Report, NASA, March, 2000.
    url: http://appl.nasa.gov/pdf/47305main_FBCspear.pdf accessed
    4-27-05.
Stephenson, A. G. (1999). Mars Climate Orbiter: Mishap investigation board
    report, NASA, November 10.
Stephenson, A. G., Lapiana, L., Mulville, D., Rutledge, P., Bauer, F.,
    Folta, D., Dukeman, G., Sackheim, R. and Norvig, P. (2000). Report
    on Project Management in NASA by the Mars Climate Orbiter Mishap
    Investigation Board. NASA, March 13.
Sterman, J. D. (2000). Business dynamics. Systems thinking and modeling for a
    complex world. McGraw Hill: New York.
Sundström, G. A. & Deacon, C. C. (2002). The evolution of possibility:
    From organizational silos to global knowledge networks. Proceedings
    of the 11th European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics, Catania, Italy,
    September 8-11, 129-135.
Sundström, G. A. & Hollnagel, E. (2004). Operational risk Management
    in financial services: A complex systems perspective. Proceedings
    of 9th IFAC/IFORS/IEA Symposium Analysis, Design, and
    Evaluation of Human-Machine Systems. Atlanta, GA, USA, September
    7-9.
Suparamaniam, N. & Dekker, S. W. A. (2003). Paradoxes of power: The
    separation of knowledge and authority in international disaster
    relief work. Disaster Prevention and Management, 12(4), 312-318.
Sutcliffe, K. M. & Vogus T. J. (2003). Organizing for resilience. In K. S.
    Cameron, I. E. Dutton & R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational
    scholarship. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, pp. 94-110.
Thompson, P. & McHugh, D. (1995). Work organisations. Basingstoke:
    Macmillan.
Tissington, P. & Flin, R. (in press). Dynamic decision making on the
    fireground. Risk Management.
386                                                             Resilience Engineering

VACS. (2003). Causale modelering en groepsrisico (Causal modelling and
    group risk) Advice to the Minister. Veiligheids Advies Commissie
    Schiphol. Hoofddorp. www.vacs.nl.
Vaughan, D. (1996). The Challenger launch decision: Risky technology, culture,
    and deviance at NASA. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vernez, D., Heijer, T. H., Wiersma, J. W. F., Rosmuller, N. & Hale, A.
    R. (1999). Generic safety balance of the tunnel in the Betuweroute freightline.
    Report to Managementgroep Betuwelijn. Delft University of
    Technology: Safety Science Group.
Visser, J. P. (1998). Developments in HSE management in oil and gas
    exploration and production. In A. R. Hale & M. Baram (Eds.) Safety
    management: The challenge of organisational change. Oxford, UK:
    Pergamon.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1952). Problems of life. An evaluation of modern biological
    and scientific thought. Harper & Brothers: New York.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1975). Perspectives on general system theory. George
    Braziller: New York.
Ward, M., Baranzini, D., Liston, P. & McDonald, N. (2004). Case studies
    on the implementation of the tools. Deliverable to the European
    Commission no. 3.2.2, ADAMS-2 project no. GRD1-2000-25751.
    Trinity College Dublin: Department of Psychology.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Weick, K. E. (2001). Making sense of the organization. Oxford: Blackwell
    Business.
Weick, K. E. & Roberts, K. H. (1993). Collective mind in organizations:
    Heedful interrelating on flight decks. Administrative Science Quarterly
    38, 357-381.
Weick, K. E. & Sutcliffe, K. M. (2001). Managing the Unexpected. San
    Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Weick, K. E., Sutcliffe, K. M. & Obstfeld, D. (1999). Organizing for
    high reliability: Processes of collective mindfulness. Research in
    Organizational Behavior, 21, 13-81.
Welchman, G. (1982). The hut six story: Breaking the Enigma codes.
    Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Westrum, R. (1991). Cultures with requisite imagination. In: Wise, J.,
    Stager, P. & Hopkin, J. (Eds.) Verification and validation in complex
    man-machine systems. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Westrum, R. (2003). Removing Latent Pathogens, 6th Australian Aviation
    Psychologists’ Conference, Sydney.
Bibliography                                                            387

Westrum, R. & Adamski, A. (1999) Organizational factors associated
    with safety and mission success in aviation environments. In
    Garland, J., Wise J. A. and Hopkin, V. D. (Eds.), Handbook of
    aviation human factors. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wiener, E., Kanki, B. & Helmreich, R L. (1993). (Eds.) Cockpit resource
    management. San Diego: Academic Press.
Williams, J. C. (2000). New frontiers for regulatory interaction within
    the UK nuclear industry. Paper to the 19th NeTWork Workshop
    Safety regulation: The challenge of new technology & new frontiers. Bad
    Homburg.
Woods, D. D. (2000). Designing for resilience in the face of change and
    surprise: Creating safety under pressure. Plenary Talk, Design for
    Safety Workshop, NASA Ames Research Center, October 10, 2000.
Woods, D. D. (2003). Creating foresight: How resilience engineering can
    transform NASA’s approach to risky decision making. Testimony on The
    Future of NASA to Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and
    Transportation,         Washington         D.C.,      October        29,
    http://csel.eng.ohio-state.edu/woods/news/woods_testimony.pdf
Woods, D. D. (2005a). Creating foresight: Lessons for resilience from
    Columbia. In M. Farjoun and W. H. Starbuck (Eds.), Organization at
    the limit: NASA and the Columbia disaster. Blackwell.
Woods, D. D. (2005b). Conflicts between learning and accountability in
    patient safety. DePaul Law Review. 54(2), 485-502.
Woods, D. D. & Cook, R. I. (2002). Nine steps to move forward from
    error. Cognition, Technology & Work, 4(2), 137-144.
Woods, D. D., Johannesen, L. J., Cook, R. I. & Sarter, N. B. (1994).
    Behind human error: Cognitive systems, computers, and hindsight. Wright-
    Patterson Air Force Base, OH: Crew System Ergonomics
    Information Analysis Center.
Woods, D. D., Roth, E. M. & Bennett, K. B. (1990). Explorations in
    joint human-machine cognitive systems. In S. Robertson, W.
    Zachary & J. Black (Eds.), Cognition, computing and cooperation.
    Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Woods, D. D. & Shattuck, L. G. (2000). Distant supervision-local
    action given the potential for surprise. Cognition, Technology & Work,
    2, 86-96.
Wreathall, J. (1998). Development of leading indicators of human
    performance. Paper presented at the Human Performance/Root
    Cause/Trending (HPRCT) Workshop, San Antonio, TX.
388                                                          Resilience Engineering

Wreathall, J. (2001). Systemic safety assessment of production
    installations. Paper presented at the World Congress: Safety of Modern
    Technical Systems, Saarbrucken, Germany.
Wreathall, J. & Merritt, A. C. (2003). Managing human performance in
    the modern world: Developments in the US nuclear industry. In G.
    Edkins & P. Pfister (Eds.), Innovation and consolidation in aviation.
    Aldershot (UK) and Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Wright, C. (1986). Routine deaths. Fatal accidents in the offshore oil
    industry. Sociological Review, 34, 265-289.
Yamamori, H. & Mito, T. (1993). Keeping CRM is keeping the flight
    safe. In: E. L. Wiener, B. G. Kanki & R. L. Helmreich (Eds.),
    Cockpit resource management (p. 400). San Diego, CA: Academic Press,
    Inc.
Yonay, E. (1993). No margin for error, The making of the Israeli air force. New
    York: Pantheon, p. 345.
Young, K. (1966). Churchill and Beaverbrook. New York: Heineman.
Young, T. (2000). Mars Program Independent Assessment Team Report,
    NASA, March 14.
Yukl, G. & Falbe, C. (1992). Influence tactics and objectives in upward,
    downward, and lateral influence attempts. Journal of Applied
    Psychology, 75, 132-140.
Yule, S., Flin, R. & Bryden, R. (under review). Senior managers and safety
    leadership.
Zohar, D. & Luria, G. (2004). Climate as a social-cognitive construction
    of supervisory safety practices: Scripts as proxy of behavior
    patterns. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 322-333.
Zohar, D. (2003). The influence of leadership and climate on
    occupational health and safety. In D. Hofmann & L. Tetrick (Eds.)
    Health and safety in organizations. A multilevel perspective. San Francisco:
    Jossey Bass.
Author Index
Adamski, A., 2, 17, 59, 60, 89,     Csete, M. E., 21
  349                               Cullen, D., 226, 229
Ale, B. J. M., 130                  Cutler, T., 226
Amalberti, R., 126, 158, 256,
  266, 270                          Davies, P. C. W., 47, 52
Ashby, W. R., 339                   Deacon, C. C., 238
Auroy, Y., 270                      Deighton, L., 60
Avolio, B., 227                     Dekker, S. W. A., 87, 162, 197,
                                      277, 330
Baker, A., 63                       Diamond, J., 350
Banbury, S., 228                    Dijkstra, G., 139, 142
Barabási, A.-L., 51                 Dominguez, C. O., 32, 228
Bedau, M. A., 46                    Doyle, J. C., 21, 51, 75
Bellamy, L. J., 289, 290, 310       Drogoul, F., 130
Benner, L. J., 9                    Duijm, N.-J., 289, 291, 296
Best, M. H., 178                    Dulac, N., 95
Biever, C., 351                     Dupuy, J. P., 52, 53
Bigley, K., 232                     Dwyer, J., 58
Borgenstam, C., 224                 Dyer, D., 237
Bourrier, M., 132, 168, 309
Branscome, D. R., 107               Elling, M. G. M., 132
Brinded, M., 227                    Endsley, M., 228
Bryden, R., 231
                                    Falbe, C., 233
Cabbage, M., 61                     Fields, C., 58
Carlson, J. M., 21, 51, 75          Fischhoff, B., 2
Carson, W., 226                     Fiterman, C., 261
Checkland, P., 282                  Flin, R., 228, 229, 230, 231, 232,
Cook, R. I., 2, 3, 5, 23, 32, 70,      233, 280
  72, 73, 75, 205, 317, 321,        Free, R., 132
  330, 338, 354                     Furuta, K., 289
Corrigan, S., 163, 165
Coutu, D., 227                      Galea, E. R., 50
Cox, S., 230                        Garland, D., 228
Crichton, M., 233
390                                               Resilience Engineering

Gehman, H., 28, 107, 142, 226,     Jackson, R., 227
  308                              James, P., 63, 226
Girard, R., 50                     Janis, I., 59, 60
Goodstein, L P, 205                Johnson, P. E., 316
Gordon, R., 62                     Johnson, W. G., 316
Gould, S. J., 347
Greenwood, M., 10                  Kennedy, I., 230
Griffiths, P., 173                 Kennis, P., 58
Guldenmund, F. W., 289, 295        Kessler, E., 225
                                   Klampfer, B., 161
Haddon, Jr. W., 302                Klein, G., 24, 316
Hale, A R., 130, 131, 135, 136,    Klinect, J. R., 161
  140, 145, 168, 223, 292, 295,    Kohn, L., 28, 255
  298, 299, 302, 303               Kolata, G., 59
Hallahan, W. H., 62                Kranz, G., 57, 61
Hammond, P., 230                   Kube, C. R., 49
Harwood, W., 61                    Kuhn, T. S., 2
Hauser, C., 57                     Kurpianov, A., 245
Hecht, J., 351
Heijer, T. H., 136, 223            Lanir, Z., 24
Heinrich, H. W., 10, 53            Laplace, P. S., 46
Helmreich, R. L., 161              Larsen, L., 125, 128, 140, 144
Hoekstra, J. M., 39, 134, 306      Lawrence, P. R., 237
Hofmann, D., 229                   LeMessurier, W., 60, 61
Holland, J. H., 44                 Leplat, J., 106
Hollnagel, E., 4, 9, 13, 15, 16,   Leveson, N. G., 49, 89, 95, 98,
  17, 28, 51, 190, 198, 241,         100, 101, 103, 111, 283, 301
  245, 248, 277, 281, 283, 303,    Link, D. C. R., 107
  348, 349, 352, 355               Luria, G., 232
Holt, L. T. C., 132, 145           Luthans, F., 227
Hopkins, A., 226, 228
Hourlier, S., 256                  Marais, K., 103
Houtenbos, M., 38, 40              Marin, B., 58
Hudson, P., 130                    Mattila, M., 227
Hughes, T., 267                    McCurdy, H., 107
Hutchins, E., 50                   McDonald, H., 107
Hutter, B., 175                    McDonald, N., 86, 87, 92, 155,
                                    161, 163, 171, 172
Itoh, K., 135                      McHugh, D., 160
Author Index                                                   391

McLennan, J., 3                     Reason, J. T., 11, 48, 63, 132,
Mearns, K., 231, 280                  138, 167, 188, 245, 278, 279,
Merritt, A. C., 278, 279              281
Merton, R. K., 352                  Reivich, K., 227
Mito, T., 151                       Ringstad, A. J., 329
Mitroff, I., 22                     Roberts, K. H., 132, 232
Morgan, G., 160, 237                Rochlin, G. I., 3, 24
Morgeson, F., 229                   Rogers, W. R., 106
Morowitz, H. J., 45
Mosley, M., 230                     Sandström, A., 224
                                    Sarter, N. B., 72
Nemeth, C., 69, 207, 321            Scholes, J., 282
Nichols, T., 226                    Schupp, B., 301
Nonaka, I., 178                     Seligman, M., 233
Norman, D. A., 73                   Senge, P. M., 107, 235, 242
                                    Sexton, J., 161
O’Connor, M., 70                    Shatte, A., 227
Ohrelius, B., 224, 226              Shattuck, L. G., 324
Ostrom, E., 322, 323                Sheridan, T. B., 238
                                    Shorrock, S., 48
Patterson, E. S., 56, 63, 70, 72,   Shrivastava, P., 58
   316, 325                         Slaven, G., 228
Pejtersen, A. M., 205               Smith, P. J., 323
Pérezgonzález, J. D., 173           Spear, A., 24, 27
Perrow, C., 12, 44, 354             Stephenson, A. G., 107, 315
Pettigrew, A., 176                  Sterman, J. D., 103, 108, 235,
Pilon, N., 130                         242
Pliske, R., 316                     Stewart, S., 173
Polet, P., 257                      Sundström, G. A., 238, 245
Porter, M. E., 178                  Suparamaniam, N., 87
Post, J., 199, 223                  Sutcliffe, K. M., 3, 227, 228
                                    Svedung, I., 36, 266, 301
Quinn, R., 233                      Szameitat, S. A., 329

Rasmussen, J., 3, 4, 22, 36, 95,    Teubner, G., 52
  167, 205, 206, 266, 301, 317,     Thompson, P., 160
  354                               Tissington, P., 232
                                    Tremblay, S., 228
392                                              Resilience Engineering

Vaughan, D., 142, 300, 308        Woods, D. D., 2, 6, 13, 16, 21,
Vernez, D., 140                    23, 24, 25, 27, 32, 72, 136,
Visser, J. P., 36                  223, 226, 228, 241, 248, 283,
Vogus, T. J., 3, 227               317, 321, 322, 324, 329, 348
von Bertalanffy, L., 235, 236,    Woods, H. M., 10
  237, 242                        Wreathall, J., 278, 279, 283
                                  Wright, C., 226
Ward, M., 164
Watkin, C., 227                   Yamamori, H., 151
Wearing, A. J., 305               Yonay, E., 64
Weick, K. E., 3, 5, 132, 146,     Young, K., 62
 164, 167, 228, 284, 329          Young, T., 107
Welchman, G., 62                  Yukl, G., 233
Westrum, R., 2, 17, 56, 59, 60,   Yule, S., 231
 63, 89, 130, 349
Whipp, R., 176                    Zipkin, D., 95
Wiener, E., 233                   Zohar, D., 229, 232
Williams, J. C., 309
Subject Index

Accident investigation, 81, 96,       Challenger, 97, 106, 107, 142,
  192, 226, 317, 330                    226, 227, 277, 300, 308, 310,
Adaptability, 13, 21, 123               318
Adaptive capacity, 21-23, 69,         Chemical industry, 145, 258,
  72-75                                 261, 304
Adjustment, 13, 16, 88, 156,          Cognition
  158, 163, 294, 297, 305               distributed, 50, 220
Agent, 48, 49, 51, 52, 241            Columbia accident, 27, 28, 60,
Aircraft maintenance, 87, 88,           61, 97, 103, 104, 106, 107,
  160-164, 167-169, 173, 175,           123, 142, 174, 224, 226, 300,
  177, 186, 192                         308, 310, 315-318, 322, 324
Assertiveness, 228-230, 232,          Common pool resources, 322,
  233                                   323, 324
Auditing, 90, 158, 169, 170,          Competence envelope, 22, 24,
  289, 290, 293, 295, 301, 304,         75
  306, 312, 313                       Complexity, 3, 5, 6, 13, 30, 43,
Automation, 4, 23, 159, 262             44, 47, 49, 52, 53, 84, 96,
                                        103, 108, 110, 116, 174, 201,
Barings plc, 235, 243, 245-250,         277, 299, 330, 348
  252, 342                            Compliance, 23, 160, 161, 175,
Barriers, 3, 11, 14, 81, 130, 135,      177, 190, 192, 200, 257, 258,
  139, 180, 192, 248, 280, 281,         259
  291-296, 299-304, 312, 329,         Concurrence, 12, 15, 17
  330, 331, 348                       Conflict resolution, 297, 298,
Boundary conditions, 22, 24,            310, 312
  46, 69, 71, 72, 75, 315             Control
Brittleness, 6, 23, 69, 71, 75, 79,     business system, 243, 244,
  87, 90, 92, 317, 321, 329                245, 248, 252
Broadening check, 24, 90                centralised or distributed,
Buffer, 24, 33, 71, 73                     134
  capacity, 23, 315                     loop, 74, 89, 102, 103, 246,
Business system, 235-244, 247,             301, 302
  249, 251, 339                         loss of, 36, 130, 292, 300,
                                           341, 342, 348
394                                                  Resilience Engineering

  supervisory, 72, 73, 74           Faster, better, cheaper, 24, 25,
Crew Resource Management              26, 27, 28, 30, 228, 315, 317
  (CRM), 233, 261                   Fault tree, 14, 15
Cycles of stability, 51, 87, 172,   Flexibility, 13, 23, 24, 35, 61,
  174                                 133, 134, 144, 159, 160, 163,
                                      164, 167, 179, 279, 280, 284,
Decision making, 228                  299, 302
Decompensation, 72, 73, 75          Foresight, 6, 59, 65, 324, 349
Diagnosis, 25, 30, 164, 227,        Fragmentation, 29, 30, 141, 144
  229, 303, 305
Disruptions, 3, 21, 23, 69, 71,     GAIN, 193, 194, 197
  73, 74, 226, 329, 347             Goal
Distancing through                   acute, 27-30, 32, 33, 318
  differencing, 331, 336, 338        business, 230, 238, 240
Disturbances, 3, 16, 23, 72-75,      chronic, 26-29, 33, 34, 315
  97, 156, 179, 236, 249, 342,       conflict, 23, 24, 29, 228, 324
  356
Drift, 36, 41, 77, 78, 82-85, 89,   Healthcare, 26, 206
  95, 96, 122, 228, 316, 318,       Heuristics, 13, 53
  354, 355                          Hindsight, 1, 2, 28, 32, 83, 89,
  into failure, 77, 82-84, 89         188, 192, 316, 331, 344
  to danger, 36, 354
Dynamic instability, 15             ICAO, 185, 186, 190, 191, 194
Dynamic stability, 15, 16, 17       Independence, 121, 180, 278,
                                      287, 319, 320, 321
Emergence, 7, 43, 44, 46, 47,       Institute of Medicine, 26, 58
  50, 53, 77, 252, 256, 263
  emergent phenomenon, 13,          Leadership, 48, 61, 86, 88-90,
     84, 85                           176, 227, 231-233, 319, 320
Emergency, 57, 139, 140, 206,       Learning, 24, 59, 61, 89, 111,
  207, 209, 211-216, 220, 232,        116, 118, 145, 159, 190, 193,
  281, 291, 296, 297, 305, 306,       199, 200, 225, 235, 242, 247,
  343, 344                            279, 280, 297, 298, 300-302,
Equilibrium, 13, 96                   306-308, 312, 329-331, 333,
Erosion of safety margins, 16,        338, 350, 357
  138                                 organisational, 242, 331
European Transport Safety           Line Operations Safety Audit
  Council, 127                        (LOSA), 161, 178
Event tree, 14, 15, 302
Subject Index                                                    395

Macroscopic behaviour, 47, 49       Planning, 160, 162, 241
Management                          Proactive impact analysis, 246,
  control, 239, 246                    249
  information, 196, 277, 278        Probabilistic safety assessment
  quality, 80, 193, 200                (PSA), 275, 277, 278, 281,
Model                                  282, 356
  accident, 9-12, 14, 77, 80, 81,   Professionalism, 155, 162, 164-
     84, 96, 301                       166, 227
  complex linear, 11, 12, 14        Prorail, 139, 140
  Domino, 10, 11, 353
  epidemiological, 14               Railways, 38, 125, 126, 129,
  functional resonance                130, 132, 134, 136, 137, 139-
     accident model, 15, 17           141, 143-147, 175, 310
  simple linear, 10, 14             Reframing, 5, 24, 316, 318, 324
  Swiss cheese, 11, 12, 353,        Requisite imagination, 2, 59, 89,
     354                              90, 349
  system dynamics, 103, 106,        Resilience
     108, 120, 122                    definitions, 6, 14, 16, 36, 95,
  systemic accident, 12, 17               281
NASA, 24-27, 33, 57, 61, 76,          nominally emergent (NER),
  96, 106, 107, 112, 113, 116-            48
  118, 123, 223, 226, 285, 315,       organisational, 43, 48, 53, 88,
  318, 324                                92, 126, 180, 223, 225,
NASA/ESA Investigation                    233, 235, 357
  Board, 107                          strongly emergent (SER), 52
National Commission on                weakly emergent (WER), 49
  Terrorist Attacks, 63             Risk
NRC, 278                              assessment, 9, 14, 15, 39, 96,
NTSB, 190, 330                            99, 100, 118, 127, 137,
                                          140, 142, 146, 189, 202,
Organisational change, 121,               232, 289-291, 298, 300,
  159, 174, 176, 177, 297, 308-           308
  310, 314                            exposure to, 39, 147
                                      management, 53, 95, 96, 98,
Performance indicators, 126,              106, 122, 175, 176, 249,
  283, 307, 314                           250, 261, 263
Perturbations, 9, 21, 22, 24, 33,     model recalibration, 79, 92
  51, 74, 75, 265                     proactive management, 173,
Piper Alpha, 226, 229, 300                251, 279
396                                                  Resilience Engineering

Sacrifice, 3, 32, 33, 84                variable, 103, 238, 239, 250,
   decisions, 1, 78, 83, 355               252
Safety                               Stiffness, 23, 284
   boundaries, 22, 32, 78, 85,       Strategy
      316, 317                          feedforward, 246, 250
   climate, 230, 231, 311            System
   culture, 2, 30, 40, 53, 81, 96,      as-designed, 89
      98, 106, 107, 113, 118,           as-imagined, 89, 90
      141, 144, 188, 229, 230,          open, 157, 237, 242, 248, 252
      233, 254, 261, 280, 283,          safety, 9, 10, 14-16, 81, 98,
      297, 311, 313                        104, 112-117
   management, 3, 6, 53, 75,            socio-technical, 13, 82, 96,
      125, 128-130, 137, 142,              97, 99, 100, 110, 156, 170,
      145, 155, 159, 169, 184-             178, 180, 206, 265, 352
      186, 193, 197, 200, 231,          theory, 53, 96, 98, 236, 238
      275, 276, 290, 296, 299,       Systemic view, 13, 15
      313, 316-319, 321, 322,
      357                            Taxonomy, 4, 48, 53, 347
   margins, 77, 84, 85, 157, 181,    Tolerance, 23, 24, 228, 270
      315, 317, 322                  Trade-off, 3, 5, 13, 25, 27-30,
   organisation, 78, 91, 112,          32-34, 51, 78, 84, 88, 134,
      123, 317, 318, 319, 320,         137, 140, 147, 199, 201, 218,
      321, 323, 324                    219, 226-228, 232, 318, 319,
   rules, 125, 127, 129, 130, 143,     322, 355
      144                              efficiency-thoroughness, 355
Scripts, 230, 232                    Tragedy of the commons, 322
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 53         Triggering condition, 345
Senior managers, 144, 226, 227,
   231                               Upward appraisal, 230, 231
STAMP, 96-98, 101, 103, 105,
   106, 122, 123                     VACS, 130
Standardisation, 80, 158, 159,       Variability
   167, 260, 261, 262, 271             endogenous, 12
State                                  exogenous, 12, 248
   catastrophic, 240, 248, 252,      Variety, 49, 56, 65, 161, 168,
      339, 341                         175, 176, 178, 181, 210, 253,
   space, 339, 342                     265, 323
   transition, 247, 342, 343, 344    Vasa, 223, 224, 225, 227
   transition rules, 343             Vectors of change, 26, 72, 320
Subject Index                                  397

Work                as imagined, 79, 92, 320, 321,
 as done, 79, 92       357
                   Workarounds, 23, 71, 357
