ESSENTIALS OF
PROJECT AND SYSTEMS
ENGINEERING
MANAGEMENT
Second Edition


HOWARD EISNER
Distinguished Research Professor and Professor, Engineering Management
and Systems Engineering
The George Washington University
Washington, DC




A WILEY-INTERSCIENCE PUBLICATION
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
ESSENTIALS OF PROJECT AND SYSTEMS
ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
ESSENTIALS OF
PROJECT AND SYSTEMS
ENGINEERING
MANAGEMENT
Second Edition


HOWARD EISNER
Distinguished Research Professor and Professor, Engineering Management
and Systems Engineering
The George Washington University
Washington, DC




A WILEY-INTERSCIENCE PUBLICATION
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                         ⬁
This text is printed on acid-free paper. 

Copyright  2002 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York. All rights reserved.

Published simultaneously in Canada.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise,
except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4744. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York,
NY 10158-0012, (212) 850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WILEY.COM.

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data:
Eisner, Howard, 1935–
     Essentials of project and systems engineering management / Howard Eisner.—2nd ed.
        p. cm.
     Includes index.
     ISBN 0-471-03195-X (alk. paper)
     1. Systems engineering—Management. 2. Project management. I. Title.

  TA168.E38 2001
  658.4⬘06—dc21
                                                                                     2001046616

Printed in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ABOUT THE AUTHOR




Since 1989, Howard Eisner has served as Distinguished Research Professor
and Professor of Engineering Management and Systems Engineering at The
George Washington University, Washington, DC. For the prior thirty years,
he held various positions in industry, including president of two systems and
software engineering companies (Intercon Systems Corporation and the At-
lantic Research Services Corporation) and as a member of the board of three
companies. He is a Life Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) and a member of several engineering honor societies. Dr.
Eisner has written two books on systems engineering and related topics and
a book on personal and corporate reengineering. He holds a B.E.E. from the
City College of New York, an M.S. from Columbia University, and a Doctor
of Science from The George Washington University.
CONTENTS




Preface                                                        xiii


PART 1    OVERVIEW                                               1

 1. Systems, Projects, and Management                            3
      1.1 Introduction, 3
      1.2 Systems and Projects, 3
      1.3 Problems in Managing Engineering Projects, 8
      1.4 The Systems Approach, 13
      1.5 The Project Organization, 17
      1.6 Organizational Environments and Factors, 22
      1.7 Large-Scale Organization and Management Issues, 30
      Questions/Exercises, 34
      References, 34

 2. Overview of Essentials                                     37
      2.1   Introduction, 37
      2.2   Project Management Essentials, 37
      2.3   Systems Engineering Process and
            Management Essentials, 41


                                                                vii
viii   CONTENTS


       2.4 System Acquisition Essentials, 45
       2.5 Selected Standards, 49
       Questions/Exercises, 62
       References, 63


PART II   PROJECT MANAGEMENT                                        65

  3. The Project Plan                                               67
       3.1  Introduction, 67
       3.2  Needs, Goals, Objectives, and Requirements, 68
       3.3  Task Statements, Statement of Work (SOW), and
            Work Breakdown Structure (WBS), 74
       3.4 Technical Approach, 76
       3.5 Schedule, 79
       3.6 Organization, Staffing, and Task Responsibility Matrix
            (TRM), 82
       3.7 Budget, 82
       3.8 Risk Analysis, 86
       3.9 The Proposal, 88
       Questions/Exercises, 88
       References, 89

  4. Schedule, Cost, and Situation Analysis                         91
       4.1 Introduction, 91
       4.2 Schedule Analysis and Monitoring, 92
       4.3 Cost Analysis and Monitoring, 96
       4.4 Situation Analysis, 115
       Questions/Exercises, 120
       References, 122

  5. The Project Manager and Leadership                             123
       5.1 Introduction, 123
       5.2 Project Manager Attributes, 124
       5.3 Self-Evaluation, 131
       5.4 Interactions with the Supervisor, 139
       5.5 Customer Interaction, 143
       5.6 Leadership, 144
       Questions/Exercises, 149
       References, 150
                                                        CONTENTS     ix

 6. Team Building and Team Interactions                             153
      6.1 Introduction, 153
      6.2 Communications, 154
      6.3 Building the Project Team, 156
      6.4 Team Busters, 160
      6.5 Conflict Management, 162
      6.6 Meetings, 165
      6.7 Presentations, 167
      6.8 Proposals, 170
      6.9 A Note on Motivation and Incentives, 176
      6.10 Another Team-Related Perspective, 178
      Questions/Exercises, 181
      References, 181



PART III    SYSTEMS ENGINEERING AND MANAGEMENT                      183

 7. The Thirty Elements of Systems Engineering                      185
      7.1  Overview of the Systems Approach and Engineering
           Process, 185
      7.2 Two Systems Engineering Perspectives, 186
      7.3 The Thirty Elements of Systems Engineering, 191
      7.4 The Importance of Domain Knowledge in Systems
           Engineering, 221
      Questions/Exercises, 222
      References, 223

 8. Requirements Analysis and Allocation                            225
      8.1  Introduction, 225
      8.2  Department of Defense (DoD) Perspectives, 226
      8.3  A National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
           Perspective, 228
      8.4 The Organization of Requirements Statements, 230
      8.5 Specific Requirements Statements, 234
      8.6 Essential Steps of Requirements Analysis, 236
      8.7 Derived and Allocated Requirements, 240
      8.8 Other Requirements Issues, 243
      Questions/Exercises, 244
      References, 245
x      CONTENTS


    9. System Architecting: Principles                                 247
         9.1  Introduction, 247
         9.2  A View of Systems Architecting, 248
         9.3  A National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
              Perspective, 249
         9.4 Architecture Descriptions, 251
         9.5 Essential Steps of System Architecting, 257
         9.6 The 95% Solution, 274
         9.7 Trade-Offs and Sensitivity Analyses, 275
         9.8 Modeling and Simulation, 278
         9.9 Summary, 282
         Questions/Exercises, 282
         References, 283

10. Software Engineering                                               285
        10.1 Introduction, 285
        10.2 Standards, 286
        10.3 Software Management Strategies, 293
        10.4 Capability Maturity, 296
        10.5 Metrics, 299
        10.6 Summary, 310
        Questions/Exercises, 311
        References, 312

11. Selected Quantitative Relationships                                315
        11.1 Introduction, 315
        11.2 Basic Probability Relationships, 316
        11.3 The Binomial Distribution, 323
        11.4 The Poisson Distribution, 324
        11.5 The Normal (Gaussian) Distribution, 325
        11.6 The Uniform Distribution, 327
        11.7 The Exponential Distribution, 328
        11.8 The Rayleigh Distribution, 329
        11.9 Error Analyses, 329
        11.10 Radar Signal Detection, 331
        11.11 System Reliability, 333
        11.12 Software Reliability, 335
        11.13 Availability, 335
        11.14 Summary, 336
                                                      CONTENTS    xi

     Questions/Exercises, 337
     References, 338


PART IV   TRENDS AND INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT                      339

12. Systems/Software Engineering and
     Project Management Trends                                   341
     12.1 Introduction, 341
     12.2 Systems Engineering Trends, 341
     12.3 Software Engineering Trends, 358
     12.4 Project Management Trends, 373
     Questions/Exercises, 376
     References, 377

13. Integrative Management                                       381
     13.1 Introduction, 381
     13.2 Managers as Integrators, 382
     13.3 Teams as Integrators, 383
     13.4 Plans as Integrators, 384
     13.5 The Systems Approach as Integrator, 387
     13.6 Methods and Standards as Integrators, 388
     13.7 Information Systems as Integrators, 388
     13.8 Enterprises as Integrators, 389
     13.9 Summary, 391
     Questions/Exercises, 393
     References, 394


     Appendix:   Systems Architecting—Cases                      395

     A.1 Introduction, 395
     A.2 A Logistics Support System (Case 1), 396
     A.3 A Software Defects Assessment System (Case 2), 401
     A.4 A Systems Engineering Environment (Case 3), 406
     A.5 An Anemometry System (Case 4), 415
     A.6 Summary, 418
     References, 423
     Index                                                       425
PREFACE




This book has two primary objectives: (1) to define and describe the essentials
of project and systems engineering management, and (2) to show the rela-
tionship and interconnection between project management and systems
engineering.
    The subject of project management is well-trodden territory and is explored
at considerable length in numerous books. Systems engineering, on the other
hand, is not as well known, as measured perhaps by the literature that de-
scribes and supports it. Like project management, it deals with a variety of
methods for designing and building a system that are independent of the
domain of the system itself. Slowly, but noticeably, systems engineering is
finding its way into a greater number of college curricula and taking its place
alongside the more traditional engineering disciplines such as electrical en-
gineering, mechanical engineering, and the like.
    More often than not, systems engineering is carried out in the real world
in the context of a project. A typical scenario is that a company might set up
a project whose basic purpose is to systems engineer some type of system.
Thus, there is almost always a strong connection between project management
and systems engineering, whether it is formally recognized or not. Many
students have asked about this often murky connection during my courses in
systems engineering. They want to know more about how systems engineering
‘‘fits into’’ the structure of a project and the various management-oriented
tasks and activities of a project. These questions, directly and indirectly, have
led to this book. Indeed, this may be the first book that attempts to bring
these two important subjects together. Special attention is paid to the inter-

                                                                              xiii
xiv      PREFACE


relationship between project management and systems engineering in the last
chapter, which deals with integrative management.
   This second edition provides new and expanded materials, including the
following subject areas:

      • Project manager attributes
      • Leadership
      • Fixed price contracting
      • Integrated product teams
      • The elements of systems engineering
      • Systems engineering management problems and issues
      • Systems integration
      • Software cost estimating
      • Life cycle cost relationships
      • Standards
      • Systems architecting
      • Errors in systems
      • Corporate interactions
      • Risk analysis
      • Verification and validation
      • System disposal
      • System acquisition
      • Capability maturity models

    The book is organized into thirteen chapters and an appendix. This makes
it suitable for a fifteen-week course in project and systems engineering man-
agement. At the same time, systems engineers and project managers in an
industrial environment will find the essentials of what they need to know
under one cover.
    I am pleased to dedicate this book at both a professional and a personal
level. With respect to the former, I dedicate it to my graduate students and
colleagues in the engineering management and systems engineering depart-
ment in the School of Engineering and Applied Science, The George Wash-
ington University. At a personal level, I dedicate the book to my wife, June
Linowitz, whose patience, support, and love helped make it possible.

                                                        HOWARD EISNER
                                                        Bethesda, Maryland
PART I
OVERVIEW
                1
SYSTEMS, PROJECTS,
AND MANAGEMENT




1.1   INTRODUCTION

This is a book about management, with emphasis on managing the design,
development, and engineering of systems. It addresses two primary questions:

  1. What does the Project Manager (PM) need to know?
  2. What does the Chief Systems Engineer (CSE) need to know?

The focus is therefore on the essentials of what the PM and CSE must master
in order to be successful in building various types of systems and managing
project teams.
   This chapter is largely introductory, dealing with the preliminary definitions
of systems and projects, problems encountered in building systems, the sys-
tems approach, key managerial responsibilities, and organizational matters
that significantly impact the way in which systems are planned, designed, and
constructed.


1.2   SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS

There are many definitions of systems, one of which is simply that ‘‘a system
is any process that converts inputs to outputs’’ [1.1]. We look here at systems
by example and, for that purpose, start by examining a radar system. This is
certainly a system, performing the functions of search and tracking of objects
in space, as in an air route or surveillance radar at or near an airport. A

                                                                               3
4       SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


system normally has functions that it carries out (such as search and tracking),
and it does so by means of its subsystems. At the same time, such airport
radar systems, together with other systems (such as communications and land-
ing systems), are part of a larger system known as an air traffic control (ATC)
system. Examined from the perspective of an air traffic control system, the
radar systems actually serve as subsystems of the larger system. In the same
vein, the air traffic control system may be regarded as a subsystem of a larger
national aviation system (NAS) that consists also of airports, air vehicles, and
other relatively large systems (e.g., access/egress) in their own right.
   Our view of systems, therefore, is rather broad. In the preceding context,
the radars, air traffic control, and national aviation system are all systems.
Such systems normally are composed of hardware, software, and human el-
ements, all of which must interoperate efficiently for the overall system to be
effective. We adopt this broad perspective in the definition of systems, draw-
ing on examples that affect our everyday life, such as automobile systems,
telephone systems, computer systems, heating and cooling systems, transit
systems, and information systems.
   Projects are formal enterprises that address the matter of designing and
developing the various systems just cited. A project is an assemblage of peo-
ple and equipment, and it is normally managed by a Project Manager (PM).
Project personnel work toward satisfying a set of goals, objectives, and re-
quirements, as set forth by a customer. Projects may also have a limited scope
of work, dealing only with, for example, the design phase of a system, rather
than its construction or entire life cycle. The success of a system is dependent
on the skills of the people on a project and how well they are able to work
together. Ultimately, the success, or lack of it, is attributed to the many skills
that the PM is able to bring to bear in what is often an extremely complex
situation and endeavor. The PM, in short, must not only have considerable
technical skills, but must also have a deep understanding of the fine art of
management.


1.2.1     Definitions of Systems Engineering
The Chief Systems Engineer (CSE) normally reports to the Project Manager
and focuses upon building the system in question. The overall process that
the CSE employs is known as Systems Engineering, a central theme in this
text. We will define Systems Engineering in terms of increasing complexity
and detail in various parts of this book, starting here with five relatively simple
expressions, namely:

    1. As developed by the International Council on Systems Engineering
       (INCOSE)
    2. As articluated by the Department of Defense (DoD)
    3. As represented in an earlier text by this author
                                                    1.2   SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS       5

  4. As summarized by the Defense Systems Management College (DSMC)
  5. As viewed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
     (NASA)

  The INCOSE definition is that Systems Engineering is [1.2]:

  An interdisciplinary approach and means to enable the realization of successful
  systems.

This definition is rather sparse and emphasizes three aspects: ‘‘interdiscipli-
nary,’’ ‘‘realization,’’ and ‘‘successful.’’ Especially for large-scale systems, it
is clearly necessary to employ several disciplines (e.g., human engineering,
physics, software engineering, and management). Realization simply confirms
the fact that systems engineering processes lead to the physical construction
of a real-life system (i.e., it goes beyond the formulation of an idea or con-
cept). Finally, our expectation is that by utilizing the various disciplines of
systems engineering, the outcome will be a successful system, although this
result is certainly not guaranteed.
   A definition provided by the Department of Defense (DoD), a strong sup-
porter as well as user of systems engineering as a critical discipline, is that
Systems Engineering [1.3]:

  Involves design and management of a total system which includes hardware and
  software, as well as other system life-cycle elements. The systems engineering
  process is a structured, disciplined, and documented technical effort through
  which systems products and processes are simultaneously defined, developed
  and integrated. Systems Engineering is most effectively implemented as part of
  an overall integrated product and process development effort using multidisipli-
  nary teamwork.

Key words from this definition include: ‘‘design and management,’’ ‘‘hard-
ware and software,’’ ‘‘structured, disciplined and documented,’’ and ‘‘overall
integrated’’ effort that involves ‘‘multidisciplinary teamwork.’’ These impor-
tant notions will be reiterated and expanded upon in later parts of this book.
   A third definition, formulated by this author, is that Systems Engineering
is an [1.4]:

  Iterative process of top-down synthesis, development, and operation of a real-
  world system that satisfies, in a near-optimal manner, the full range of
  requirements for the system.

Here, key ideas have to do with ‘‘iterative,’’ ‘‘synthesis,’’ ‘‘operation,’’ ‘‘near-
optimal,’’ and ‘‘satifies the system requirements.’’ Designing and building a
system usually involves several loops of iteration, for example, from synthesis
to analysis, from concept to development, and from architecting to detailed
6     SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


design. The notion of synthesis is emphasized, since the essence of systems
engineeering is viewed from the perspective of design rather than analysis.
Design precedes analysis; if there is no coherent design, there is nothing to
analyze. The term ‘‘near-optimal’’ suggests that large-scale systems engi-
neering does not lead to a provably optimal design, except under very special
circumstances. The normal cases all involve attempts to find an appropriate
balance between a variety of desirable features. Trade-off analyses are utilized
to move in the direction of a ‘‘best possible’’ design. Finally, in terms of the
basic definition, we find a need to satisfy the full range of requirements for
the system. The focus on constructing a system that is responsive to the needs
of the user-customer is central to what systems engineering is all about.
   The Defense Systems Management College text summarizes Systems En-
gineering as [1.5]:

    An interdisciplinary engineering management process to evolve and verify an
    integrated, life cycle balanced set of system solutions that satisfy customer needs.

Here, key words emphasize a ‘‘management process,’’ ‘‘verification,’’ a ‘‘bal-
anced set of solutions,’’ and ‘‘customer needs.’’ This definition, therefore,
tends to see systems engineering through a ‘‘management’’ prism, requires a
balanced set of solutions as well as verification of those solutions, and the
satisfaction of what the customer states as a set of needs.
   The last definition cited in this chapter is that represented by NASA,
namely, that Systems Engineering is [1.6]:

    A robust approach to the design, creation and operation of systems.

NASA expands this short explanation by emphasizing:

    1. Identification and quantification of goals
    2. Creation of alternative system design concepts
    3. Performance of design trades
    4. Selection and implementation of the best design
    5. Verification that the design is properly built and integrated
    6. Post-implementation assessment of how well the system meets the
       stated goals

   The above five definitions of systems engineering, in the aggregate, give
us a point of departure for our further exploration of systems engineering and
the management thereof. We will also see other representations that tend to
add further detail and structure to these short-form definitions. For example,
Chapter 2 cites several standards that relate to systems engineering. Further,
                                                 1.2   SYSTEMS AND PROJECTS   7

Chapter 7 defines the thirty elements that this author considers to be the
essence of large-scale systems engineering.

1.2.2   System Cost-Effectiveness
The project team, led by the PM and the CSE, are also in search of a cost-
effective solution for the customer. In order that this concept have real sub-
stance, we must be in a position to ultimately quantify both the system cost
as well as its effectiveness.
   System cost will be approached from a life-cycle perspective. This means
that a life-cycle cost model (LCCM) will eventually be constructed, with the
following three major categories of cost:

  1. Research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E)
  2. Acquisition or procurement, and
  3. Operations and maintenance (O&M)

The latter category, by our definition, will also include the cost of system
disposal when it is necessary to do so. System cost will also be viewed as an
independent variable, expressed as ‘‘cost as an independent variable’’ (CAIV).
The Department of Defense (DoD) sees CAIV as a ‘‘strategy that entails
setting aggressive yet realistic cost objectives when defining operational re-
quirements and acquiring defense systems and managing achievement of these
objectives’’ [1.3].
   System effectiveness will also need to be calculated. One perspective re-
garding system efectiveness is that it is a function of three factors [1.4]:

  1. Availability
  2. Dependability
  3. Capability

Availability is sometimes called the readiness reliability, whereas dependa-
bility is the more conventional reliability that degrades with time into the
system operation. Capability is also referred to as system performance. The
approach adopted here with respect to effectiveness is somewhat less restric-
tive, allowing the CSE’s team the flexibility to select those effectiveness mea-
sures that are fundamental to the system design as well as of special
importance to the customer and user.
   System cost-effectiveness considerations may thus be visualized as a graph
of effectiveness (ordinate) plotted against total life-cycle cost (abcissa). As
such, we see that this type of graph implies that several systems can be built,
each representing a ‘‘point’’ on such a plot. Our overall task as architects and
designers of systems is to find the point design that is to be recommended to
8       SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


the customer from among a host of possible solutions. This further implies
that the process will include the exploration of several alternatives until a
preferred alternative is selected.

1.2.3     System Errors
In broad terms, all systems are said to exhibit fundamental errors known as
Type I and Type II errors. These errors are related to the field of hypothesis
testing whereby errors are made by (a) rejecting a hypothesis that is true
(Type I error) or (b) accepting a false hypothesis (Type II error). From a
systems engineering perspective, a major task of the CSE’s team is to reduce
such errors so as to satisfy the system requirements. Three examples of these
errors are briefly discussed below.
   Many of us have car alarm systems that are intended to go off when an
intruder is trying to get into our car. There is an error if and when the alarm
does not go off when forced entry is being attempted (Type I). At the same
time, we do not wish to be awakened at 3 o’clock in the morning when the
alarm goes off from the car in front of our house, without any type of intrusion
(Type II error).
   On a somewhat larger scale, we have radar systems that are intended to
detect targets at specified ranges. When they fail to do so, an error (Type I)
has been committed. On the other hand, these systems also claim, from time
to time, that a target is present when no such target exists. This latter case (a
Type II error) is called a false alarm. These types of errors for a search radar
are explored in some detail in later chapters of this text. Specific detection
and false alarm probabilities are calculated, and the relationship between them
is examined.
   On an even larger scale, we have situations presented by our national air
transportation system. When the system fails to get you to your destination
at the expected time of arrival (ETA), an error has been committed that all
of us have experienced. And, if you’re trying to get to New York from Wash-
ington, and wind up in Philadelphia due to bad weather, the system is deliv-
ering an unintended result.
   Understanding when systems are likely to fail to do what they’re supposed
to do, and also do what they’re not supposed to do, is often a central theme
of the systems engineering activities. These, of course, can be expressed as
problems that need to be solved by the management and technical personnel
working on the system. At the same time, there are many problems that might
be considered chronic issues when managing an engineering project. A sam-
ple of such problems is presented and discussed in the next section.

1.3     PROBLEMS IN MANAGING ENGINEERING PROJECTS

An article in the Washington Post [1.7] described an industry contract with
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in the terms ‘‘out-of-control con-
                            1.3   PROBLEMS IN MANAGING ENGINEERING PROJECTS   9

tract’’ and ‘‘how a good contract goes sour.’’ It went on to describe how a
‘‘cure letter’’ was sent to the contractor saying that ‘‘delays in a $4 billion
contract to modernize the computers used in the nation’s air traffic control
system were unacceptable.’’ Although this admonition pointed to delays and
therefore could be connected to not getting the work done on time, it is likely
that time delays resulted from performance issues and were also related to
the cost of the program. In general terms, problems that surface on a typical
project usually show themselves ultimately in terms of three main features:

  1. Schedule (time)
  2. Cost (as compared with the original budget)
  3. Performance

These are the ‘‘big three’’ of project management and systems engineering
management. Projects are originally planned to meet the performance require-
ments within the prescribed time and budget constraints.
   Although there are numerous reasons why projects do not satisfy these
three key aspects of a system development [1.8, 1.9, 1.10], several of the most
common such reasons are:

  1. Inadequate articulation of requirements
  2. Poor planning
  3. Inadequate technical skills and continuity
  4. Lack of teamwork
  5. Poor communications and coordination
  6. Insufficient monitoring of progress
  7. Inferior corporate support

The following discussion expands on these reasons for problems and lack of
success.


1.3.1   Inadequate Articulation of Requirements
Requirements for a system are normally defined by the customer for the
system and are at times referred to as ‘‘user’’ requirements. Such systems can
be completely new or they can represent upgrades of current systems. Espe-
cially if they are new, the customer often has difficulty in expressing these
requirements in a complete and consistent fashion, and in terms that can be
utilized by a system developer. It is also the case that it may be simply too
early to understand all system requirements. Poor requirements invariably lead
to poor system design. This situation remains a problem if the requirements
cannot be negotiated and modified for various contractual reasons. Both users
and developers complain about requirements, but from their own perspectives.
10      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


They agree that something new has to be done regarding how requirements
are defined and satisfied and several proposals have been made (such as the
‘‘spiral model’’ for software development) to improve the situation. Flexibility
is called for in contractual situations that can be quite formal and unyielding.
Project Managers must keep this high on their list of potential problem areas.

1.3.2   Poor Planning
Projects normally follow a ‘‘project plan’’ written at the initiation of a project.
The ingredients of such a plan are described in detail in Chapter 3. Such plans
often are ‘‘locked in’’ as part of a proposal and cannot be easily modified
from the point of view of the customer. Because system developments are
rather dynamic, most project plans are obsolete 6 to 12 months after they
have been written. They therefore need to be continually updated to reflect
the current understanding and status of the system. Basing communications
and future actions on outmoded or nonexistent plans can lead to large amounts
of trouble.

1.3.3   Inadequate Technical Skills and Continuity
Many PMs complain that they are not able to access the necessary personnel
resources in order to run their projects. In a company setting, there is obvious
competition for the best people and some projects suffer simply because they
cannot find or hire such people. When they are able to hire from outside the
company, even if the new personnel are technically competent, it takes time
for them to climb the learning curve in terms of the project itself as well as
the corporate culture. Another side of the coin is the loss of key technical
capabilities to other ‘‘more important’’ projects in a company or the possibility
that various people may just get up and go to another firm. It is critically
important for a PM to maintain an excellent technical staff or else face the
strong possibility of inadequate technical performance, which will also show
up as problems in schedule and cost.

1.3.4   Lack of Teamwork
Even with a cadre of strong technical people, if they do not operate as a team,
the project is in jeopardy. The skills of the Project Manager are paramount
here, as he or she must be able to forge a spirit of teamwork and cooperation.
Today’s systems are very complex and require day-to-day interactions of the
members of the project. If these interactions do not take place, or are negative,
the project suffers and loses ground. There are times, as well, that a PM must
‘‘bite the bullet’’ with a project person who is not able to be part of a team,
preferring instead to be isolated, or act so as to represent a divisive force in
a team effort. This should not be tolerated and decisive action is required to
                            1.3   PROBLEMS IN MANAGING ENGINEERING PROJECTS    11

solve this type of problem. A variety of issues surrounding how to build a
productive team are addressed in considerable detail in Chapter 6.

1.3.5   Poor Communications and Coordination
One of the key skills of a Project Manager, and a leader, is communication.
Effective communication is critical both within the project itself and outside
the project to supporting company elements (e.g., company management,
accounting/finance, contracts, etc.) as well as the customer. Special efforts
are required to keep necessary people continually informed about what is
going on and why. Surprises as well as insufficient data and lead times can
be deadly in a project situation. Project staff are especially sensitive to a PM
who does not provide important information and feedback. Some staff require
a special amount of ‘‘TLC’’ so that they can perform. Such are the facts of
life in dealing with high-technology engineering projects. Many projects fail
for this reason alone. A responsible PM must always be aware of the need
for communication and be prepared to spend the time necessary to commu-
nicate and coordinate.

1.3.6   Insufficient Monitoring of Progress
For reasons that are not particularly clear, many Project Managers kick off
their projects and then let them run ‘‘open loop’’ until a critical project review
is scheduled. Peters and Waterman’s ‘‘management by walking around
(MBWA)’’ [1.11] is something to keep in mind in this regard. A good PM
keeps in touch with people and progress every day, mostly by ‘‘walking
around’’ and informally exploring issues, problems, and needs. Even highly
competent personnel require monitoring, as long as it is done in an inobtrusive
and helpful way. By careful and sensitive monitoring of progress between
key milestones, one is able to keep the project on track and avoid disasters
during the formal project reviews when both management and customer are
present. This is especially true during the early days of a project because one
‘‘never gets a second chance to make a good first impression.’’ Consistent
and constructive monitoring and feedback from the beginning set the stage
for project success.

1.3.7   Inferior Corporate Support
All organizations are expected to provide assistance and support to the pro-
jects that are often the lifeblood of these organizations. Support should be
forthcoming from the PM’s boss as well as the various designated support
groups such as accounting and finance, contracts, graphics, production, man-
ufacturing, and an assortment of matrixed functional elements (such as me-
chanical design, electrical design, software engineering, etc.). For example,
12      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


accounting/finance may be expected to provide project cost reports to the PM
and the project team on a periodic basis, such as monthly. If these reports are
late or incorrect most of the time, the PM is operating at a distinct disadvan-
tage. The PM should not allow this situation to continue. Although finding
solutions to inadequate internal support can be a nontrivial adventure, it is
usually worth the time and effort necessary to solve such a problem. However,
even a good PM may have to enlist the good offices of line management to
do so.

   The preceding sections present just seven ways a project can go off track.
There are clearly many others. If you are a Project Manager or Chief Systems
Engineer, it makes sense to understand these and other problem areas so that
you can find solutions before they lead to cost and schedule overruns and
inadequate system performance. These key problems can be restated in terms
of specific guidance to the Project Manager, as described in Exhibit 1.1:

     Exhibit 1.1: Selected Ways for the PM to Avoid Problems
     1. Review and analyze requirements continuously and in detail and raise
        problems with requirements with your management and, as necessary,
        with your customer.
     2. Prepare the best project plan that you can and update that plan at least
        once a quarter; make sure that your plan is concise and readable by
        your project personnel.
     3. Do not accept poor technical performers on your project; insist on the
        best technical talent who meet the highest standards of performance and
        creativity.
     4. Build a high-energy responsive team that is able to communicate freely
        and solve project problems; discharge personnel that prove to be incor-
        rigible nonteam players.
     5. Maintain high standards of open and honest communication and coor-
        dination with your boss, other company people, project staff, and the
        customer.
     6. Monitor project status and progress through informal MBWA, being
        sensitive to the work habits and needs of your people; establish more
        formal periodic status reviews.
     7. Set up efficient and productive support mechanisms within your com-
        pany or organization so as to maximize the effectiveness of these in-
        teractions; insist upon high standards of performance from support
        organizations.

   Most government agencies develop systems and therefore have been strug-
gling with these types of problems for a long time. They often try, therefore,
to provide guidance internally and also to contractors as to issues and prob-
                                                1.4   THE SYSTEMS APPROACH   13

lems that they have faced in the past. For example, the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) has been building high-technology sys-
tems since its inception and attempted to head off problems by publishing a
document called Issues in NASA Program and Project Management [1.12].
The contents of this document are as follows:

  1. An Overview of the Project Cycle
  2. Systems Engineering and Integration (SE&I) Management for Manned
     Space Flight Programs
  3. Shared Experiences from NASA Programs and Project: 1975
  4. Cost Control for Mariner Venus/Mercury ’73
  5. The Shuttle: A Balancing of Design and Politics
  6. Resources for NASA Managers

Clearly, NASA is trying to learn from its history, experiences, and mistakes
and have its contractors benefit from the past. A relatively new ‘‘theory’’ of
management emphasizes ‘‘the learning organization’’ and proposes methods
of assuring that such learning occurs [1.13]. Learning from one’s own as well
as another’s errors is a basic rationale for this as well as other books.


1.4   THE SYSTEMS APPROACH

The ‘‘systems approach,’’ at times difficult to define and execute, is basically
a recognition that all the elements of a system must interoperate harmoniously,
which, in turn, requires a systematic and repeatable process for designing,
developing, and operating the system. The architecture for a system must be
sound, and it must at least satisfy all the requirements for the system as set
forth by the user or customer. By following a systematic and repeatable ‘‘sys-
tems’’ process, the developer maximizes the chances that this will be the case.
   The key features and results of a systems approach may be stated as fol-
lows:

  1. Follow a systematic and repeatable process.
  2. Emphasize interoperability and harmonious system operations.
  3. Provide a cost-effective solution to the customer’s problem.
  4. Assure the consideration of alternatives.
  5. Use iterations as a means of refinement and convergence.
  6. Satisfy all user and customer requirements.
  7. Create a robust system

  Figure 1.1 provides an overview of a systems approach, the elements of
which are briefly cited in what follows:
         Customer/




14
           user

     1                          2                        3    Functional              4                          6
                                                                                             Analysis                  Preferred     Architecture
                                      Project                  design of
     Requirements                                                                               of                       system      design
                                       plan                   alternatives                 alternatives               architecture
                                                                          Iteration
                 No                                                                             5
                                                                                                    Evaluation
                      7
                                                                                                     criteria
                Satisfies
              requirements
                    ?
                                8
                                     Subsystem           9                            10                         11
                          Yes          design                  Analysis                                                Preferred
                                                                                            Trade-off
                                                                  of                                                  subsystem
                                    • Hardware                                               studies
                                                             alternatives                                               designs
                                    • Software
                 No                 • Human                                                                                          Subsystem
                     12                                                                                                              design
                                                              Iteration
                Satisfies
              requirements
                    ?
                                13
                                    Subsystems/         14                            15                         16
                          Yes         builds                  Subsystem/                    Subsystem/                  System
                                                                 build                        build                    test and
                                    • Hardware                integration                      test                   evaluation
                                    • Software
                                                                                                                                     System
                                    • Human
                                                                                                                 17                  construction
                                                                                                                      Cost-
                                                              Iteration
                                                                                                                    effective
                                                                                                                 physical system

                                                  Figure 1.1. Overview of the systems approach.
                                             1.4   THE SYSTEMS APPROACH   15

Box 1: Requirements. Requirements for the system are defined by the cus-
  tomer and user and become the touchstone for all design and develop-
  ment efforts. These are considered inviolate unless a negotiation leads
  to changes that should be reflected in all contractual documents. Re-
  quirements are normally provided in a formal ‘‘requirements’’ docu-
  ment. At times, a derivative document called a specification is
  forthcoming from the customer. The specification, however, is often
  written by the developer.
Box 2: Project Plan. The PM is able to develop a project plan from the
  statement of requirements. This is a roadmap (discussed in Chapter 3)
  for the important aspects of the project. If the key members of the
  project team have been selected, they will work with the PM in order
  to develop the plan. If not, they must ultimately buy into the plan as
  defined by the PM, or modify it appropriately.
Box 3: Functional Design of Alternatives. The architectural design of the
  system operates at the functional level, that is, it concentrates on the
  functions that the system is to perform in distinction to how these func-
  tions are to be implemented in hardware, software, and human com-
  ponents. Several such designs are configured, each representing a
  feasible alternative. Often, these alternatives span concepts that range
  from low cost to high performance.
Box 4: Analysis of Alternatives. Each of the alternatives is analyzed in
  terms of cost, performance, and satisfaction of requirements. By inter-
  acting back and forth between the postulation of alternatives and their
  analyses, it is ultimately possible to determine the quantitative and qual-
  itative attributes of the various viable alternatives. At the system level,
  two to four alternatives might be considered desirable.
Box 5: Evaluation Criteria. The analysis of alternatives could not be car-
  ried out without the clear identification of criteria against which the
  alternatives are evaluated. These criteria are derived from the require-
  ments and may include such features as interoperability, growth poten-
  tial, and societal risk as well as the detailed performance items listed in
  the requirements document. A formal evaluation framework is normally
  necessary in order to carry out the evaluation.
Box 6: Preferred System Architecture. This step is a selection of the sys-
  tem-level architecture that is most cost-effective. It represents a choice
  among the competing alternatives. Many projects go astray because they
  leap to a preferred architecture without the explicit consideration of
  alternatives. As an example, this may constitute the selection of time-
  division multiplexing as preferred over a frequency-division multiplex-
  ing approach for a communications system. System architecture is a very
  important part of the systems approach and the system engineering and
  design process and is discussed again in Chapter 9.
Box 7: Satisfies Requirements? We make this step explicit in order to em-
  phasize the significance of assuring that the preferred system architec-
16      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


       ture meets all the designated requirements. If even one mandatory
       requirement is not completely met, then it is necessary to loop back and
       consider additional alternatives. If all the key requirements are satisfied,
       then and only then can the project team move on to the matter of sub-
       system design.
     Box 8: Subsystem Design. By knowing the preferred architecture at the
       system level, it is then possible to move into detailed subsystem design.
       These subsystems involve the interplay among hardware, software, and
       human elements. Subsystems are naturally divided into subordinate el-
       ements, which can be called builds, configuration items (CIs), compo-
       nents, or other names that can be mutually understood.
     Box 9: Analysis of Alternatives. Following a process similar to that utilized
       to develop a preferred architecture, alternatives are set forth and ana-
       lyzed at the subsystem level of design. This is critical because there are
       numerous ways to implement a given function. Issues of timing and
       sizing are usually important here.
     Box 10: Trade-Off Studies. A variety of trade-offs are generally considered
       in trying to optimize at the subsystem level. These may be
       power–weight–space–performance trades, attempting to find the proper
       balance of attributes. An iteration loop is shown explicitly to account
       for the possible need to postulate additional alternative subsystem
       designs.
     Box 11: Preferred Subsystem Designs. Preferred subsystem designs flow
       from the previous steps, representing near-optimal choices with all rel-
       evant factors explicitly considered in the trade-off studies. At this stage
       of the process, one is still at the design level and the system has not,
       as yet, been built. There are some exceptions to this, as with the notion
       of rapid prototyping of subsystems in order to prove certain critical high-
       risk parts of a system.
     Box 12: Satisfies Requirements? We again wish to make explicit the check-
       ing of the preferred subsystem designs to assure that all requirements
       have been met. If not, an iteration loop is shown that means we are
       ‘‘back to the drawing board.’’ If so, we move on to the physical building
       of the system.
     Box 13: Subsystems/Builds. The physical construction of the subsystems
       is now in order, occurring for the hardware, software, and human com-
       ponents, and in consonance with the subsystem designs. Builds is used
       here as a generic name for configuration items, components, subsub-
       systems, and so on. The physical construction proceeds through the
       various levels of indenture defined in the design process.
     Box 14: Subsystem/Build Integration. After a given build (or CI) has been
       constructed, it must be integrated with all interoperating builds (or CIs).
       This is performed at all subordinate levels of the system.
                                            1.5   THE PROJECT ORGANIZATION   17

  Box 15: Subsystem/Build Test. Physical testing takes place as builds (CIs)
    are integrated to assure that they work together, are compatible, and
    perform as required. If integrated builds fail these tests, the process is
    iterated until the test leads to success. Clearly, all test plans and pro-
    cedures must be based on the original or derivative requirements. Many
    people have suggested, especially with respect to software, that a ‘‘build
    a little, test a little’’ orientation is most likely to lead to success.
  Box 16: System Test and Evaluation. A final system-level test and evalu-
    ation (T&E) step confirms that the system meets both development and
    operational requirements. This can be a long and protracted step, es-
    pecially for systems that are to operate in a hostile field environment
    such as aboard a ship or aircraft. It represents an end-to-end check of
    the full system and a final verification that all requirements have been
    met.
  Box 17: Cost-Effective Physical System. The result of all the previous
    steps, and many implicit substeps, is a cost-effective physical system.

   Although these steps represent most of the elements of the systems ap-
proach, there are several that are implicit and therefore are examined in later
chapters. However, this overview explains the key aspects of such an ap-
proach. It is intended to lead to a system that meets all requirements and is
cost-effective and robust. These terms are examined in the chapters dealing
with systems engineering management.
   The Project Manager and Chief Systems Engineer are clearly key players
in assuring that the systems approach is carried out with discipline and good
sense. We now more formally explore their roles and responsibilities in a
corporate setting.


1.5   THE PROJECT ORGANIZATION

An illustrative organization chart for a project is shown in Figure 1.2. This
chart shows only the project and not the organization in which the project
may be embedded, which is addressed later in this chapter.
   The Project Manager (PM) is shown at the top of the chart with two other
key players, the Chief Systems Engineer (CSE) and the Project Controller
(PC). In this book, we strongly suggest that the chief engineer of a project
be called the Chief Systems Engineer, stressing that the main task of the chief
engineer is the systems integrity of the overall system. Some organizational
structures might list the lead engineer as the chief engineer and have the
systems engineer and systems engineering function in parallel with the other
engineering functions such as hardware and software engineering. Some pro-
jects might be more limited in scope and therefore not require some of the
functions shown. Others might indeed be larger and include additional func-
18
                                                Project
                                             manager (PM)




        Project                                                                       Chief system
     Controller (PC)                                                                 engineer (CSE)

        1.7

          Scheduling        1.1                       1.2                    1.3                  1.4                   1.5                   1.6
                               Systems                   Hardware                Software                                                         Quality
                                                                                                        Testing               Logistics
        1.8                   engineering               engineering             engineering                                                      assurance

              Costing             1.1.1                     1.2.1                  1.3.1                1.4.1                 1.5.1                 1.6.1
                                                              Electrical            Software               Test
                                    Operations                                                                                   RMA                    Quality
        1.9                                                    design                design              planning
          Personnel               1.1.2                     1.2.2                  1.3.2                1.4.2                 1.5.2                 1.6.2
         assignments
                                                             Mechanical                                    Test                                      Configuration
                                  Requirements                                       Coding                                       ILS
        1.10                                                   design                                    execution                                   management

           Facilities             1.1.3                     1.2.3                  1.3.3                1.4.3                 1.5.3                 1.6.3
                                                                MMI                 Software              Testing                                      Interface
                                  Specifications                                      tools/                                    Training
        1.11                                                   design                                     support                                       control
                                                                                    methods
            Contract
                                  1.1.4                     1.2.4                                       1.4.4
             liaison
                                     System                   Specialty                                  Test and
                                    evaluation               engineering                                 evaluation

     Figure 1.2. Illustrative project organization. RMA ⫽ reliability-maintainability-availability; ILS ⫽ integrated logistics support; MMI ⫽ man-machine interface.
                                              1.5   THE PROJECT ORGANIZATION   19

tions such as manufacturing, production engineering, installation, operations
and maintenance, and others. We will now consider the specific responsibil-
ities of the Project Manager, Chief Systems Engineer, and the Project
Controller.

1.5.1   Responsibilities of the Project Manager (PM)
Clearly, the Project Manager (PM) has responsibility for the overall project,
in all its dimensions. At the top level, this focuses on the schedule, cost, and
technical performance of the system. An estimate of the time that a PM might
spend on each of these features might be 20% schedule, 30% cost, and 50%
performance, assuming that one could divide all job-related activities into
these three categories. If one includes purely administrative activities as a
fourth category, the percentages might be 15% schedule, 25% cost, 35% per-
formance, and 25% administrative. The last item would include such matters
as interviewing personnel, preparing their evaluations, and similar duties.
    The classical responsibilities of a PM are usually described in terms of
four activities: (1) planning, (2) organizing, (3) directing, and (4) monitoring.
Some people use the word ‘‘controlling’’ in place of this alternative of ‘‘mon-
itoring,’’ for which all control is subsumed within the ‘‘directing’’ activity.
    The planning activity is dominant in the early stages of a project, especially
with respect to the coherent preparation of a project plan. Steady-state plan-
ning involves updating this plan and thinking about and planning how to
handle special problems and contingencies.
     The organizing responsibility involves deciding how to organize the pro-
ject itself (e.g., the chart of Figure 1.2), and reorganizing when and where
necessary. It also means the allocation of resources to the various tasks of
the project. This shows up as the preparation of initial tasking, work break-
down structures, responsibility matrices for the project, and the like.
    The directing activity is the formal and informal day-to-day running of the
project and its various meetings as well as the delineation of assignments
when changes or fine-tuning is required to solve problems.
    The monitoring duty involves the continuous reading of the status of all
aspects of the project in relation to the system requirements and the project
plan. If monitoring results in the discovery of problems, remedial action is
taken under the directing activity.
    An often frustrating factor comes into play when the PM’s responsibilities
and authority are not congruent. Because the PM usually has full responsi-
bility for the success or failure of the project, it can be extremely difficult if
this person cannot, for example, hire or fire, negotiate with outside vendors
and subcontractors, and make final arrangements with a counterpart customer.
Incommensurate authority is one of the ‘‘red flags’’ of most PMs. A summary
list of the various responsibilities and duties of a Project Manager is provided
in Exhibit 1.2.
20      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


     Exhibit 1.2: Selected Duties and Responsibilities of a PM
     Cost/Budget
     • Confirming that the project can be completed within budget
     • Reviewing periodic (e.g., monthly) cost reports
     • Obtaining valid cost-to-complete estimates
     • Assessing and mitigating project cost risks
     • Assuring the validity of system life-cycle costs
     Schedule
     • Establishing an up-to-date master schedule
     • Assuring that all interim milestones are met
     • Determining ways to make up time when slippage occurs
     • Obtaining valid time-to-complete estimates
     • Scheduling internal and customer status reviews
     Technical Performance
     • Assuring that the system satisfies all technical requirements
     • Confirming the validity of the technical approach
     • Continuous tracking of technical performance status
     • Installing systems and software engineering methods/practices
     • Obtaining computer tools for systems and software engineering
     Administrative
     • Personnel interviewing, hiring, and evaluation
     • Interfacing with corporate management
     • Interfacing with internal project support groups
     • Coaching and team building
     • Assuring the availability of required facilities


1.5.2    Responsibilities of the Chief Systems Engineer (CSE)
As suggested by the organization chart of Figure 1.2, the Chief Systems
Engineer (CSE) is the key manager of all the engineering work on the project.
Thus, the CSE is both a technical contributor as well as a manager. Indeed,
the CSE might well have twice as many direct reports as does the PM.
   The CSE, under the PM, assumes primary responsibility for the technical
performance of the system. In terms of time allocations, the CSE might ex-
perience 15% schedule, 15% cost, and 70% technical performance. The CSE
has some administrative responsibilities, largely having to do with the man-
agement of the technical team. The CSE is definitely a systems engineer and
should spend a great deal of energy in finding the correct technical solution
for the customer.
                                             1.5   THE PROJECT ORGANIZATION   21

   The fact that both the PM and the CSE have, to some extent, overlapping
responsibilities, suggests that it is critically important that these two people
work together productively and efficiently. Friction between these key players
will seriously jeopardize project success. They must communicate and share
information extremely well, and understand each other’s weaknesses and
strengths. One-on-one meetings are standard so that potential problems are
solved before they might hurt the efforts of the entire team. A summary list
of the key responsibilities and duties of the Chief Systems Engineer is shown
in Exhibit 1.3.

  Exhibit 1.3: Ten Responsibilities and Duties of the Chief Systems
  Engineer (CSE)
   1. Establish the overall technical approach
   2. Evaluate alternative architectural system designs
   3. Develop the preferred system architecture
   4. Implement a repeatable systems engineering process
   5. Implement a repeatable software engineering process
   6. Oversee use of computer tools and aids
   7. Serve as technical coach and team builder
   8. Hold technical review sessions
   9. Attempt to minimize overall project time period
  10. Develop cost-effective system that satisfies requirements


1.5.3   Responsibilities of the Project Controller
The Project Controller (PC) is the third player in the project management
triumvirate. The PC has no technical performance responsibilities, focusing
instead on schedule, cost, personnel assignment, facilities, and contract liaison
issues. Time spent on these matters is estimated as 25% schedule, 45% cost,
10% personnel, 10% facilities, and 10% contract liaison. Cost issues have to
do with assuring that the PM and CSE get the cost reports that they need and
also that the overall project stays within budgeted costs.
   The Project Controller is likely to be the ‘‘keeper’’ of the master schedule
for the project, although inputs are obviously required from engineering per-
sonnel. The PC need not be an engineer, although an understanding of what
engineering does is clearly a requirement. Good PCs can anticipate problems
by in-depth analyses of project cost and schedule data. By examining trends
and timetables, the PC may be able to spot trouble spots before they are
evident to other project personnel. This person therefore can be worth his or
her weight in gold, primarily to the PM. A brief citation of some of the PC’s
responsibilities and duties is provided in Exhibit 1.4.
22      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


     Exhibit 1.4: Ten Responsibilities and Duties of the
     Project Controller (PC)
      1. Maintain overall project schedule
      2. Assess project schedule risks
      3. Assure validity and timeliness of project cost reports
      4. Track special cost items (e.g., travel, subcontractors)
      5. Develop project cost trends
      6. Assess project cost risks
      7. Maintain life-cycle cost model for system
      8. Verify and maintain personnel assignments
      9. Assure that necessary facilities are available
     10. Maintain appropriate liaison with contracts department


1.6     ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENTS AND FACTORS

There are many who claim that the organizational environment in which a
project is performed is the critical factor in the ultimate success or failure of
a project [1.14]. This item was alluded to earlier under the topic of ‘‘inferior
corporate support.’’ We examine this issue here in somewhat greater detail
with respect to the particular corporate entities with which the Project Man-
ager (and the Chief Systems Engineer and Project Controller) must interact.
Interactions with project staff, in the main, are reserved for the discussions
in Chapters 5 and 6.

1.6.1    Corporate Organizational Structures
Although to a large extent a project has a great deal of internal structural
coherence, it exists within a given overall corporate organizational structure.
That corporate structure, depending on its configuration and processes, can
have major impacts on how well a project is able to function.
   In general, it can be said that there are three generic types of corporate
structures, as illustrated in Figure 1.3: (a) the functional structure, (b) the
project structure, and (c) the matrix structure.
   As shown in the figure, the functional structure is organized fundamentally
by functional areas such as engineering, marketing, sales, manufacturing, pro-
duction, and so forth. Projects, as such, either for internal or outside custom-
ers, are formed within a functional group for the duration of the project and
then are dissolved. As projects come and go, the basic functional structure
remains. A PM is selected from the functional group that is likely to have
the most to do with the project from a functional discipline perspective. De-
pending upon how high up the PM is in the functional organization, as well
as other factors such as the technical scope of work of the project, the PM
                                       Corporate
                                      management
                                                                 Corporate
                                                               administration
                                                                and support



    Engineering        Marketing       Sales          Manufacturing         Production




    Electronic       Mechanical        Software              Integration       Specialty
      design           design         engineering             and test        engineering

                                             (a)

                                       Corporate
                                      management
                                                                 Corporate
                                                               administration
                                                                and support



     Program           Program                 Program                          Program
     manager           manager                 manager                          manager



Project    Project      Project    Project         Project    Project      Project   Project
   A          B            C          D               E          F           G         H

                                             (b)

                                       Corporate
                                      management
                                                                 Corporate
                                                               administration
                                                                and support


Director       Engineering    Marketing            Sales     Manufacturing       Production
Projects

     Project A

    Project B
           …




    Project N
                                             (c)
                     Figure 1.3. Corporate organizational structures.
                                                                                            23
24      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


may have to reach across functional lines to access resources for the project.
This can work very well because all functional managers are in the same
position of requiring resources from other groups from time to time. Projects
therefore can do very well in functionally structured organizations, but only
if the functional line management is supportive of project needs and
requirements.
   Figure 1.3 next shows the ‘‘pure’’ project structure, in which the entire
organization consists of a set of projects. This structure is prevalent in service
organizations, and especially in professional services contractors that do work
for the federal government. In such cases, each contract tends to establish a
project, and projects come and go as the contracts under which they are
operating are completed without renewals or further work requirements. The
PM usually starts a project with key personnel from a project that is phasing
down or being completed. Such an overall corporate orientation is conducive
to project autonomy and support because it is its only focus. Projects can
flourish in that type of environment, but from time to time, they do not have
ready access to specialized expertise that might reside in a functional group.
   The third type of overall corporate structure shown in Figure 1.3 is the
matrix structure. This might be viewed as a hybrid between the previous two
forms, with the coexistence of functional groups together with the formal
recognition of a project group. In principle, this structural corporate form can
provide an ideal mix of the advantages of both project autonomy and func-
tional expertise. However, real-world pressures and competition between
project and functional groups can also yield a nonsupportive environ-
ment. Theories aside, much of the success of a matrix structure, in terms ex-
perienced by the Project Manager, depends on the quality of corporate
management.

1.6.2   Interactions with Management
The PM reports ‘‘upward’’ to management, as represented perhaps by a pro-
gram manager, or a division director, or a vice president. The specific title
may be less important than the nature of the relationship between the PM
and the boss. A project management position may carry with it the assumption
that the PM runs the project, that is, that the PM has full responsibility and
authority for the project. This can be true for the former, but in real life is
rarely true for the latter. That is, the PM’s authority is limited, and that is a
key matter that has to be negotiated between the PM and the boss. Failure to
resolve this issue can lead to significant stress for both parties, which will
carry over to the CSE, PC, and other members of the project team. Some
organizations attempt to recognize and solve this problem through the formal
use of an ‘‘authority matrix,’’ which defines the boundaries of authority at the
various levels in the organization. Such a matrix might deal with precise
definitions of limits with respect to such activities as:
                              1.6   ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENTS AND FACTORS    25

  1. Hiring personnel and setting salaries
  2. Giving raises and bonuses
  3. Negotiating and signing contracts
  4. Expenditures of monies for different categories
  5. Signing and verifying time cards and charges
  6. Negotiating with customers

In the absence of a culture that requires such matrix definitions, it falls to the
two parties, the PM and the boss, to negotiate a working relationship. If you
are a PM, or aspire to be one, you should seriously consider how to begin a
dialogue with your boss with respect to your authority and lack of it. A good
working understanding is crucial to the success of the project.

1.6.3   Interactions with Matrixed Functional Managers
Depending on the organizational structure of the enterprise at large, it may
be necessary to interact with matrixed functional managers so as to obtain
resources, the principal one of which is people. Especially in large organi-
zations, there are managers of software engineering, or electronic engineering,
or mechanical engineering groups. If a PM needs three software engineers
for the project, the corporate culture may call for requesting such persons
from the head of the software engineering group or department. This involves
interviews with candidates, selections of the best persons for the job, conflicts
with current assignments, and ultimately commitments of people for various
specific lengths of time. Depending as well on the circumstances (e.g., the
project load and level of business) as well as the people and personalities
involved, this interaction may be easy or it may be difficult. If a PM cannot
get satisfaction in terms of obtaining the necessary commitments of the right
personnel, it may be necessary to work up the chain of command and across
to the functional manager chain of command at a higher level than the PMs
counterpart. Such are the necessary vagaries of working ‘‘across the com-
pany’’ in order to secure the needed project personnel and support. Much of
this can be avoided if the PM has a go-ahead to hire, but the well-run orga-
nization will almost always have an eye out for borrowing or transferring
people from one group to another to maximize productivity for the enterprise
at large.

1.6.4   Interactions with Accounting/Finance
Another kind of interaction occurs when an accounting/finance group has
responsibility for project cost accounting, and this group does not report to
the PM. This is a very common situation, calling for an early understanding
of what types of reports will be provided to the project management team.
26      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


The centerpiece of such reports is likely to be project cost reports, which
define the costs expended to date, and during the last reporting period (e.g.,
month), by various categories of cost (e.g., direct labor, overhead, and general
and administrative costs). The PM may designate the Project Controller as
the point of contact in obtaining the required cost reports with the desired
format and frequency. A smooth interaction in this regard that works effec-
tively is considered critical to the success of the project. No project can be
run efficiently without timely and accurate cost information.

1.6.5   Interactions with Contracts
As with accounting and finance, most organizations have a contracts depart-
ment that does not report to the PM. Thus, a linkage has to be established
with certain contracts personnel in order to understand the precise require-
ments of the contract, provide all the necessary contract deliverables, and,
when appropriate, negotiate modifications to the contract. Various types of
contracts (e.g., cost type vs. fixed price vs. time and materials) will be handled
by a PM in different ways. Contract provisions may allow certain costs to be
traded without contracting officer approval, or they may not. Certain contracts
have limits on expenditures by category (e.g., use of travel or consultant fees),
and so forth. The PM must thoroughly understand these types of contract
provisions in order to effectively manage the project. The PC may also be
utilized by the PM as the primary point of contact with contracts so as to
conserve the time demands on the PM but still have a solid and constructive
interaction. PMs who neglect this relationship are headed for trouble.

1.6.6   Interactions with Marketing/Sales
For purposes of this discussion, we can consider two circumstances. For the
first, the company is primarily focused upon developing products to sell to
other businesses or to the public at large (e.g., consumer products), and for
the second, the company does most of its system development under a con-
tract with a specific customer. We call the first case ‘‘commercial’’ and the
second ‘‘contract.’’
    In the commercial case, marketing/sales has the task of trying to figure
out what types of which products should be made, and for what classes of
customers. When they have made such a determination, they then establish a
requirement that engineering make the selected products, including the fea-
tures that are considered most desirable. Timetables are also established and
a project is up and running to meet these needs. Thus, there is a direct link
between the project and sales/marketing such that the requirements for the
system (product) in question are determined by the marketing/sales staff. The
vagaries of the marketplace often come into play such that the PM, CSE, and
PC are under enormous pressure with difficult schedules and performance
                             1.6   ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENTS AND FACTORS    27

requirements. In smaller companies and projects, this can lead to twelve-hour-
a-day work assignments, due to the usual lack of resources. The project team
thus needs to be functioning well, and also needs to stay in constant touch
with the marketing/sales people.
   In the contract case, as with doing work for federal, state, and local gov-
ernments, marketing/sales get involved early in talking to the customer and
conveying the system requirements to the project team, usually before a re-
quest for proposal (RFP) has been written or conveyed. Both the project team
and marketing/sales work together in order to shape the proposal response
so as to maximize the probability of a win. Once the contract is indeed won,
marketing/sales usually shift their focus to the potential follow-on contract,
talking to both project team and customer to make sure that the PM, CSE,
and PC are considering the future contract as well as the current one. Thus,
there is continual contact between the project team and the marketing/sales
organization in order to be in a position to make the most competitive bids,
and win as many of them as possible.


1.6.7   Interactions with Human Resources
Typically, the Human Resources Department (HRD) focuses upon at least the
following:

  1. Recruiting in order to satisfy project needs
  2. Administering benefit programs (health insurance, etc.)
  3. Managing the overall personnel review/evaluation process
  4. Recommending salary and total compensation increases
  5. Advising on special personnel problems

   The need for new people for a project is usually established by the PM
and the HRD is tasked to find these people. This is a most critical link in the
relationship with the HRD, since without the right people at the right time,
the project risks begin to escalate. Less interaction is required relative to the
benefit programs, since they tend to be standard for all employees. Personnel
performance reviews are held periodically and guidance is usually given to
the PM by the HRD for consistent execution. This leads to salary and com-
pensation increases, which tend to result in at least some unhappy people.
This, in turn, might result in the HRD folks working with the PM in order
to convey the correct messages to the employees in question. Typically, the
PM, CSE, and PC are the most important folks in determining what the
compensation will be for each member of the project team. The best results
are usually obtained when there is good communication with the Human
Resources people.
28      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


1.6.8    Interactions with Corporate Information Officer (CIO) Office
The Office of the CIO has, among others, the following responsibilities:

     1. Identify information needs of the entire enterprise
     2. Focus these needs at the project level
     3. Build or acquire the systems in order to satisfy these needs
     4. Operate these systems in order to provide support to the various projects
     5. Reengineer the systems as the needs change

As suggested earlier in the interactions with Accounting/Finance, there is a
critical need for the PM, CSE, and PC to be able to track cost, schedule, and
technical performance of the project. The cost information typically comes
from accounting/finance, but may have to be converted into a project man-
agement format by the CIO office. A well-run organization understands that
this highly critical interface issue needs to be worked and resolved success-
fully. This means that the reports sent to the project team must be timely and
accurate. Certain special needs may have to be satisfied, such as cost at the
task and subtask levels, and being able to establish ‘‘crosswalks’’ to the pro-
ject work breakdown structure (WBS), as an example. Schedule information
may be captured in a Project Management Software package (such as Micro-
soft Project). In such a case, project cost information may have to be trans-
ferred into such a package in order to analyze and display cost and schedule
status charts. In all cases, project people need to provide timely inputs, such
as monthly cost to complete and time to complete estimates, usually at the
task and activity level.

1.6.9    Interactions with Corporate Technology Officer (CTO) Office
Tasks that are typically carried out within the Office of the CTO are:

     1. Identifying technologies that are needed now and into the future by the
        entire enterprise
     2. Relating these technologies to individual programs and projects
     3. Investing in and acquiring the necessary technologies
     4. Training project personnel with respect to these technologies
     5. Assisting project personnel with technology transfer and insertion in
        order to provide additional value to the customers as well as a highly
        competitive position

Interaction with the CTO office can ultimately have a profound effect upon
the success of a project, especially the so-called high-tech projects. Such
projects are continuously exploring new technologies that will result in su-
perior performance at an affordable cost. If this can be achieved, the project
                               1.6   ORGANIZATIONAL ENVIRONMENTS AND FACTORS     29

will enhance its chances of success, both immediately and into the future. As
we see in the next chapter, a project will often have a requirement to formulate
a Systems Engineering Management Plan (SEMP), one of whose elements
has to do with technology transitioning. This means that the project must
consider and ultimately define how various technologies need to transition
from current to future systems.
   Another type of technology that is usually needed by a project team can
be described by a set of computer-based tools. Computer-Aided Software
Engineering (CASE) tools are an example, and they provide the software
engineering team the tools that it needs to get its job done. A project team
that is provided with superior tools of this type will be able to operate at
higher levels of productivity, which will translate into higher efficiency and
a better overall result for the customer. Technology of all types can be viewed
as discriminators that lead to better solutions, which, in turn, lead to project
succcess.

1.6.10   Interactions with Customers
Finally, but certainly not last in importance, is the matter of interactions with
customers. Usually, there is a customer counterpart with whom the PM has
direct and day-to-day contact. This is true whether the customer is in the
same organization or is an outside client. Although more is discussed on this
critical subject in other parts of this book, there is little that is more important
than an honest, trusting, and effective relationship with the customer. At the
same time, the relationship cannot transcend or violate the terms and condi-
tions of the contract between the two entities. For example, the PM cannot
agree to do tasks that are not called for under the scope of work of the
contract. All increases or modifications in scope must be handled through
formal changes in the contract itself.
   Another key factor in customer interaction involves the PM’s boss and his
or her boss, and so forth up the organization. No PM ‘‘owns’’ the customer;
the formal relationship is between corporate groups. A good organization has
multiple points of contact up and down the organization. This can be partic-
ularly effective when problems occur that cannot be resolved between the PM
and the client counterpart. Relationships up the chain of command can be
brought to bear in attempts to resolve difficulties that arise and find solutions
acceptable to both parties. The nature and success of a PM’s interaction with
the customer are affected and supported by bosses up the chain of command.
This is yet one more reason for establishing a solid working relationship
between a PM and the boss. For better or worse, this relationship can dom-
inate the life of a PM, working smoothly and successfully, or with stress and
possible failure.
   The effective PM truly sees the Project Manager, Chief Systems Engineer,
and Project Controller as a triumvirate that works together on a day-to-day
basis to anticipate and respond to the myriad demands of managing a project.
30      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


It is one of the most difficult jobs, with lots of stumbling blocks and hurdles.
The PM must be a highly skilled and competent individual in order to stay
focused on the key issues and create a team that moves forward effectively
and solves the many problems that invariably arise.



1.7    LARGE-SCALE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT ISSUES

The focus of this book is upon project and systems engineering management.
Some of the above discussion suggests that success or failure of a project
depends significantly upon the larger organizational structure within which
the project is being carried out. If it is embedded in a highly bureaucratic
situation, success becomes more difficult. Examples of such situations, of
course, can be found in both industry and government. Large bureaucratic
organizations often chip away at problems, but tend not to be able to truly
solve them. The reasons for this are varied, but they clearly can affect the
PM, CSE, and PC, who are laboring in the trenches, trying to make a difficult
problem more tractable.
   The federal government, with its large size and tendency toward bureauc-
racy, is a good example of a set of large-scale organizations (i.e., the various
executive departments) that have a wide variety of internal problems that are
extremely difficult to solve. One can get some idea as to what these problems
are by looking at reports produced on a continuing basis by the General
Accounting Office (GAO), whose job it is to investigate problem areas in the
executive agencies. Exhibit 1.5 provides a sample listing of some of the re-
ports of the GAO.

     Exhibit 1.5: A Sampling of General Accounting Office (GAO)
     Report Titles
     • Defense Transportation: Process Reengineering Could Be Enhanced by
      Performance Measures
     • Managing for Results: Strengthening Regulatory Agencies’ Performance
       Management Practices
     • Management Reform: Elements of Successful Improvement Initiatives
     • Department of Energy: Need to Address Longstanding Management
       Weaknesses
     • Executive Guide: Creating Value Through World-Class Financial
       Management
     • Defense Acquisitions: Need to Revise Acquisition Strategy to Reduce
       Risk for Joint Air to Surface Standoff Missile
     • Defense Acquisitions: Comprehensive Strategy Needed to Improve Ship
       Cruise Missile Defense
                  1.7   LARGE-SCALE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT ISSUES   31

• Defense Acquisitions: Improvements Needed in Military Space Systems’
 Planning and Education
• Defense Acquisitions: Achieving B-2A Bomber Operational Re-
  quirements
• Air Traffic Control: FAA’s Modernization Investment Management Ap-
  proach Can Be Strengthened
• Combat Identification Systems: Changes Needed in Management Plans
  and Structure
• Defense Acquisitions: Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration
  Program Can Be Improved
• Defense Logistics: Actions Needed to Enhance Success of Reengineering
  Initiatives
• Internal Revenue Service: Custodial Financial Management Weaknesses
• Information Security: Opportunities for Improved OMB Oversight of
  Agency Practices
• Defense Information Resource Management (IRM): Critical Risks Facing
  New Materiel Management Strategy
• Department of Transportation: University Research Activities Need
  Greater Oversight
• Battlefield Automation: Army Needs to Determine Command and Con-
  trol Priorities and Costs
• Department of Energy: Management Problems Require a Long-Term
  Commitment to Change
• Military Satellite Communications: Opportunity to Save Billions of
  Dollars
• Acquisition Reform: Contractors Can Use Technologies and Management
  Techniques to Reduce Costs
• Defense Management: Impediments Jeopardize Logistics Corporate In-
  formation Management
• Tactical Intelligence: Joint STARS Needs Current Cost and Operational
  Effectiveness Analysis
• NASA Aeronautics: Impact of Technology Transfer Activities Is
  Uncertain
• Financial Management: Reliability of Weapon System Cost Reports is
  Highly Questionable
• Drug Control: Heavy Investment in Military Surveillance Is Not Paying
  Off
• Simulation Training: Management Framework Improved, But Challenges
  Remain
• DoD Computer Contracting: Inadequate Management Wasted Millions of
  Dollars
32      SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


     • Financial Management: IRS Lacks Accountability Over its ADP
      Resources
     • Patent and Trademark Office: Key Processes for Managing Automated
       Patent System Development Are Weak
     • DoD Information Services: Improved Pricing and Financial Management
       Practices Needed for Business Area
     • Information Security: Serious Weaknesses Place Critical Federal Opera-
       tions and Assets at Risk
     • Space Surveillance: DoD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements
       and a Coordinated Plan
     • Defense IRM: Strategy Needed for Logistics Information Technology
       Improvement Efforts
     • Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Maneuver System Schedule Includes Unnec-
       essary Risk
     • Department of State IRM: Modernization Program at Risk Absent Full
       Implementation of Key Best Practices
     • Air Traffic Control: Complete and Enforced Architecture Needed for
       FAA Systems
     • Tax System Modernization: Imaging System’s Performance Moderniza-
       tion Improving But Still Falls Short of Expectations
     • Air Traffic Control: Improved Cost Information Needed to Make Billion
       Dollar Modernization Investment Decisions
     • Major Management Challenges and Program Risks: A Governmentwide
       Perspective

     Scanning Exhibit 1.5 we see a variety of problem areas, including:

      1. Overall management deficiencies
      2. Risks that need to be reduced
      3. Costs that are too high or not well enough known
      4. Schedules that are not workable
      5. Requirements difficulties
      6. Need for better performance and effectiveness measurement of systems
      7. Need for use of best practices
      8. Investment decision issues
      9. Overall financial management issues
     10. Need for systems reengineering and improvements

These are all familiar themes in the worlds of project management and sys-
tems engineering. However, in the context of large-scale organizational issues,
they may well be beyond the scope of what the PM, CSE, and PC are able
                      1.7   LARGE-SCALE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT ISSUES   33

to tackle and provide effective solutions for. Indeed, the last-cited item in
Exhibit 1.5 offered solution areas for twenty individual federal government
agencies, solutions that emphasized the following four areas:

  1. Adopting a results orientation
  2. Effectively using information technology to achieve program results
  3. Establishing financial management capabilities that effectively support
     decision making and accountability
  4. Building, maintaining, and marshaling the human capital needed to
     achieve results

Massive efforts will be required to address these areas for the twenty gov-
ernment agencies.
   The last point to be made in relation to the above is the fact that we are
seeing increasing amounts of software in our systems such that software itself,
its development and maintenance, is fast becoming our number one ‘‘sys-
tems’’ problem. Exhibit 1.6 lists some of the GAO reports that highlight the
various aspects of software that need to be addressed.

  Exhibit 1.6: Selected GAO Reports That Focus Upon Software Issues
  • Land Management Systems: Major Software Development Does Not
    Meet BLM’s Business Needs
  • Weather Forecasting: Improvements Needed in Laboratory Software De-
    velopment Processes
  • Defense Financial Management: Immature Software Development Pro-
    cesses at Indianapolis Increase Risk
  • Embedded Computer Systems: Defense Does Not Know How Much It
    Spends on Software
  • Embedded Computer Systems: F-14D Aircraft Software Is Not Reliable
  • Embedded Computer Systems: Significant Software Problems on C-17
    Must Be Addressed
  • Embedded Computer Systems: New F/A-18 Capabilities Impact Navy’s
    Software Development Process
  • Space Station: NASA’s Software Development Approach Increases
    Safety and Cost Risks
  • Mission-Critical Systems: Defense Attempting to Address Major Soft-
    ware Challenges
  • Software Tools: Defense Is Not Ready to Implement I-CASE Depart-
    mentwide

The ubiquitous nature of software in our systems has led this author to include
a separate chapter (Chapter 10) in this book that highlights significant soft-
34    SYSTEMS, PROJECTS, AND MANAGEMENT


ware issues and attempts to define approaches that are and have been taken
in order to find effective solutions. The PM, CSE, and PC are all likely, in
the twenty-first century, to have to deal with an increasing number of prob-
lems associated with software as critical parts of our future systems.


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

1.1 From your own experience or your reading, identify
    a. a project with major problems
    b. three reasons the project got into trouble
    c. what might have been done to
       • fix the problems
       • avoid the problems
1.2 For a project of your selection, discuss ways in which the systems
    approach
    a. was used effectively
    b. was not used, and the consequences
1.3 Critique the systems approach diagram of Figure 1.1. Are there ways
    that you would modify the diagram? Explain.
1.4 Discuss three advantages and disadvantages each for the following or-
    ganizational structures:
    a. functional
    b. project
    c. matrix
1.5 Draw a project organization chart for a project of your own selection.
1.6 Identify three responsibilities, other than those listed in this chapter, of
    a. the Project Manager
    b. the Chief Systems Engineer
    c. the Project Controller
1.7 Locate another two definitions of systems engineering from the litera-
    ture. Which of the various definitions do you find most satisfying? Why?
1.8 Define three additional areas in which systems exhibit Type I and Type
    II errors. How would you describe such errors? Are these errors related
    to one another? Explain.


REFERENCES

 1.1 Chapman, W. L., A. T. Bahill, and A. W. Wymore (1992). Engineering Modeling
     and Design. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
                                                                   REFERENCES      35

 1.2 International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE), 2033 Sixth Avenue,
     #804, Seattle, WA 98121.
 1.3 Department of Defense (DoD) Website: web2.deskbook.osd.mil
 1.4 Eisner, H. (1988). Computer-Aided Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
     Prentice-Hall, p. 17.
 1.5 Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) (1999). Systems Engineering
     Fundamentals. Ft. Belvoir, VA: DSMC Press, p. 3.
 1.6 Shishko, R. (1995). NASA Systems Engineering Handbook, SP-6105. Linthicum
     Heights, MD: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Scientific and
     Technical Information Program Office, p. 4.
 1.7 Burgess, J. (1993). ‘‘Out-of-Control Contract.’’ Washington Post, March 8.
 1.8 Archibald, R. D. (1976). Managing High Technology Programs and Projects.
     New York: John Wiley, p. 10.
 1.9 Kezsbom, D. S., D. L. Schilling, and K. A. Edward (1989). Dynamic Project
     Management. New York: John Wiley.
1.10 Kerzner, H. (2000). Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning,
     Scheduling and Controlling, 7th edition. New York: John Wiley.
1.11 Peters, T. J., and R. H. Waterman, Jr. (1982). In Search of Excellence. New York:
     Bantam Books.
1.12 Hoban, F. T., ed. (1992). Issues in NASA Program and Project Management,
     NASA SP-6101(05). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
     istration, Office of Management and Facilities.
1.13 Senge, P. M. (1990). The Fifth Discipline — The Art & Practice of The Learning
     Organization. New York: Doubleday.
1.14 Frame, J. D. (1987). Managing Projects in Organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-
     Bass.
                2
OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS




2.1   INTRODUCTION

This chapter provides an overview of the essentials of project management
and the systems engineering process as well as its management. This is fol-
lowed by an examination of the essentials of the systems acquisition life cycle,
which itself is correlated with the systems engineering process. The chapter
concludes with a citation of some of the standards relevant to project man-
agement and systems engineering.



2.2   PROJECT MANAGEMENT ESSENTIALS

The previous chapter explored some of the elements of project management,
including the roles of the project triumvirate—the Project Manager (PM), the
Chief Systems Engineer (CSE), and the Project Controller (PC)—and the
various organizational interfaces that affect how they approach and perform
their jobs. Here we continue this exploration, but focus on the essentials of
project management in a more step-by-step fashion. An overview of the es-
sentials of project management is depicted in Figure 2.1. This figure shows
the project management triumvirate as a team that oversees the essential pro-
ject management functions of planning, organizing, directing, and monitoring.
   Starting from the left side of Figure 2.1, the customer is shown as the
source of a request for proposal (RFP) that might start off the project. For
cases in which the project is internal to an organization, there is no formal
RFP, but the requirements nevertheless should be spelled out in some type of

                                                                             37
38
                                                     PROJECT MANAGER & PM TEAM (w/CSE and PC)


                                     PLANNING                   ORGANIZING              DIRECTING              MONITORING

                               1    Project Plan
                Request                                         2 Work Activities       4    Project           5    Status
                   for          Goals/objectives                                              Team                 Reviews
     CUSTOMER   proposal         requirements               Tasks, SOW, WBS
                                                                                         • Team                 • MBWA
                 (RFP)                                               Approach              building             • Formal
                               Task statements,
                                 statement of                        Schedule            • Assignments            reviews
                                work (SOW) &                                             • Project                – Cost
                               work breakdown                          TRM                                        – Schedule
                                                                                           procedures
                               structure (WBS)                                           • Periodic/              – Performance
                                                                          Relating         special              • Risk
                                     Technical
                                                                          to               meetings               assessment
                                     approach
                                                                                         • Situation            • Problem
                                     Schedule                                                                     detection
                                                                3                          analysis
                                  Organization,                        Staff
                                                                                         • Problem-
                                  staffing and                         Project             solving
                               task responsibility                  organization         • Corrective
                                  matrix (TRM)                                             action
                                                                      Project
                                      Budget                          staffing
                                   Risk analysis


                                     Proposal
                                                                                             Reports &
                                   • Technical                                                system
                                   • Cost
                                   • Management



                           6                           CORPORATE ENVIRONMENT AND SUPPORT
                                        • PM supervisor                • Matrixed managers       • PM/MIS automated tools
                                        • Support departments          • Facilities              • Training

                                        Figure 2.1. Overview of Project Management.
                                        2.2   PROJECT MANAGEMENT ESSENTIALS    39

document. In either situation, the planning phase begins with the develop-
ment of a project plan (Box 1). Such a plan contains seven essential elements,
discussed in greater detail in the next chapter. These elements are:

  1. Needs, goals, objectives, and requirements
  2. Task statements, a statement of work (SOW), and a work breakdown
     structure (WBS)
  3. The technical approach to the project
  4. A project schedule
  5. Organization, staffing, and a task responsibility matrix (TRM)
  6. The project budget
  7. Risk analysis

   If an RFP response is called for, the preceding elements of the project plan
form the basis for preparing the proposal, which normally contains three
volumes:

  1. A technical proposal
  2. A management proposal
  3. A cost proposal

This three-volume proposal is delivered to the customer for evaluation. A
feedback loop from the monitoring function, when it is necessary to update
the project plan, is not shown in the figure but is implicit in the process.
   The seven project plan elements provide the input to the organizing func-
tion, as shown in Figure 2.1. This function is divided into two essential ac-
tivities, namely, work activities (Box 2) and activities having to do with the
project organization and staffing (Box 3). The work activities have four parts,
all flowing from the project plan. These are:

  1. The tasks, SOW, and WBS
  2. The technical approach
  3. The schedule
  4. The task responsibility matrix (TRM)

The last three, in particular, interact strongly with the staffing for the project
because more or less staff stretches or compresses the schedule and the ability
to perform tasks in series or in parallel. The TRM is an explicit assignment
of people to the various tasks and elements of the work breakdown structure
(WBS). The two elements of the staff activities are

  1. The project organization, and
  2. The project staffing
40      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


Initially, the project organization is shown without specific people filling the
various organizational roles; as the project is staffed with specific individuals,
names are added to the organization chart to make it clear as to precisely who
fills what roles. Particular individuals may fill more than one project role. A
typical project organization chart was shown in Chapter 1 in Figure 1.2. The
preceding work and staffing activities constitute the essentials of the organ-
izing function for the project.
    The organizing function is normally followed by the directing function.
The essential element of this function is to establish a coherent and effective
project team (Box 4). Typical directing activities include:

     1. Team building
     2. Clarifying assignments for various team members
     3. Articulating project and team procedures
     4. Executing both periodic and special team meetings
     5. Carrying out situation analyses, as a team
     6. Problem solving when the inevitable problems occur
     7. Implementing corrective actions

All of these directing activities are an ongoing part of the project and con-
stitute the main expenditure of energy and time in order to perform the various
project tasks. Project reports and systems (physical and procedural, as called
for in the statement of work) flow from the work of the project team, operating
individually and collectively.
    This is followed by the steady-state monitoring function, which explic-
itly and continuously takes stock of the project status. This is executed by
(Box 5):

     1. MBWA (management by walking around)
     2. Formal and periodic schedule, cost, and performance reviews, some of
        which are attended by upper management and the customer
     3. Risk assessment
     4. Problem detection

When a problem is discovered, there is feedback to the directing function in
which corrective action is taken. Some texts consider the combination of
problem detection and corrective action as a separate project function known
as project control. Results of the directing and monitoring functions are pro-
vided to the customer in the feedback loop shown in the figure.
   All of the previously cited project functions are carried out in the context
of and support by a corporate environment (Box 6). As mentioned in Chapter
1, this support, or lack of it, can have a major influence on the success or
failure of the project. Some of the influencing factors include:
              2.3   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PROCESS AND MANAGEMENT ESSENTIALS    41

  1. The supervisor (boss) of the project manager
  2. The support departments (e.g., finance/accounting, contracts, and hu-
     man resources)
  3. The matrixed functional managers (if resources are to be obtained in a
     matrix situation)
  4. Facilities to be provided by the corporate entity, ranging from office
     space to computers to special test equipment
  5. Project management/management information system (MIS) tools and
     systems
  6. Training that might (or might not) be provided in both technical and
     management disciplines

Figure 2.1 also shows the project management team leader triumvirate (PM,
CSE, and PC) at the top of the chart as managing the essential key functions
of planning, organizing, directing, and monitoring.


2.3 SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PROCESS AND
MANAGEMENT ESSENTIALS

An overview of the essentials of the systems engineering process and its
management is provided in Figure 2.2. As with the project management chart
of Figure 2.1, the process is initiated by the customer/user with statements
of needs, goals, objectives, and requirements. These feed the development of
the project plan (as depicted as well in Figure 2.1) and, from a systems
engineering perspective, the elements of mission engineering and require-
ments analysis and allocation. These feed into the element of functional anal-
ysis and allocation, which forms the basis for the design/synthesis of the
system architecture. Iterations between the synthesis and analysis elements,
and the implicit high-level trade-offs that are required, lead to the definition
of a preferred system architecture. Confirming the validity of this architecture
also requires both a life-cycle costing and an analysis of the risks associated
with this architecture. At this point, the systems engineering team, with the
interaction of the project manager, has developed what is believed to be a
cost-effective architectural design for the system (Box 1).
   We note that many of these elements are shown as being supported by
other system considerations (Box 4). These considerations are at a top level
that is appropriate to architectural, in distinction to subsystem, design. They
represent a first-order examination of system factors that include such ele-
ments as:

    1. Technical performance measurement (TPM)
    2. Evaluation criteria
42
        Customer/user
     needs/goals/objectives

                             Mission engineering
         Requirements
                                 Requirements            Functional             Architecture        Preferred system
                               analysis/allocation    analysis/allocation     design/synthesis        architecture
                                                                                                                                      1    Architecture
         Project plan                                                                                                                         design
                                                                                   System        Life cycle       Risk
                                                                                   analysis       costing        analysis
     5   Project                                                            (For architecture design)
         control
                                                                       4       Other system/subsystem considerations
     • Schedule
     • Cost                         Applies to all elements             • Technical performance • Integration
     • Performance                                                          measurement (TPM) • Test and evaluation
                                                                        • Evaluation criteria   • Configuration management
                                                                        • ILS                   • Specialty engineering
                                                                        • RMA                   • Quality assurance
                                         (For subsystem design)         • P3I                   • Training
                        Specifications                                  • Schedules             • Interfaces



                                    Subsystem
     2    Subsystem                    design
            design                                    Analysis and    Subsystem      Subsystem       Subsystem        Test and
                                    • Hardware
                                                        trade-offs      builds       integration        test          evaluation      3
                                    • Software                                                                                              System
                                    • Human                                                                                               construction
                                               Iteration                                                             Cost-effective
                                                                                                                    physical system

                                              Figure 2.2. Overview of systems engineering process and management.
               2.3   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PROCESS AND MANAGEMENT ESSENTIALS     43

   3. Integrated logistics support (ILS)
   4. Reliability-maintainability-availability (RMA)
   5. Preplanned product improvement (P3I)
   6. Schedules
   7. Integration
   8. Test and evaluation
   9. Configuration management
  10. Specialty engineering (e.g., safety or security)
  11. Quality assurance
  12. Training
  13. Interface control and compatibility, and others

A more complete articulation of these other system/subsystem considerations
is provided in Chapter 8. They are extremely important because they complete
the (approximately) thirty elements that comprise systems engineering and its
management.
    When a cost-effective system architecture has been defined, the next step
is to enter the process of subsystem design (Box 2). This set of activities goes
into the levels of detail necessary to both design and build the system. Thus,
we see a generic process of design defined at two distinct levels, namely, (1)
architectural design, and (2) subsystem design.
    One might draw an analogy, in this regard, between this process and how
an A&E (architect and engineering) firm might design and construct a large
building or an airport. The architect part of the firm first develops an overall
architecture of the ‘‘system’’ in question. Only after a satisfactory architecture
has been designed is it possible to engineer all the details of the architecture
and then, in fact, build the system. This two-step approach is mirrored in the
systems engineering process shown in Figure 2.2. In addition, the architectural
design is usually performed at a ‘‘functional’’ level, whereas the subsystem
design is executed at the specific hardware/software/human engineering
level. This distinction is an important part of the systems engineering process.
In general, functional design describes ‘‘what’’ is to be done in some detail
at the top level of a system, with secondary consideration to ‘‘how’’ it is to
be done. Subsystem design accepts what is to be done as a given, and fleshes
out the ‘‘how’’ details by selecting specific hardware, software, and human
engineering components. More will be said about this subject in Chapter 8,
with examples that will help clarify these concepts.
    The architecture design allows for a more complete definition of the system
in the form of a specification. Actually, specifications can be written at several
levels, but it is necessary for a specification to be written in order to begin
the process of subsystem design. At times, a top-level specification is provided
as a derivative of the system requirements and is an input to the mission
engineering and requirements analysis and allocation activities that begin the
overall systems engineering process.
44      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


   As suggested before, subsystem design (Box 2) involves the detailed se-
lection of components embodied in hardware, software, and human parts of
the system. These design alternatives are analyzed, and traded off, in order
to select the best mix of components that will cost-effectively carry out the
prescribed system functions. Iteration between analysis and design (synthesis)
at the subsystem level parallels the iterative analysis and design/synthesis
activities that are an integral part of architectural design. As an example, if
‘‘information storage’’ is a functional element in the top-level architectural
design, at the subsystem design one must choose between the various ways
in which information storage might be accomplished, to include tape storage
versus conventional disk storage versus CD-ROM storage. These different
implementations have different cost and performance attributes that have to
be balanced while satisfying the requirements and specifications for the
system.
   When the subsystem design has been completed, the team is ready to begin
the formal building of the system. System ‘‘builds’’ is used here as a generic
name for such formal construction, although other names such as ‘‘configu-
ration items’’ are used extensively. Each build must be tested to assure that
it meets the requirements and specifications, and combinations of builds are
tested as an upward process of integration occurs. Progressive integration of
components, configuration items (CIs), and builds all require testing in order
to verify the performance of the system. As the top levels of the system are
constructed, we enter a top-level ‘‘test and evaluation’’ activity that can have
a rather formal structure in various implementations of systems engineering.
In principle, many cycles of ‘‘integration and test’’ must be carried out as the
system is constructed until a ‘‘final’’ set of ‘‘test and evaluation’’ activities
confirm that the system satisfies development and operational requirements.
Here again, these notions are revisited in Part III of this book. Finally, a cost-
effective physical system is constructed (Box 3) that meets all the stated
requirements of the system.
   A project control function (Box 5) is executed throughout the process in
order to assure that overall schedule, cost, and performance profiles are ap-
propriate. This control function is embedded in the project directing and mon-
itoring functions shown in Figure 2.1. The Chief Systems Engineer (CSE) is
the key player in the overall systems engineering process described in Figure
2.2. The Project Manager, in conjunction with the CSE and the Project Con-
troller, assures that the project control function is properly executed.
   This overview of the systems engineering process and its management
shows a sequence of three essential steps:


     1. Architecture design
     2. Subsystem design
     3. System construction
                                          2.4   SYSTEM ACQUISITION ESSENTIALS   45

These, in turn, are facilitated and augmented by (1) other system/subsystem
considerations, and (2) project control.
   It therefore can be observed that the preceding five steps constitute an
overview of the systems engineering process and how it is managed. However,
certain elements of systems engineering and the life-cycle phases of a system
have not as yet been covered. These include system production, installation,
operations and maintenance, and system operation and modification in the
field. These additional elements are dealt with explicitly in Chapter 8, and
are considered to be part of the thirty key elements of engineering and fielding
a real-world system. The rationale for these additional elements is further
reinforced by the following section, which deals with the nature of the sys-
tems acquisition process and some of the issues that are embedded in such a
process.

2.4   SYSTEM ACQUISITION ESSENTIALS

The matter of project management and systems engineering can also be ap-
proached from the perspective of the customer interested in acquiring a sys-
tem. Such a customer needs to do a considerable amount of planning in order
to do so, even if another party is to actually carry out most of the project and
the systems engineering that is part of the project. A typical example might
be a government agency, such as the Department of Transportation (DOT) or
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), that wishes to
procure systems that will be responsive to its needs and requirements. In the
case of the DOT, through its subordinate Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), it may need to acquire a new radar as part of its air traffic control
charter. NASA, as an example, may need to procure a new or upgraded sat-
ellite that will carry out a portion of its ‘‘mission to planet earth’’ initiative.
In both cases, a typical plan calls for following a systems acquisition process
set forth by the government, with a major role to be executed by a large
systems contractor.
   Most government agencies with needs such as those just described have
evolved an acquisition process that has been institutionalized. This provides
for clear communications and understandings both within the agency as well
as between the agency and other groups such as systems engineering con-
tractors. A generic acquisition process usually consists of phases such as those
defined in Exhibit 2.1. These phases are normally sequential in time.

  Exhibit 2.1: Typical System Acquisition Phases

      Phase Name                       Phase Activities or Purposes
  Prephase 0:             Define mission need
                          Validate need
                          Assure that new system is required to fulfill need
46      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


     Phase 0:              Identify alternative concepts
       Concept             Evaluate feasibility of alternative concepts
       Definition          Determine most promising concepts
     Phase 1:              Design alternative feasible systems
       Concept             Demonstrate critical processes
       Validation          Demonstrate critical technologies
                           Build and test early prototypes
     Phase 2:              Finalize preferred system design
       Engineering         Build system
       Development         Test and evaluate system
     Phase 3:              Produce system
       Production and      Install system
       Deployment          Establish system logistics support
     Phase 4:              Operate and maintain system in field
       Operations and      Monitor performance of system
       Support             Modify and improve system as necessary

   The Department of Defense (DoD) presents its acquisition phases as the
‘‘DoD 5000 Acquisition Model’’ [2.1]. This model shows four sequential
phases, namely:

     1. Concept and technology development
     2. Systems development and demonstration
     3. Production and deployment
     4. Operations and support

Technology opportunities and user needs feed into these phases, as necessary
and appropriate. Mission needs are articulated concurrently with the concept
and technology development phase. An interim operational capability (IOC)
is achieved during part of the production and deployment phase. In a parallel
manner, a final operational capability (FOC) is present when entering the
operations and support phase.
   The DoD Defense Acquisition System, as it is called, employs a set of
policies and principles that may be examined in the following five categories
[2.2]:

     1. Achievement of interoperability
     2. Rapid and effective transition from science and technology to products
     3. Rapid and effective transition from acquisition to deployment and
        fielding
     4. Integrated and effective operational support
     5. Effective management
                                           2.4   SYSTEM ACQUISITION ESSENTIALS        47

Interoperability, especially between the various services, but also including
with our allies, has been a key issue within the DoD for many years. With
more rapid deployments and joint forces, these matters are of special and
continuing importance. The two transition issues cited above indicate the de-
termination of the DoD to assure technology transfer as well as the com-
pression of schedules that have otherwise been unacceptable. The last
above-cited item emphasizes the need for providing support in an integrated
fashion. Integration cannot be properly achieved without interoperability. Fi-
nally, effective management is critical to satisfying needs in the other four
category areas. Managing within an organization as large as the DoD is a
major challenge that must be addressed on a continuing basis.
   Other topics that are highlighted as parts of the above five areas include:


   1. Time-phased requirements and communications with users
   2. Use of commercial products, services, and technologies
   3. Performance-based acquisition
   4. Evolutionary acquisition
   5. Integrated test and evaluation
   6. Competition
   7. Departmental commitment to production
   8. Total systems approach
   9. Logistics transformation
  10. Tailoring
  11. Cost and affordability
  12. Program stability
  13. Simulation-based acquisition
  14. Innovation, continuous improvement, and lessons learned
  15. Streamlined organizations and a professional workforce


A key paragraph under item (8) above, in terms of its relevance to this text,
is [2.2]:


  Acquisition programs shall be managed to optimize total system performance
  and minimize total ownership costs by addressing both the equipment and the
  human part of the total system equation, through application of systems engi-
  neering. Program managers shall give full consideration to all aspects of system
  support, including logistics planning; manpower, personnel and training; human,
  environmental, safety, occupational health, accessability, survivability, and se-
  curity factors; and spectrum management and the operational electromagnetic
  environment.
48      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


2.4.1    Specific Focus for Systems Acquisition Agent
Given the phases outlined in Exhibit 2.1, the acquisition agent for the cus-
tomer or user of a system must focus on certain activities in order to assure
that the acquisition process is as effective as possible. The following areas of
focus are suggested, with emphasis that depends on the particular phase that
is being approached:

     1. Restatement of needs/goals/objectives (of that phase)
     2. Reiteration of requirements
     3. Preparation of tasks statements, statements of work (SOWs), and work
        breakdown structures (WBSs)
     4. Key schedule milestones
     5. Budget limitations and constraints
     6. Project reviews

   At each and every phase depicted in Exhibit 2.1, it is necessary for the
acquisition agent to restate the needs, goals, and objectives of the customer
or user. These may change from phase to phase, but are required to provide
new guidance to a project and systems engineering team. The requirements
for each phase will almost certainly change throughout the acquisition pro-
cess, so it is necessary to state explicitly what the requirements are for the
forthcoming phase. Such requirements are work requirements as contrasted
to system requirements, which may remain relatively unchanged. As sug-
gested in Chapter 1, requirements become an important point of departure for
a systems engineering contractor, for example, to design and develop the
system. Similarly, each new phase carries with it a new statement of work
and associated WBS that must be conveyed in writing to the system designer.
With respect to schedule, the customer usually defines when it is that the
system must ultimately be fielded and how that impacts the schedule of the
phase under consideration. It therefore falls on the acquisition agent to estab-
lish key schedule milestones. Relative to budget matters, monies are allocated
to the execution of each phase and these allocations become constraints within
which a project team must perform.
   The issue of project reviews is often considered as an integral part of the
acquisition process. At least four reviews have become more or less standard,
namely

     1. The system requirements review(s) (SRR)
     2. The system design review (SDR)
     3. The preliminary design review (PDR)
     4. The critical design review (CDR)
                                                  2.5   SELECTED STANDARDS   49

with the following general practice:

  • Various SRRs are carried out during concept definition and validation.
  • The SDR is executed during concept validation.
  • Both the PDR and CDR are implemented during the engineering devel-
      opment phase.

It is also standard procedure that a formal review and approval is required to
move from one phase to the next phase in the sequence. In addition, it is
expected that an interim operational capability (IOC) is achieved at some
point in the production phase and a final operational capability (FOC) is
confirmed before entering the formal operations phase. Changes to the system
in the form of engineering change proposals (ECPs) are considered during
this operations phase. Additional guidance relative to these matters is provided
in the next section in which certain standards for system acquisition are
explored.



2.5     SELECTED STANDARDS

Standards that may be applied in the project management or systems engi-
neering arenas provide guidance to the Project Manager or the Chief Systems
Engineer. Various domain-specific fields (e.g., computers, communications)
provide detailed standards that also suggest to manufacturers of hardware and
software how they may be able to assure compatibility with each others’
equipment. For example, producers of software must select the operating sys-
tem with which their software will be compatible. In this section, we deal
only with standards that are operative at the level of the overall project man-
agement and systems engineering activities because domain-specific standards
would fill many volumes of text.


2.5.1    Military-Standard-499A
An engineering standard was produced in 1974 that has supported and guided
the systems engineering process and its management [2.3]. This ‘‘engineering
management’’ standard served as a touchstone for systems engineering, es-
pecially for systems developed for the military. The standard was ‘‘developed
to assist government and contractor personnel in defining the system engi-
neering effort in support of defense acquisition programs.’’ Exhibit 2.2 lists
the (two-digit) table of contents of this standard.
50      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


     Exhibit 2.2: Table of Contents of Mil-Std-499A (Two-Digit)
      1. SCOPE
         1.1 Purpose
         1.2 Application
         1.3 Implementation
         1.4 Tailoring
      2. REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
      3. DEFINITIONS
         3.1 Engineering Management
         3.2 Technical Program Planning and Control
         3.3 System Engineering Process
         3.4 Engineering Specialty Integration
         3.5 Technical Performance Measurement
      4. GENERAL CRITERIA
      5. DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
         5.1 System Engineering Management Plan (SEMP)
         5.2 Review of Contractor’s Engineering Management
      6. NOTES
         6.1 Relationship of Technical Program Planning to Cost and Schedule
             Planning
         6.2 Relationship of Technical Performance Measurement (TPM) to
             Cost and Schedule Performance Measurement
         6.3 Relationship of Integrated Logistics Support (ILS) to System
             Engineering
         6.4 Minimum Documentation
         6.5 Data
     10. APPENDIX A
         10.1 Technical Program Planning and Control
         10.2 System Engineering Process

We note from the preceding that this standard defined systems engineering
management in terms of three essential elements:

     1. Technical program planning and control
     2. The system engineering process
     3. Engineering specialties and their integration

   Although there is much to discuss with respect to the details of this stan-
dard and its relationship to project and systems engineering management, we
bypass such discussion because Mil-Std-499A was superseded by Mil-Std-
499B, which is described in some detail in what follows. The latter has in-
fluenced both project and systems engineering management for many years.
Further, although it was developed in the context of military systems, it is
applicable in terms of its basic structure to the design and development of
                                                  2.5   SELECTED STANDARDS   51

both civil and commercial systems. Specific emphasis is placed on tailoring
the provisions of this standard to the unique requirements of a particular
program or project.


2.5.2   Mil-Std-499B (Draft)
This draft standard, entitled ‘‘systems engineering,’’ defines systems engi-
neering as ‘‘an interdisciplinary approach to evolve and verify an integrated
and optimally balanced set of product and process designs that satisfy user
needs and provide information for management decision making’’ [2.4]. Sys-
tems engineering management is cited as ‘‘the management, including the
planning and control for successful, timely completion of the design, devel-
opment, and test and evaluation tasks required in the execution of the systems
engineering process.’’ The (three-digit) table of contents of this significant
standard is provided in Exhibit 2.3 to display its broad and far-reaching scope.

  Exhibit 2.3: Table of Contents of Mil-Std-499B (Three-Digit)
  1. SCOPE
     1.1 Scope
     1.2 Application Guidance
     1.3 Order of Preference
  2. REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
  3. DEFINITIONS
     3.1 Acronyms
     3.2 Fundamental Definitions
         3.2.1 System
         3.2.2 Life Cycle
         3.2.3 User
         3.2.4 Primary Functions
         3.2.5 Systems Engineering
         3.2.6 Systems Engineering Process
         3.2.7 Item
         3.2.8 Requirements
         3.2.9 Design
         3.2.10 Output Views
     3.3 Supplementary Definitions
         3.3.1 Baseline
         3.3.2 Configuration Item (CI)
         3.3.3 Environment
         3.3.4 Evolutionary Acquisition
         3.3.5 Exit Criteria
         3.3.6 Function
         3.3.7 Life-Cycle Resources
         3.3.8 Measure of Effectiveness (MOE)
52      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


            3.3.9 Operational Effectiveness
            3.3.10 Operational Suitability
            3.3.11 Performance Parameter
            3.3.12 Preplanned Product Improvement
            3.3.13 Risk
            3.3.14 Specification
            3.3.15 Specification Tree
            3.3.16 Subsystem
            3.3.17 System Effectiveness
            3.3.18 System Element
            3.3.19 Systems Engineering Management
            3.3.20 Systems Engineering Master Schedule (SEMS)
            3.3.21 Systems Engineering Detailed Schedule (SEDS)
            3.3.22 Technical Effort
            3.3.23 Technical Objectives
            3.3.24 Technical Performance Measurement (TPM)
            3.3.25 Technical Performance Parameters (TPPs)
     4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
        4.1 Systems Engineering Scope
            4.1.1 Purpose
            4.1.2 Key Tasks
        4.2 Systems Engineering Output
            4.2.1 Decision Database
            4.2.2 Output Views
        4.3 Systems Engineering Input
        4.4 Systems Engineering Management
            4.4.1 Engineering Planning
            4.4.2 Engineering Control
            4.4.3 Systems Engineering Integration
        4.5 Systems Engineering Process Requirements
            4.5.1 Requirements Analysis
            4.5.2 Functional Analysis/Allocation
            4.5.3 Synthesis
            4.5.4 Systems Analysis and Control
     5. DETAILED REQUIREMENTS
        5.1 Technical Data
        5.2 Systems Engineering Planning
        5.3 Systems Engineering Management Plan (SEMP)
             5.3.1 Systems Engineering Process
             5.3.2 Systems Analysis and Control
             5.3.3 Technology Transition
             5.3.4 Technical Integration Teams
        5.4 Effectiveness Analysis
             5.4.1 Production Engineering Analysis
             5.4.2 Test/Verification Analysis
             5.4.3 Deployment/Installation Analysis
                                                2.5   SELECTED STANDARDS   53

          5.4.4 Operational Analyses
          5.4.5 Supportability Analyses
          5.4.6 Training Analysis
          5.4.7 Disposal Analysis
          5.4.8 Environmental Analysis
          5.4.9 Life-Cycle Cost Analysis
          5.4.10 Models
     5.5 Systems Engineering Detailed Schedule
     5.6 Technical Reviews
          5.6.1 Subsystem Reviews
          5.6.2 Functional Reviews
          5.6.3 Interim System Reviews
          5.6.4 Major Reviews
     5.7 Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
     5.8 Technical Integration Requirements
          5.8.1 Reliability and Maintainability
          5.8.2 Survivability
          5.8.3 Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Frequency
                  Management
          5.8.4 Human Systems Integration
          5.8.5 System Safety, Health Hazard, and Environmental Impact
          5.8.6 System Security
          5.8.7 Quality
          5.8.8 Production
          5.8.9 Integrated Logistics Support
          5.8.10 Test and Evaluation
     5.9 Other Development Requirements
          5.9.1 Nondevelopmental Items
          5.9.2 Use of Metric System
          5.9.3 Parts Control
          5.9.4 Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence
          5.9.5 Prototyping
     5.10 Review of Contractor’s Engineering Management
  6. NOTES
     6.1 Intended Use
     6.2 Tailoring Guidance
         6.2.1 Technical Review Considerations
     6.3 Data Requirements List and Cross Reference
     6.4 Subject Term (Key Word) Listing
     6.5 Changes from Previous Issue

  The essence of the systems engineering process, as far as this standard is
concerned, is describable in four parts:

  1. Requirements analysis
  2. Functional analysis/allocation
54      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


     3. Synthesis
     4. Systems analysis and control

These four elements are also shown in Figure 2.2, but they are placed in a
context that includes a variety of other elements. The standard, in effect, says
that ‘‘needs statements’’ are formulated as inputs to the system engineering
process (the preceding four elements) and a life-cycle-optimized set of prod-
ucts and processes is the resultant output.
   The life cycle of a system, as depicted before with respect to the system
acquisition process, is described in terms of ‘‘primary functions,’’ which are:


     1. The development function
     2. The production function
     3. The test/verification function
     4. The deployment/installation function
     5. The operations function
     6. The support function
     7. The training function
     8. The disposal function

This standard also defines major reviews that should be carried out for a
system. In addition to the four reviews cited earlier (i.e., SRR, SDR, PDR,
and CDR), the following additional reviews are called for:

     1. Software specification review
     2. Functional system audit
     3. Functional configuration audit
     4. Physical configuration audit

   Mil-Std-499B deals with planning, in the main, through the formulation of
a system engineering management plan (SEMP). The SEMP is a key respon-
sibility of the Chief Systems Engineer (CSE), whereas the overall project plan
lies primarily in the hands of the Project Manager (PM). The two plans must
of course be consistent. The elements of the SEMP (para. 5.3 of Exhibit 2.3)
include the items listed in Exhibit 2.4.

     Exhibit 2.4: The Systems Engineering Management Plan
     (SEMP) Elements
     5.3.1 Systems Engineering Process
     5.3.2 Systems Analysis and Control
                                                   2.5   SELECTED STANDARDS   55

        5.3.2.1 Systems Analysis
        5.3.2.2 Technical Performance Measurement (TPM)
                • Parameters
                • Technical Parameter Planning Data
        5.3.2.3 Technical Reviews
                • Review Success Criteria
  5.3.3 Technology Transition
  5.3.4 Technical Integration Teams


We note the technical orientation of the SEMP, but also must acknowledge
the interaction between the SEMP and the project plan in such items as the
need for a master schedule, which would be part of both plans.
   There are many who view this and other standards, especially those drawn
up by the U.S. Department of Defense, as ‘‘overkill,’’ arguing that such stan-
dards add unnecessary tasks, reports, and formality, thereby increasing cost
without much, if any, benefit. This argument is countered, at least in part, in
the foreword of Mil-Std-499B, which states explicitly that ‘‘this standard must
be appropriately tailored to ensure that only cost-effective requirements are
cited in defense solicitations and contracts.’’ This is sufficient guidance to
provide flexibility in the real-world acceptance and implementation of the
details of this important standard. In short, the provisions of this standard, or
derivatives thereof, should not be blindly applied; they have to be modified
appropriately to suit the particular and peculiar characteristics of the system
that is being acquired and the circumstances surrounding the procurement of
that system. Such circumstances include schedule, cost, interfaces with other
systems, use of commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) components and nondevel-
opmental items (NDIs), and other relevant factors.



2.5.3   IEEE P1220
This is a ‘‘Standard for Systems Engineering,’’ as developed by the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) [2.5]. Examining this standard
in detail shows that it has its roots in Military-Standard-499B, as described
in the previous section. The four steps in the systems engineering process
have been expanded to five, which are:


  1. Requirements analysis
  2. Functional analysis
  3. Synthesis
  4. Systems analysis
  5. Verification and validation
56      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


The latter two new terms are defined as:

     Verification. A process of determining whether or not the products of a
     given phase of development fulfill the requirements established during the
     previous phase
     Validation. A process of evaluating a configuration item, subsystem, or
     system, to ensure compliance with system requirements

These two important activities will be revisited in Chapter 7 where the thirty
elements of systems engineering are presented.
   This standard [2.5] also has a short-form definition of systems engineering
as ‘‘an interdisciplinary collaborative approach to derive, evolve, and verify
a lifecycle balanced system solution which meets customer and public ac-
ceptability.’’ This definition may be compared with those provided in the
previous chapter.
   Another interesting feature of this standard is its definition of a system
architecture, namely, the ‘‘composite of the functional, physical, and foun-
dation architectures, which form the basis for establishing a system design.’’
In this text, as we formulate concepts and procedures for architecting a sys-
tem, shown later in Chapter 9, the reader will likely wish to reexamine this
standard’s notion of a system architecture.
   As suggested above, this standard does not represent a major departure in
principle from Mil-Std-499B. Further, it illustrates the fact that the IEEE has
moved into the systems engineering arena. Over the years, this will certainly
help in trying to assure that systems engineering takes its place among other
well-accepted engineering disciplines (electrical, mechanical, chemical, etc.).


2.5.4    EIA-632
This standard, with the title ‘‘Processes for Engineering a System,’’ has been
promulgated by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA) [2.6]. Although
an earlier version of this standard (1994) looked quite a lot like Mil-Std-
499B, the later version represented a considerable departure.
   Several important points can be made about this standard. First, it was
basically developed through the combined efforts of the EIA and the Inter-
national Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE). Second, it represents a
shift from systems engineering to the processes that are required in order to
engineer any type of system. This may be viewed as related to the notions of
business process reengineering, which holds that systems may be enhanced
by improving the processes that lead to the design and development of these
systems. Third, and most significant, is the overall structure of the standard.
This structure identifies thirteen processes that are critical to the engineering
of systems, with these processes cited under the five categories listed below:
                                                2.5   SELECTED STANDARDS   57

  A. Acquisition and Supply
   1. Supply process
   2. Acquisition process

  B. Technical Management
   3. Planning process
   4. Assessment process
   5. Control process

  C. System Design
   6. Requirements definition process
   7. Solution definition process

  D. Product Realization
   8. Implementation process
   9. Transition to use process

  E. Technical Evaluation
  10. Systems analysis process
  11. Requirements validation process
  12. System verification process
  13. End products validation process

Some thirty-three requirements are also related to the above thirteen pro-
cesses. This extremely interesting approach shows, among other things, that
there are many ways to look at the issue of the engineering of systems.


2.5.5   EIA/IS-731
This is another standard provided by the Electronic Industries Association
(EIA), focusing upon the Systems Engineering Capability Model (SECM)
[2.7]. The standard itself was the result of the joint efforts of the EIA,
INCOSE, and the Enterprise Process Improvement Collaboration (EPIC). Pre-
viously, the Systems Engineering Capability Maturity Model, developed at
the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie-Mellon University, had pro-
duced the first such model, based upon the structure of their software model.
This was called the SE-CMM. INCOSE then formulated their version of such
a model, namely, the Systems Engineering Capability Model (SECAM). The
SECM then became the consequence of harmonizing these two earlier models.
58      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


The standard itself is divided into two parts. One is the model itself, and the
other is the SECM appraisal method.
   Just as the original software capability maturity model addressed the matter
of how to assess and improve the capability of an organization to develop
and utilize all aspects of software, this standard had basically the same intent,
except as applied to the field of systems engineering. An important step in
developing all of these models is to decide upon a series of focus areas, or
process areas, which has been done in all cases.
   Additional information regarding capability maturity models will be pro-
vided in later chapters, in particular 10 and 12. Further variations on these
themes, including integrated models, will also be described.

2.5.6    Systems Acquisition Directives and Instructions
The acquirer of large-scale systems, such as those procured by the U.S. De-
partment of Defense (DoD), has an extremely complex job. Some of this was
alluded to before with respect to the essentials of the systems acquisition
process. The DoD has issued a directive and instruction that provide policies
and procedures for the acquisition of military systems [2.8, 2.9, 2.10], stating
that ‘‘acquisition programs shall be managed with the goal to optimize total
system performance and reduce the cost of ownership.’’ These standards are
rather voluminous but are required reading for those organizations that are
producing systems for the DoD.

2.5.7    Key Software Development Standards
Software development is a critical aspect of building and fielding a system
and, as such, is dealt with separately and in detail in Chapter 10. A very well-
known standard for software development was the Department of Defense
standard 2167A (DoD-Std-2167A) [2.11], which had the title ‘‘Defense Sys-
tem Software Standard.’’ The key phases of software development defined in
that standard were

     1. System requirements analysis/design
     2. Software requirements analysis
     3. Preliminary design
     4. Detailed design
     5. Coding and computer software unit (CSU) testing
     6. Computer software component (CSC) integration and testing
     7. Computer software configuration item (CSCI) testing
     8. System integration and testing

From this list, we note the emphasis on requirements, design, integration, and
testing. These are indeed extremely critical elements because we know from
                                                   2.5   SELECTED STANDARDS    59

experience that untested software is a formula for failure. The standard ap-
pears to support the industry conventional wisdom for software of ‘‘build a
little, test a little.’’ Because most of our modern large- and small-scale systems
today contain large amounts of software, how it should be developed is a
mandatory part of the training of today’s Project Manager and Chief Systems
Engineer. Of special interest is the manner in which the software development
process ‘‘fits into’’ both project management and systems engineering. Again,
this subject is discussed at length in Chapter 10.
    The long-standing 2167A standard was replaced by Military Standard 498
in December 1994 [2.12]. The two-digit detailed requirements in this standard
were articulated in the following subject areas:

  • Project planning and oversight
  • Establishing a software development environment
  • System requirements analysis
  • System design
  • Software requirements analysis
  • Software design
  • Software implementation and unit testing
  • Unit integration and testing
  • CSCI qualification testing
  • CSCI/HWCI (hardware configuration item) integration and testing
  • System qualification testing
  • Preparing for software use
  • Preparing for software transition
  • Software configuration management
  • Software product evaluation
  • Software quality assurance
  • Corrective action
  • Joint technical and management reviews
  • Other activities

Two additional standards that relate specifically to software are:

  1. IEEE/EIA 12207—Software Life Cycle Processes
  2. IEEE P1471—Recommended Practice for Architectural Description

The second of these is of particular interest as it relates to the architecting of
software and systems. The latter is a central theme of this book, with a full
chapter 9 devoted to providing a prescriptive method for the process of ar-
60      OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


chitecting a system. Additional information regarding these two standards is
provided in Chapter 10.

2.5.8    International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has been producing
standards that apply in the international arena. Companies that wish to do
business outside the United States are paying a great deal of attention to such
standards, recognizing that compliance is essential in order to compete
successfully.
   An example is the ISO 9000 Series, which deals with various aspects of
product and service quality, as follows:

     1. ISO 9000: Provides basic definitions and concepts; explains how to
        select and use other standards in the series
     2. ISO 9001: Deals with external quality assurance (QA) situations; en-
        sures conformance with requirements during design, development, pro-
        duction, installation, and service
     3. ISO 9002: Deals with external QA situations; used when production
        and installation conformance are of concern
     4. ISO 9003: Deals with external QA situations; focuses on ensuring con-
        formance in final test and inspection
     5. ISO 9004: Deals with internal QA situations; provides guidelines on
        technical, administrative, and human factors affecting the quality of
        products and services

Firms interested in providing products and services in Europe and countries
outside the United States should pay special attention to what the ISO has
established and is working on with respect to international standards in sys-
tems and software engineering and their related topics.

2.5.9    Other Standards
Other standards have been promulgated that can be used by the project man-
agement team in order to assist in the design and development of systems.
Military Standard 499B, discussed earlier, contains a list of such standards,
which is reproduced here as Table 2.1. From this, we see a variety of military
standards and handbooks on important subjects such as configuration man-
agement, environmental analysis, human factors, manufacturing, quality, re-
liability, safety, security, and value engineering. For those who may be
operating as acquisition agents for systems, standards are available that can
provide inputs to such activities as reviews and audits, work breakdown struc-
tures (WBSs), statements of work (SOWs), technical data packages, and
specifications.
                                                    2.5   SELECTED STANDARDS       61

TABLE 2.1      Standards Cited in Mid-Std-499B
Technical Discipline                          Reference
Configuration management             Mil-Std-480 / 481 / 482 / 483
Climatic Information                 Mil-Std-210
Computer-aided acquisition and
  logistics support                  Mil-Hdbk-59
Corrosion prevention and control     Mil-Std-1250                    Mil-Std-1568
Environmental analysis               Mil-Std-810
Electromagnetic compatibility        Mil-Std-1541                    Mil-Std-461
                                     Mil-E-6051                      Mil-Hdbk-237
Electrostatic discharge              Mil-Std-1686
Human factors                        Mil-Std-1472                    Mil-Std-1794
                                     Mil-Std-1800                    Mil-Hdbk-763
                                     Mil-H-46855
Maintainability                      Mil-Std-470                     Mil-Std-1843
                                     Mil-Std-2184                    Mil-Hdbk-791
Manufacturing                        Mil-Std-1528
Nondestructive inspection            Mil-Hdbk-728                    Mil-Hdbk-731
                                     Mil-I-600
Parts control                        Mil-Std-965
Producibility                        Mil-Hdbk-727
Quality                              Mil-Q-9858                      Mil-I-45208
Reliability / durability             Mil-Std-785                     Mil-Std-1530
                                     Mil-Std-1543                    Mil-Std-1783
                                     Mil-Std-1796                    Mil-Std-1798
                                     Mil-Std-2164
System safety engineering            Mil-Std-882
Software                             DoD-Std-2167                    Mil-Std-1803
                                     Mil-Std-1815
                                     Mil-Hdbk-287
Software quality assurance           DoD-Std-2168                    DoD-Hdbk-286
Supportability                       Mil-Std-1388
Survivability                        Mil-Std-1799                    Mil-Std-2069
                                     DoD-Std-2169                    Mil-Hdbk-336
System security                      Mil-Std-1785
Telecommunications                   Mil-Std-188-xxx
Testability                          Mil-Std-2165
Thermal design / analysis            Mil-Hdbk-251
Transportability                     Mil-Std-1367                    Mil-Hdbk-157
Value engineering                    Mil-Std-1771
Technical reviews and audits         Mil-Std-1521
Work breakdown structure             Mil-Std-881
Statement of work preparation        Mil-Hdbk-245
Technical data package               Mil-T-3100
Specification practices              Mil-Std-490                     Mil-S-83490
62    OVERVIEW OF ESSENTIALS


   Increasingly, standards are being produced in various domain-specific areas
(e.g., telecommunications, information security) under the sponsorship of pro-
fessional organizations such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics En-
gineers (IEEE) and the Electronic Industries Association (EIA). The IEEE
has been very active in systems and software engineering and has produced
a variety of standards in both subjects. Work in the latter area has been
especially significant (see Chapter 10), but systems engineering has not been
neglected (see Chapter 12). Other government agencies outside the Depart-
ment of Defense have also been concerned with the formulation of various
kinds of standards. In this category, the National Institute for Standards and
Technology (NIST) has a specific charter to develop standards. The respon-
sible Project Manager and Chief Systems Engineer will assure themselves
that standards that might be applicable to their project are examined in detail
to make sure that, where necessary, the project is in conformance with such
standards.



QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

2.1 Identify three activities not shown explicitly in Figure 2.1. Where might
    they fit into this chart?
2.2 Identify three activities not shown explicitly in Figure 2.2. Where might
    they fit into this chart?
2.3 Investigate the history of a real system and its acquisition. From this
    history, put the phases shown in Exhibit 2.1 on a time line.
2.4 Identify six items that are typically part of the agenda for a critical
    design review (CDR).
2.5 Compare Military Standards 499A and 499B with respect to
    a. three similarities
    b. three differences
2.6 Discuss the similarities and differences between a project plan and a
    systems engineering management plan (SEMP).
2.7 Compare the approaches to defining systems engineering as represented
    in this chapter with those of the previous chapter. Which do you find
    most/least satisfying? Explain.
2.8 Based upon the material in this and the previous chapter, write your
    own three to five sentence definition of:
    a. project management
    b. systems engineering
                                                                REFERENCES      63

REFERENCES

2.1  Department of Defense (DoD) Website: web2.deskbook.osd.mil
2.2  Department of Defense Directive Number 5000.1 (2000). Washington, DC: Un-
     der Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics), U.S. Depart-
     ment of Defense, Pentagon, October 23.
2.3 Engineering Management, Military Standard 499A (1974). Washington, DC: U.S.
     Department of Defense.
2.4 Systems Engineering, Military Standard 499B (1971). Washington, DC: U.S. De-
     partment of Defense.
2.5 Standard for Systems Engineering, IEEE P1200 (1994). New York: Institute of
     Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
2.6 Processes for Engineering a System, EIA Standard 632 (1998). Washington, DC:
     Electronic Industries Association, Engineering Department; available also
     through Global Engineering—see http: / / global.ins.com
2.7 Systems Engineering Capability Model (SECM), EIA / IS-731 (1998). Washing-
     ton, DC: Electronic Industries Association, Engineering Department.
2.8 Defense Acquisition, DoD Directive 5000.1 (1991). Washington, DC: U.S. De-
     partment of Defense. See also The Defense Acquisition System, DoD Directive
     5000.1 (2000). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense
2.9 Defense Acquisition Program Procedures, DoD Instruction 5000.2 (1991). Wash-
     ington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense. See also Operation of the Defense
     Acquisition System, DoD Instruction 5000.2, (2000). Washington, DC: U.S. De-
     partment of Defense
2.10 Defense Acquisition Management Documentation and Reports, DoD Manual
     5000-R (1991). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense. See also Man-
     datory Procedures for Major Defense Acquisition Program (MDAPS) and Major
     Automated Information System (MAIS) Acquisition Programs, (2000). Washing-
     ton, DC: U.S. Department of Defense
2.11 Defense System Software Development, DoD-Std-2167A (1988). Washington,
     DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
2.12 Software Development and Documentation, Mil-Std-498 (1994). Washington,
     DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
PART II
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
                3
THE PROJECT PLAN




3.1   INTRODUCTION

The project plan (PP) is at the core of the planning function for the project
team, and is a blueprint for the work to be performed as well as the proposal
to the customer, if such a proposal is indeed required. The project plan has
seven essential elements:

  1. Needs, goals, objectives, and requirements
  2. Task statements, statement of work, and work breakdown structure
  3. Technical approach
  4. Schedule
  5. Organization, staffing, and task responsibility matrix
  6. Budget
  7. Risk analysis

All project plans should contain these essential elements, although it is rec-
ommended that a project plan should be as short and concise as possible. If
the customer requires great elaboration of the preceding elements, then a
‘‘short form,’’ or summary of the project plan, should be prepared that will
serve the project team on a day-to-day basis. The project plan should be used
in at least the following ways:

  1. To allow all project team members, including newly assigned personnel,
     to understand the essentials of the project

                                                                           67
68      THE PROJECT PLAN


     2. To provide corporate management, to whom the project reports, with
        an understanding of the project
     3. To convey to the customer the project essentials, as perceived and for-
        mulated by the project team
     4. To form the basis for a proposal to the customer, where such a proposal
        is called for

Updates to the formal project plan should be considered on a quarterly basis.
Changes to various portions of the plan, such as the schedule, should be
carried out when necessary.
   In this chapter, use is made of various items in the literature, and in re-
quests for proposal, to show examples of the type of material that has been
used on real projects and programs. In addition, an example of a project with
eight tasks is postulated so as to convey how the various elements of the
project plan are interrelated.


3.2     NEEDS, GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND REQUIREMENTS

This first part of a project plan can be divided into two parts, the first con-
sisting of needs, goals, and objectives, and the second constituting the re-
quirements. Requirements are of two types, project and system, with the latter
being quite voluminous and usually a part of the formal contract between the
customer and the system developer. Statements of needs, goals, and objectives
can be rather variable.
   The statements of needs, goals, objectives, and requirements come from
the customer and acquirer of the system to be developed. The outside system
developer, therefore, is a recipient (rather than an original source) of these
statements. For at least this reason, they are much condensed or simply reit-
erated or incorporated by reference when a Project Manager deals with them
in a project plan.

3.2.1    Needs
The Department of Defense (DoD) acquisition directive [3.1] states that three
key aspects of acquisition management are

     1. Translating operational needs into stable affordable programs
     2. Acquiring quality products
     3. Organizing for efficiency and effectiveness

With respect to the first key, the statement is made [3.1] that ‘‘prudent man-
agement also dictates that new acquisition programs only be initiated after
fully examining alternative ways of satisfying identified military needs.’’ Mis-
                            3.2   NEEDS, GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND REQUIREMENTS   69

sion needs are also ‘‘identified as a direct result of continuing assessments of
current and projected capabilities in the context of changing military threats
and national defense policy.’’ Examples of possible military needs that are
identified in the acquisition directive are

  1. The need to impede the advance of large armored formations 200 kil-
     ometers beyond the front lines, or
  2. The need to neutralize advances in submarine quieting made by poten-
     tial adversaries

Whereas the DoD may have rather formal procedures and processes for iden-
tifying and documenting needs, other government agencies and potential com-
mercial clients are likely to be much less structured in their approach to this
issue.
   The bottom line, with respect to needs, is simply that the system acquirer
must make sure that a true need exists for the system in question. If that is
not the case, the project may ultimately not be able to be sustained. The
reader who wishes to explore this matter in greater depth may obtain the DoD
directive cited or examine the commentary of J. Davidson Frame, who spends
an entire chapter in his book [3.2] on the matter of ‘‘making certain that a
project is based on a clear need.’’
   In terms of the program plan, the statement of need can be abstracted from
the needs as represented by the acquisition agent. It can be very short and
expressed in only a few lines. This is in distinction to the needs analysis and
confirmation carried out by the acquirer of the system. As indicated by the
earlier DoD directive, such a needs analysis and assessment can be rather
formal and substantial, following the guidelines of the DOD.

3.2.2   Goals and Objectives
Goals and objectives are usually short declarative statements, with goals being
rather broad and objectives under each goal being somewhat more specific,
although some treat goals and objectives in reverse order. They are often
established for programs in distinction to projects. For this reason, they may
not be a firm requirement as part of a project plan. An illustrative set of goals
and objectives is shown in Table 3.1, in relation to an overall defense science
and technology strategy.
   Another example of a stated objective, as articulated by the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG) in a real-world project procurement [3.3], is

  1. To support marine safety and law enforcement activities
  2. To record activities and resource usage
  3. To analyze mission performance
  4. To monitor program effectiveness and resource usage
70     THE PROJECT PLAN




TABLE 3.1 Illustrative Defense Science and Technology Goals
and Objectives
Goal A: Deterrence
Objectives
A.1 Deploy weapon systems that can locate, identify, track, and target strategically
    relocatable targets.
A.2 Attain worldwide, all-weather force projection capability to conduct limited
    warfare operations (including special operations forces and low intensity
    conflict) without the requirement for main operating bases, including a rapid
    deployment force that is logistically independent for 30 days.
A.3 Eliminate the threat posed by nuclear ballistic missiles of all ranges, through
    non-nuclear methods and in compliance with all existing treaties.
Goal B: Superiority
Objectives
B.1 Attain affordable, on-demand launch and orbit transfer capabilities for space
    deployed assets with robust, survivable command and control links.
B.2 Regain the substantial antisubmarine warfare advantages the United States
    enjoyed until recent years.
B.3 Achieve worldwide, instantaneous, secure, survivable, and robust command,
    control, communications, and intelligence (C3I) capabilities within 20 years to
    include: (a) on-demand surveillance of selected geographical areas; (b) real-time
    information transfer to command and control authority; and (c) responsive,
    secure communications from decision makers for operational implementation.
B.4 Field weapon systems and platforms that deny enemy targeting and allow
    penetration of enemy defenses by taking full advantage of signature
    management and electronic warfare.
B.5 Deploy enhanced, affordable close combat and air defense systems to
    overmatch threat systems.
B.6 Field affordable ‘‘brilliant weapons’’ that can autonomously acquire, classify,
    track, and destroy a broad spectrum of targets (hard fixed, hard mobile,
    communications nodes, etc.).
Goal C: Affordability
Objectives
C.1 Reduce operations and support resource requirements by 50% without impairing
    combat capability.
C.2 Reduce manpower requirements for a given military capability by 10% or more
    by 2010.
C.3 Ensure the affordability, producibility, and availability of future weapons
    systems.
                             3.2   NEEDS, GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND REQUIREMENTS   71

  5. To exchange information between USCG offices, other government
     agencies at the federal and state level, natural resource trustees, and
     certain private organizations
  6. To fulfill specific statutory requirements

We note that these statements of objectives are concise and to the point and
refer specifically to the project work that is being procured by the customer,
in this case from the Coast Guard.


3.2.3   Requirements
Requirements, as alluded to in earlier chapters, is a dense and important
subject. At the outset, we make a distinction between two types:

  1. Requirements to be fulfilled by the project (project requirements)
  2. Requirements of the ‘‘system’’ that the project addresses (system
     requirements)

Project requirements refer to all the work to be performed on the project.
System requirements are applicable to the ‘‘system’’ that is being addressed
by the project. To illustrate the difference, let us assume that the project is to
design, but not build, a new ‘‘subway’’ system for a city. That is, the project
is limited to design and does not include the construction of any hardware or
software for the system. The project requirements, therefore, are limited to
all the work to be accomplished as part of the design process only. This may
include estimating the cost of the subway system for each year during its
entire life cycle. However, the cost of the project itself, limited as it is to the
design phase, is clearly a subset of that total cost, and is likely to be only a
minor part of the life-cycle cost of the subway system. The system require-
ments describe, at increasing levels of detail, the full characteristics of the
subway system, from initial design to operations and support.
   Thus, the Project Manager (PM) must keep in mind this distinction when
constructing the project plan. The latter should be focused on the project
requirements, with the system requirements carried forth, as defined by the
customer, in an ancillary document to be used in engineering the system in
question. Further discussions of the ways in which the system requirements
are to be handled are found in Chapter 8.
   Project requirements are often stated by a customer in the main body of a
request for proposal in both broad and specific terms, whereas system re-
quirements can be described in several volumes of reports. An example of
the former is shown in Exhibit 3.1, drawn from a requirements statement in
a U.S. Coast Guard procurement dealing with mission-oriented information
systems engineering (MOISE) support.
72      THE PROJECT PLAN


     Exhibit 3.1: U.S. Coast Guard Statement of Requirements [3.3]
     The contractor shall furnish the equipment, software, maintenance, ser-
     vices, and support required under the terms and conditions of the contract.
     The major requirements are
     1. Technical, functional, data, programmatic, and strategic integration of
        information systems
     2. System and software development services within the information sys-
        tem (IS) life-cycle phases defined by the U.S. Coast Guard
     3. Management, quality assurance, and requirements metrics
     4. Cross-cutting requirements that span more than one life-cycle phase
     5. Limited quantities of hardware, services, and software to support system
        development and to transition the systems to an operating and mainte-
        nance provider
     6. Establishment, staffing, operation, and management of the System De-
        velopment Center (SDC) to support the development of ISs by a phased
        approach using task orders
     7. Contractor management and personnel requirements, and security
        procedures

   In a similar vein, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), in its pro-
curement of technical assistance contract (TAC) services related to its ad-
vanced automation program (AAP) and automation program (ANA), has
documented the summary of requirements set forth in Exhibit 3.2.

     Exhibit 3.2: FAA Summary of Requirements for TAC Support [3.4]
     a. The contractor shall support FAA’s Advanced Automation Program
        (AAP) and Automation Program (ANA) in an engineering and technical
        assistance capacity. The contractor’s efforts shall complement, support,
        and extend those of the AAP/ANA engineering staff, which are re-
        sponsible for the overall technical and contractual direction of the AAP
        and ANA programs.
     b. The contractor shall provide assistance to the FAA in critical technical
        areas at key periods throughout the contract. A broad range of talents
        are required to address complex technical problems, for varying periods
        of time and under stringent response constraints. The contractor’s skills
        must have particular depth, breadth, and quality as follows: [as listed].
     c. The contractor’s experience and performance must be at a level to pro-
        vide the highest quality of analytic expertise and, if required, to support
        the provision of expert testimony.

  The two exhibits focus on project requirements. The Project Manager will
normally accept these customer statements of requirements for integration into
                            3.2   NEEDS, GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND REQUIREMENTS   73

the project plan. Also note that they are relatively brief and differ from system
requirements when a large-scale system is being procured. If provided, the
system requirements can be cited by reference in the program plan rather than
being an integral part of the plan itself.
   Other project requirements may also be stated in a procurement that may
be regarded as subordinate requirements. These may be described as mini-
mum position qualification requirements, or estimated staffing requirements,
or even special contract requirements. For example, Exhibit 3.3 shows the
estimated staffing requirements associated with a NASA procurement [3.5].

  Exhibit 3.3: Illustrative Estimated Staffing Requirements

            Labor Category                            Estimated Hours Required
  1. Program Manager                                               100
  2. Senior Instructor                                             300
  3. Instructor                                                    120
  4. Senior Facilitator                                            100
  5. Facilitator                                                    80
  6. Course Development Specialist                                 240
  7. Administrative/Clerical                                       120
                             Total                                1060

   These subordinate requirements impact the staffing of the project and, of
course, the estimated cost of the project, as described in later parts of the
project plan. A list of other special contract requirements from this same
NASA procurement follows:

   1. Printing and duplicating
   2. Task ordering procedure
   3. Key personnel and facilities
   4. Observance of legal holidays
   5. Protection of information
   6. Level of effort (cost)
   7. Property administration
   8. Contractor’s program manager
   9. Special provisions regarding travel costs
  10. Minimum position qualifications
  11. Identification of contractor employees
  12. Advance understanding: nonfee-bearing costs
  13. General-purpose equipment
  14. Contractor-acquired property: submission of vouchers
74      THE PROJECT PLAN


These subordinate requirements should only be cited by reference and not be
included in detail in the requirements portion of the project plan. An alter-
native is to list them as an appendix to the plan.


3.3 TASK STATEMENTS, STATEMENT OF WORK (SOW), AND WORK
BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE (WBS)

Task statements are usually part of the statement of work (SOW) provided
by the customer. Thus, these are used interchangeably in this text. These
statements are normally accepted and reiterated by the system developer in
the program plan. Changing the customer’s SOW is not a recommended action
because it may turn into a point of contention later in the process. Work
breakdown structures (WBSs) may or may not be part of the customer’s
definition of the work to be performed. When it is provided by the customer,
it almost always should be accepted and used by the system developer.
   An example of task statements (sometimes also called task areas) is shown
in Exhibit 3.4, drawn from a real-world request for proposal from the FAA
to industry. Under each of the task areas listed in the Exhibit, there is a short
description of the tasks to be performed. Thus, task statements are embedded
in the defined task areas.

     Exhibit 3.4: Example of Task Statements and Task Areas from the
     FAA [3.4]
     Task Area 1
       Requirements Analysis and Documentation
       Computer–Human Interface (CHI)
       Specification Development
       Reliability, Maintainability, and Availability (RMA) and Fault Tolerance
          (FT)
       System Modeling and Performance Analysis
       Local Communication Network (LCN)
       Algorithm Evaluation
       Interfaces
       Standards
       Technical Planning and Risk Analysis
       Software Engineering
     Task Area 2
       Advanced Automation System (AAS) Contractor Requirements Trace-
          ability and Compliance Tracking
       Technical Support
       Engineering Change Proposals (ECPs)
       Testing and Evaluation
       Implementation
   3.3   TASK STATEMENTS, STATEMENT OF WORK, AND WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE     75

    Division/Branch Segment
    Integrated Logistics Management
  Task Area 3
    Terminal Automation Program Management
    En Route/Traffic Management Systems Automation Program Manage-
       ment
    Maintenance Automation Program Management
  Task Area 4
    Planned Product Improvement Design Evaluation
    Planned Product Improvement Operational Test and Evaluation (OT&E)
    Operational Test and Evaluation
    Site Implementation
    Manufacturing and Production
    Factory Testing
  Task Area 5
    Configuration Management
    Financial Management
    Data Management
    Office Automation
    Program Control

   A similar example for work to be performed under a solicitation from the
Defense Systems Management College (DSMC) is provided in Exhibit 3.5.
Here, again, task areas are defined and elaborated to constitute task
statements.

  Exhibit 3.5: Example of Task Areas from the Defense Systems
  Management College [3.6]
  Task Area 1: Curriculum Design and Development
  Task Area 2: Program Management Course Curriculum Material Update
  Task Area 3: Development of Automated DSMC Management and Teach-
               ing Tools
  Task Area 4: Statistical Analysis Support
  Task Area 5: Executive Education Curriculum Development
  Task Area 6: Quality of Instruction
  Task Area 7: Define Teaching Quality
  Task Area 8: Establishment of Baselines
  Task Area 9: Reports

   A third illustration of how a statement of work may be formulated is found
in Exhibit 3.6. This exhibit lists seven ‘‘detailed items of work’’ with a break-
down of more specific work under the first item.
76      THE PROJECT PLAN


     Exhibit 3.6: Example of Items of Work from the Department of
     Transportation’s Volpe Center [3.7]
     1. Project Planning and Scheduling Support
        1.1 User and System Requirements Analysis
        1.2 Technical Meeting Support
        1.3 Technology Assessment
        1.4 Project Management Support
        1.5 Transition Planning
        1.6 Environmental Impact Assessments
        1.7 Cost Benefit Analyses
     2. System Design and Development Support
     3. Software Development Support
     4. Systems Integration Support
     5. Testing and Evaluation Support
     6. Training Support
     7. Documentation and Configuration Management Support

   The work breakdown structure (WBS) is also a formal exposition of work
to be performed and is illustrated in Figure 3.1 for a NASA program known
as Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS) Phase B
[3.8]. The most convenient form of a WBS is one in which there is a one-
to-one correspondence between the tasks and the WBS. In such a case, the
WBS elements can be considered a further breakdown of the major tasks into
subtasks and each WBS element is identical to a subtask. If a WBS has not
been defined by the customer, it is a recommended procedure to have the
WBS correspond directly to the tasks and subtasks. However, if the customer
provides a WBS, it may be necessary to develop a ‘‘cross-walk’’ between the
task statements and the WBS. Such a cross-walk is shown symbolically in
Table 3.2. This usually creates a layer of complexity that is not really desirable
but may be necessary in order to satisfy the instructions of the customer.


3.4    TECHNICAL APPROACH

The technical approach is a task-by-task description of how the project team
intends to execute the tasks and subtasks in the SOW, from a technical per-
spective. The technical approach is usually formulated, in detail, in response
to a request for proposal (RFP) if such an RFP is a precursor to the project.
In such a situation, this technical approach can be abstracted and used in this
section of the project plan.
   The technical approach changes, of course, for each project and the domain
of the project. The approach to building a management information system
(MIS) is different from the approach to constructing a subway or transit sys-
tem. However, some questions that might be common to all projects, with
                                                                                          EosDIS
                                                                                                 1000




              Study                                          Architecture                                        Operations                              Life-cycle
            management                                       formulation                                                                                 estimate
                      1100                                           1300                                               1500                                     1700
     1110 Technical management              1310 Review external architectures                   1510 Develop operations scenarios             1710 Initial cost estimate
          activities                        1320 Refine EosDIS system architecture               1520 Develop staffing plan                    1720 Final cost estimate
     1120 Resource management               1330 Develop EosDIS Unique Level III                 1530 Develop training plan
     1130 Financial management                   architecture                                    1540 Develop test plan
     1140 Configuration control             1340 Develop strawman Level IV                       1550 Develop maintenance plan
     1150 Document control                       architecture                                    1560 Document
     1160 Document preparation              1350 Define interfaces at Level III                  1570 Review
                                                 and IV
                                            1360 Perform trade studies
                                            1370 Document
                                            1380 Review

                                  Requirements                                            EosDIS
                                  analysis and                                            unique                                        Special
                                    definition                                            design                                        studies
                                           1200                                                  1400                                          1600
                       1210 Refine Level I and Level II                     1410 Refine operations concept                       1610 Perform study tasks
                            requirements                                    1420 Develop element level design spec.              1620 Document
                       1220 Develop Level III requirements                  1430 Develop component level design                  1630 Review
                       1230 Develop strawman Level IV                            specification
                            requirements                                    1440 Develop implementation plan
                       1240 Develop initial operations concept              1450 Perform reliability/maintainability/
                       1250 Perform trade studies                                availability analysis
                       1260 Document                                        1460 Perform trade studies
                       1270 Review                                          1470 Document
                                                                            1480 Review




77
                                                       Figure 3.1. EOSDIS Phase B work breakdown structure.
78      THE PROJECT PLAN


TABLE 3.2     Cross-Walk Between SOW and WBS
                                       Work Breakdown Structure
                       WBS 1.0     WBS 2.0     WBS 3.0     WBS 4.0    WBS 5.0
              Task 1       X          X                       X
Statement     Task 2                  X           X                       X
    of        Task 3                  X                       X
  Work        Task 4       X                      X           X
 (SOW)        Task 5       X          X                                   X
              Task 6                              X                       X




respect to the technical approach, are cited in Exhibit 3.7. These questions
assist the project team in addressing a wide variety of technical issues.


     Exhibit 3.7: Two Dozen Selected Questions for Technical Approach
      1. How do we plan to execute this task/subtask?
      2. How will we employ a systems approach and systems engineering
         process?
      3. What is special or unique about our approach?
      4. What technology do we plan to utilize or transition?
      5. Is this technology at or pushing the state of the art?
      6. How can we be most productive and efficient?
      7. What computer tools will we be using?
      8. How can we demonstrate that we will, as a minimum, satisfy all cus-
         tomer requirements?
      9. Do we plan to exceed requirements in certain areas?
     10. Are certain requirements vague, incorrect, or inconsistent?
     11. What special facilities will we need?
     12. What aspects of our previous work can be brought to bear?
     13. Do we plan to use any special models or simulations in order to assess
         system performance?
     14. How will we execute a coherent technical performance measurement
         program?
     15. What is our approach to system and subsystem testing?
     16. Do we have a unique knowledge base to support our approach?
     17. Can our independent research and development (IR&D) program re-
         sults be utilized for this project?
     18. What specialty engineering capabilities will we be using?
                                                            3.5   SCHEDULE   79

  19. How does our technical approach correlate with our Systems Engi-
      neering Management Plan (SEMP)?
  20. Do we plan to use special processes such as concurrent engineering,
      business process reengineering, or Total Quality Management (TQM)?
  21. How can we approach software development with the most up-to-date
      methods?
  22. What types of technical support will be needed from the rest of the
      company?
  23. How will we find the most cost-effective solution?
  24. How will we prove that we have the most cost-effective solution?

Question 19 of Exhibit 3.7 raises the issue of the relationship between the
Systems Engineering Management Plan and the technical approach. These
two documents are not the same, but certain elements of the SEMP, as a
minimum, should be addressed in the technical approach. These include the
systems engineering process, technical performance measurement, methods
of systems analysis, technology transitioning, and technical integration.




3.5   SCHEDULE

A schedule is an expression of the tasks and activities to be performed along
a time line. Two main methods of describing a schedule are in use today,
namely, (1) a Gantt Chart and (2) a program evaluation and review technique
(PERT) Chart. Figures 3.2 and 3.3 show examples of these types of schedules.
Both figures are constructed for a hypothetical project of eight principal tasks
that involve selecting commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) software for use by a
project team. Such software might be, for example, a project management
package or some other package (e.g., geographic information system, exec-
utive information system) that would be needed by a project team.
   Both figures map the tasks against a time line for the eight weeks of the
total project. The Gantt chart is quite straightforward and easy to read. Each
bar represents a single task. The PERT chart is somewhat more complex but
is also simple to grasp. Each circle represents an event—a specific point in
time at which a measurable activity is either started or completed. The lines
between the events are activities during which resources are expended to
achieve the designated end event. Further details regarding how a PERT chart
is developed are provided in Chapter 4. However, one major point is that the
PERT chart places in evidence the longest path through the network, which
is known as the critical path. By definition, all other paths are at most as
long as the critical path. Those parallel paths that are shorter have ‘‘slack’’
80    THE PROJECT PLAN



              1
                  Analyze project
 Task 1            requirements

                      2
                          Examine project
 Task 2                     environment

                      3
                           Define COTS
 Task 3                     alternatives

                                                4
 Task 4                                       Select
                                            alternative

                                                          5
 Task 5                                                   Purchase
                                                           software

                                                                          6
 Task 6                                                                    Install
                                                                          software

                                                                          7
                                                                                  Document
 Task 7                                                                       system operation

                                                                                                     8
 Task 8                                                                                                Train
                                                                                                     personnel

          0       1             2           3            4            5              6           7               8
                                                    Time, weeks
                            Figure 3.2. Example of project schedule.




in them. Slack represents an opportunity for moving some tasks or subtasks
forward or backward to utilize resources in more efficient ways.
   The schedule for a complex project can literally take up the space of an
entire wall. The schedule in the program plan should be an overview schedule,
emphasizing major tasks and milestones. Too much detail is not warranted in
an overview project plan. A full computer-generated schedule might be in-
cluded only as an appendix to the plan.
   The schedule must be ultimately consistent with the customer’s delivery
requirements. This applies to interim dates as well as the final project com-
pletion date. To the extent that the schedule drawn up by the project team
does not do this, it has to be continually reworked until all customer require-
ments with respect to the schedule are met. If this is not possible, then the
plan is not viable and there is an impasse that must be negotiated and resolved
before work can begin.
                                                      1
                                                   Project                                                                       7
                                                requirements                                                                  System
                                                  analyzed                                                                   operation
                                (3)                                                                                         documented

                                                                                                                                         (1)
                                                     3
                                                   COTS
                                (2)                                                                                   (0)
                                                alternatives                                                                                       8
     Start                                                           (1)
                                                  defined                                    (2)                                               Personnel
                                                                                                        (2)
                                                                                                                                                trained
                                (2)
                                                                (1)                                           6
                                                      2
                                                  Project                                                 Software
                                                environment                                               installed
                                                 examined
                                                                                                  (1)
                                                               (1)
                                                                           4              5
                                                                                  (1) Software
                                                                      Alternative
                                                                       selected       purchased
             ( ) = Expected time in weeks


      0                  1                  2        3                    4              5                    6                 7                 8
                                                                     Time, weeks
                                                  Figure 3.3. Example of a project PERT chart.




81
82        THE PROJECT PLAN


3.6 ORGANIZATION, STAFFING, AND TASK RESPONSIBILITY
MATRIX (TRM)

The project organization can be simply the organization chart (see Figure 1.2
in Chapter 1), supplemented by a short description of key roles and respon-
sibilities. Staffing refers to the next step of actually assigning categories of
personnel to the various project tasks. This results in a task responsibility
matrix (TRM), as illustrated in Table 3.3, based on the schedule in Figure
3.2. We note that person-week totals by task and by category of personnel
are easily derived from the assignment of personnel types to the tasks. As
indicated previously, if a WBS is part of the project, and the relationship
between the tasks and the WBS has been developed, then it is possible to
also develop a profile of which personnel are expected to execute the elements
of the WBS.
   It is considered optional for the project plan to contain the specific names
of the people that represent the various personnel categories. Clearly, this step
must ultimately be taken, but it does not necessarily have to be part of the
program plan document. In many ways, it is preferable to treat the assign-
ments by category rather than by the names of specific individuals.



3.7       BUDGET

From the previously developed information, and some additional cost data, it
is then possible to formulate a budget for the project. Such a project budget


TABLE 3.3        Task Responsibility Matrix (TRM)
                                  Personnel (Staff) Categories
                  A               B                    C                D
           Senior Software     Software           Documentation      Training
              Engineer         Engineer             Specialist       Specialist
           Number         Number         Number         Number          Total:
             of   Person-   of   Person-   of   Person-   of   Person- Person-
           People Weeks People Weeks People Weeks People Weeks Weeks
Task 1       1        3                                                           3
Task 2                        1           2                                       2
Task 3       1        2       1           2                                       4
Task 4       1        1       1           1                                       2
Task 5                        1           1                                       1
Task 6       1        1       1           1                                       2
Task 7       1        2       1           2         1            3   1        1   8
Task 8       1        1       1           1                          1        1   3
Totals:               10                 10                      3            2   25
                                                               3.7   BUDGET      83

is illustrated in Table 3.4, utilizing the same data from the task responsibility
matrix in Table 3.3. Cost items may also be broken down by week, as illus-
trated in Table 3.5. This facilitates cost tracking, as discussed in the next
chapter.
   From Table 3.4, a project budget is prepared by first examining the direct
labor costs. These costs are incurred as a result of project personnel working
on the various tasks of the project. As shown in the figure, and using the
person-week data provided in Table 3.3, we list the four categories of per-
sonnel together with their labor rates per week and the person-weeks that
each has been assigned. This yields the direct labor cost by category. The
summation of these costs ($19,700) is the total direct labor cost for this
project. This is augmented by adding the fringe benefits, in this case 30% of
the direct labor costs. The resultant sum, shown as subtotal 1, is $25,610. The
next item of cost to consider is the overhead cost. This example shows the
overhead rate to be 70%, or a total of $17,927. Some companies embed fringe
benefits into the overhead percentage and therefore there is no reason to
consider fringe and overhead separately. In this model, they are constructed
as separate rates.
   Subtotal 2 shows the direct costs with fringe and overhead costs added,
yielding an amount of $43,537. At this point in the process, other direct costs
(ODCs) are considered. These may be a variety of cost items, such as ma-
terials, consultants, subcontractors, and services provided from outside the
company. In Table 3.4, two such costs are listed: the cost of purchasing soft-

TABLE 3.4      Project Budget
Direct Labor                     Rate / Week       Person-Weeks               Cost
Senior software engineer           $1,000               10              $10,000
Software engineer                     700               10                7,000
Documentation specialist              500                3                1,500
Training specialist                   600                2                1,200
                                                        25              $19,700
Fringe benefits @ 30%                                                   $ 5,910
                                                             Subtotal 1 $25,610
Overhead @ 70%                                                          $17,927
                                                             Subtotal 2 $43,537
Other direct costs
  1. Software                                                            $ 8,000
  2. Training materials                                                    1,000
                                                             Subtotal 3 $52,537
General & administrative @ 15%                                             7,881
                                                              Total cost $60,418
                                               Fee (profit) @ 10%          6,042
                                               Cost and fee (Price)      $66,460
84
     TABLE 3.5      Cost Budget by Week
                               Week 1            Week 2           Week 3           Week 4           Week 5           Week 6           Week 7           Week 8
     Labor Category          P-wk   Cost    P-wk     Cost    P-wk     Cost    P-wk     Cost    P-wk     Cost    P-wk     Cost    P-wk     Cost    P-wk     Cost
     Senior software eng’r    1     1,000    2       2,000    2       2,000    1       1,000    1       1,000    1       1,000    1       1,000    1       1,000
     Software eng’r           —      —       2       1,400    2       1,400    1         700    2       1,400    1         700    1         700    1         700
     Document specialist      —      —       —        —       —        —       —        —       1         500    1         500    1         500    —        —
     Training specialist      —      —       —        —       —        —       —        —       —        —       —        —       1         600    1         600
                              1     1,000    4       3,400    4       3,400    2       1,700    4       2,900    3       2,200    4       2,800    3       2,300
     Fringe @ 30%                     300            1,020            1,020              510              870              660              840              690
       Subtotal 1                   1,300            4,420            4,420            2,210            3,770            2,860            3,640            2,990
     Overhead @ 70%                   910            3,094            3,094            1,547            2,639            2,002            2,548            2,093
      Subtotal 2                    2,210            7,514            7,514            3,757            6,409            4,862            6,188            5,083
     ODCs: Software                  —                —                —                —               8,000             —                —                —
      train. mat’ls                  —                —                —                —               1,000             —                —                —
      Subtotal 3                    2,210            7,514            7,514            3,757           15,409            4,862            6,188            5,083
     G&A @ 15%                        331            1,127            1,127              564            2,311              730              928              763
       Total cost                   2,541            8,641            8,641            4,321           17,720            5,592            7,116            5,846
                                                                                         Total cost $60,418
     Cumulative cost                2,541           11,182           19,823           24,144           41,864           47,456           54,572           60,418
                                                                 3.7   BUDGET    85

ware, estimated at $8,000, and the cost of training materials, shown as $1,000.
Adding these costs to subtotal 2 leads to subtotal 3, which is $52,537.
   Next, general and administrative (G&A) costs are added. These are rep-
resented as a percentage, in this case 15%, or a total of $7,881. Summing
this cost with subtotal 3 yields the total estimated project cost of $60,418.
This, of course, is a critical number. If all went according to plan, the overall
project, for this example, would cost $60,418. Finally, a fee is added, in this
case 10%. This is the profit that the company wishes to make by engaging
in this effort. Adding the fee to the cost results in the overall estimated price
of $66,460.
   In order to calculate the bottom-line cost without ODCs, and do it quickly,
we introduce the notion of a ‘‘cost factor.’’ This cost factor (CF) is a multiplier
on the direct labor costs that results in the total project cost, without any
ODCs. The cost factor is

                      CF ⫽ (1 ⫹ FR)(1 ⫹ OH)(1 ⫹ GA)

where FR ⫽ fringe rate (expressed as a decimal)
     OH ⫽ overhead rate
     GA ⫽ general and administrative rate

Thus, in the example shown in Table 3.4, the cost factor is

       CF ⫽ (1 ⫹ 0.3)(1 ⫹ 0.7)(1 ⫹ 0.15) ⫽ (1.3)(1.7)(1.15) ⫽ 2.54

This means that every dollar of cost at the direct labor line translates into
$2.54 in bottom-line cost, exclusive of ODCs.
   In a similar vein, the ‘‘price factor’’ (PF) translates direct costs into bottom-
line prices and is

                              PF ⫽ (CF)(1 ⫹ PR)

where PR is the profit (fee), expressed as a decimal. By using numbers from
Table 3.4, the price factor is

                  PF ⫽ (2.54)(1 ⫹ 0.1) ⫽ (2.54)(1.1) ⫽ 2.79

Again, both the cost and price factor are rapid ways to estimate bottom-line
costs and profits, but without other direct costs.
   We note that some elements of cost are estimated by the Project Manager
(more likely in concert with the Project Controller and the Chief Systems
Engineer). These include the original person-week estimates, and the software
and training materials costs (ODCs). All other costs are derivable from the
fringe, overhead, and G&A costs. These three costs are characteristic of the
corporate structure and generally are not under the control of the Project
86      THE PROJECT PLAN


Manager. In a similar vein, company management will likely select the fee
(profit) that is to be bid, obtaining an input from the Project Manager.
   The PM must control the project to the overall cost number and not the
total bid price. The fee is not to be spent by the PM unless some agreement
has been reached within the company’s decision-making apparatus to do so
for this project. There are even times when the PM is not aware of the fee
(profit) that has been proposed.
   The customer may also wish to see the estimated project costs broken down
by time period (as in Table 3.5) or by project task. The task breakdown of
cost would be derived from using the task person-week data shown in Table
3.3.
   An inviolate notion in project as well as corporate management is that cost
and price are not the same. If it turns out that the project is successful, then
the enterprise would receive the bid price from the customer, which then
would be booked as company sales or revenues. The difference between pro-
ject revenue and project cost is, of course, the profit that is made by the
project. If that number is positive and equal to or greater than the bid profit,
then all is well. If it is negative, then the PM may be in some difficulty, with
a lot of explaining to do.



3.8    RISK ANALYSIS

In order to avoid future difficulty, the project triumvirate, as a minimum,
should carry out a risk analysis, the results of which become part of the
project plan. This analysis attempts to focus on trouble spots before the fact,
developing risk-mitigation strategies prior to actual work on project tasks.
   In general, it can be said that there are four kinds of risk that the Project
Manager would be concerned with. These are

     1. Technical performance risk
     2. Schedule risk
     3. Cost risk
     4. Administrative risk

   Technical performance risk (TPR) flows from items of design, develop-
ment, and construction of the system that result in not meeting the technical
requirements set forth by the customer. These might include situations where
one is pushing the state of the art, not meeting system response times, ex-
periencing harsh environments that degrade system performance and numer-
ous others. TPR is by far the most complex area and must be examined by
domain-knowledge personnel to identify what tasks appear to be most difficult
from the perspective of system performance. Background information regard-
ing the details of how to carry out a technical performance risk analysis can
                                                            3.8   RISK ANALYSIS   87

be found in the literature [3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12]. It is also considered again
in Chapter 8. Technical performance risk is also a primary factor in creating
schedule and cost risks.
   Schedule risk, of course, involves not meeting project milestones. If inter-
nal milestones are not met, then the PM may be able to get back on schedule
by the deployment of additional resources and other means. Customer deliv-
ery and review dates are viewed as much more serious, especially the delivery
of parts of the system and special reports to the customer. If penalty clauses
for late delivery are operative, schedule risks in this regard are considered
critical. Analysis of the project PERT chart is usually a good place to start
in assessing schedule risk. Activities and events on the critical path should
be examined in considerable detail because this path is the controlling factor
in the overall project schedule. Long lead-time items that come from other
vendors should be subject to scrutiny and it may be necessary to have backup
plans for such items. Cases in which the customer has to provide an input or
pieces of hardware and software should also be examined in detail, the ques-
tion being: What happens if the customer fails to provide these inputs when
required? Schedule risks, although numerous, are subject to analysis and can,
in a great many cases, be accurately predicted.
   Cost risk is often experienced when not enough effort has gone into the
early cost-estimation processes. ‘‘Guesses’’ are accepted as hard data and not
discovered as incorrect until the situation is investigated. For example, in the
sample costing shown in Table 3.4, software costs are estimated to be $8,000,
representing about 13% of the total project cost. If these costs turn out to be
$12,000 instead of the original $8,000 estimate, an increase in cost of $4,600
would be experienced (the $4,000 increase plus the G&A of $600). There is
very little room in this illustrative project to make up a cost increase of this
amount.
   Risk to the project may be present when the overhead and G&A rates in
the enterprise are not stable. If these rates increase in the middle of the project,
they will impact total cost even though the PM may be doing everything
correctly. In such a case, the PM is somewhat ‘‘off the hook,’’ but may still
be asked to try to make up for these cost increases. This type of risk may be
called an administrative risk, but its effect results in a cost risk. Another type
of administrative cost risk involves the failure of the company to hire on time
for the project, or the unexpected loss of a key person to another firm halfway
through the project.
   As suggested by this discussion, there are often many risks to the success
of the project and it behooves the project triumvirate to attempt to anticipate
these risks and establish risk-mitigation strategies. Therefore, the risk-analysis
portion of the project plan would consider the previous four types of risks in
terms of the following questions:


  1. What specific risks are present for this project?
  2. What are the likelihoods of experiencing these risks?
88      THE PROJECT PLAN


     3. What are the likely consequences if indeed the risks occur?
     4. Based on 2 and 3, how can we prioritize the risks that have been
        identified?
     5. What can we do to minimize the likelihood of occurrence as well as
        the consequences of high-priority risks?

The answers to the last question represent the risk-mitigation strategies.



3.9    THE PROPOSAL

The Project Manager is often faced with the matter of writing a proposal in
order to have the opportunity to be awarded the project contract. In such a
case, it is recommended that the previous project plan be constructed, in rough
form, as a precursor to the actual proposal-writing process. Thus, the project
plan becomes a critical input to proposal preparation because it deals with
most of the crucial issues.
   The format of the proposal is very often structured as follows:

     1. A technical proposal
     2. A cost proposal
     3. A management proposal

It is very important that the proposal manager, often but not always the pro-
posed Project Manager, follow the request-for-proposal (RFP) instructions to
the letter in order to score as high as possible. The bases for evaluating
proposals are usually described in a portion of the RFP citing the ‘‘evaluation
criteria.’’
    Writing a high-quality and winning proposal is a complex matter that is
likely to be a part of the careers of the Project Manager, the Chief Systems
Engineer, and the Project Controller. Some of the rules and vagaries of de-
veloping high-quality proposals are examined in greater detail in Chapter 6.



QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

3.1 Identify additional elements you might add to a project plan. Explain
    why.
3.2 Compare the work breakdown structure (WBS) in Figure 3.1 with the
    project structure in Figure 1.2. Should the latter be more or less the
    same as the former? Why?
                                                                  REFERENCES      89

3.3 Cite three features of the PERT approach that are not present for Gantt
    charting. When and why are these features significant?
3.4 Calculate the fully loaded hourly rate for each of the four labor cate-
    gories in Table 3.4. What is the average hourly rate for the entire
    project?
3.5 From Table 3.5, enter the person-week and cost expenditures for each
    week into a spreadsheet and print out graphs showing:
    a. expenditures each week
    b. cumulative expenditures by week
3.6 Identify and discuss three areas of significant cost risk. What might be
    done to mitigate these risks? Do the same for schedule risk.
3.7 Cite and discuss three suggestions for writing an outstanding proposal.
3.8 Define a numerical approach to evaluating a proposal. Show by example
    how a given proposal might receive a set of evaluation scores. See if
    you are able to compare your approach to that taken by a government
    agency on a real procurement.




REFERENCES

3.1   Defense Acquisition, DoD Directive 5000.1 (1991). Washington, DC: U.S. De-
      partment of Defense.
3.2   Frame, J. D. (1987). Managing Projects in Organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-
      Bass.
3.3   Mission Oriented Information System Engineering (MOISE) Solicitation (1992).
      Washington, DC: U.S. Coast Guard, Department of Transportation.
3.4   Technical Assistance (TAC) Request for Information (RFI) (1993). Washington,
      DC: Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Transportation.
3.5   Management Training and Organizational Development Support Services Solic-
      itation (1993). Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
      Headquarters Acquisition Division.
3.6   Curriculum Support for the Defense Systems Management College (Solicitation).
      Fort Belvoir, VA: DSMC: Directorate of Contracting, Contracting Division.
3.7   Specialized Quick Response Support, Solicitation DTRS-57-93-R-00047 (1993).
      Washington, DC: Department of Transportation.
3.8   Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS), Phase B Study
      Statement of Work (SOW) (1988). Greenbelt, MD: NASA, Goddard Space Flight
      Center.
3.9   Eisner, H. (1988). Computer-Aided Systems Engineering. Englewood, NJ: Pren-
      tice Hall, Chapter 13.
90    THE PROJECT PLAN


3.10 Marciniak, J. J., and D. J. Reifer (1990). Software Acquisition Management, New
     York: John Wiley, Chapter 6.
3.11 Charette, R. N. (1989). Software Engineering Risk Analysis and Management.
     New York: McGraw-Hill.
3.12 Henley, E. J., and H. Kumamoto (1981). Reliability Engineering and Risk As-
     sessment. Englewood, NJ: Prentice Hall.
                4
SCHEDULE, COST, AND
SITUATION ANALYSIS




4.1   INTRODUCTION

This chapter deals mainly with the monitoring function of the Project Man-
ager (PM), the Chief Systems Engineer (CSE), and the Project Controller
(PC), as previously depicted in Figure 2.1 in Chapter 2. A key element of
this function is to continuously review and analyze the status of the project
with respect to schedule, cost, and performance. In this chapter, we focus on
schedule and cost, leaving technical performance to the systems engineering
chapters. As shown in Figure 2.1, once a problem area is discovered, feedback
is provided to the project team, which, together with the project triumvirate,
will analyze the issue in greater depth in order to define and implement cor-
rective action.
   Monitoring of a project is often used synonymously with the word ‘‘con-
trol.’’ Indeed, the PM does in fact attempt to control the project, steering it
through times of difficulty by continuous measurement and corrective action.
Thus, in several other texts on the subject of project management [4.1, 4.2,
4.3], the reader will find many of the topics of this chapter listed under the
heading of project control.
   The last subject of this chapter deals with the topic of ‘‘situation analysis.’’
This is a procedure, defined herein, to be used both in real-world situations
as well as in teaching the subject of project management. In effect, it is a
minicase study of a situation that might arise on any given project. An ex-
ample of how this procedure may be applied completes this chapter.




                                                                                91
92      SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


4.2    SCHEDULE ANALYSIS AND MONITORING

Matters relating to the project schedule were presented briefly in the last
chapter in discussing the project plan. Every project plan must have a sched-
ule, although such a schedule is generally an overview of the project, with a
detailed schedule included perhaps as an appendix. In this chapter, we ex-
amine some of the ‘‘nuts and bolts’’ of project scheduling, exploring partic-
ularly the characteristics of the PERT (program evaluation and review
technique) approach.
   PERT is the preferred scheduling procedure for a large-scale system in
which there are large numbers of events and activities that must be identified
and tracked. This technique, in distinction to Gantt charting, deals explicitly
with dependencies between the various tasks and activities. A PERT network
is normally devised by starting with known ‘‘end’’ events and milestones and
asking the question: What activities need to be accomplished before this event
or milestone can be achieved? By working backward in this fashion, even-
tually an entire network is developed.
   The PERT procedure leads to a network of serial and parallel paths of
events and activities. A simple example of such a network was shown in
Figure 3.3 of the previous chapter. We use this example here to examine the
network itself as well as some of the data that are required to formulate the
network.
   We first work backward from the end event (number 8) and redraw the
network so as to identify the critical path, which is the longest path through
the network. This path, by definition, has no slack in it, and slippage along
this path leads to slippage in the project end date unless corrections are made.
The redrawn network, based on Figure 3.3, is shown here as Figure 4.1. We
note that the critical path now consists of the following sequence of events:

                           Critical Path ⫽ 0–1–4–5–7–8

In this example, this path is 8 weeks long. We note that slack exists in various
subpaths:

     Subpath 0–3–4 has slack of 1 week
     Subpath 0–2–4 has slack of 1 week
     Subpath 4–7 has slack of 1 week
     Subpath 5–6–7 has slack of 1 week

Using the convention that, where slack exists, all activities start as late as
possible, we have the network in Figure 4.1. If we used the convention that,
where slack exists, all activities will start as early as possible, the network
would change by events 2, 3, and 6, all moved to 1 week earlier. If we
compare Figures 3.3 and 4.1, we see that in the latter, event 6 has been moved
                                    1
                                 Project                                                                   7
                              requirements                                                              System
                                analyzed                                                               operation
                 TE = 3                                                                               documented
                                                                           TE = 2
                                             TE = 1
                                                                                                                    TE = 1
                                       TE = 1                                   TE = 2
                                   3                                  5
                                 COTS                 4
                 TE = 2                          Alternative       Software
      0                       alternatives                        purchased                                   (0)           8
     Start                      defined           selected
                                                                                                                        Personnel
                                                           TE = 1
                                                                                                                         trained
                 TE = 2                                                                      TE = 1
                                             TE = 1
                                    2                                                                      6
                                Project                                                                Software
                              environment                                                              installed
                               examined




      0      1            2        3                 4                 5                 6                7                  8
                                                Time, weeks
                                  Figure 4.1 Illustrative project PERT chart.




93
94      SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


1 week to the right to reflect the convention adopted here of starting an
activity as late as possible.
   The basis for determining the critical path is the set of time estimates for
the various activities in that path. These time estimates are designated as
‘‘expected times’’ (TE) for these activities. In the original PERT procedure
[4.4], expected times were derived from three time estimates for each
activity:

     • An optimistic time (TO)
     • A most likely time (TL)
     • A pessimistic time (TP)

Under an assumption of a ‘‘beta’’ distribution for the activity times, the ex-
pected time for each activity is calculated as

                                       TO ⫹ 4TL ⫹ TP
                               TE ⫽
                                             6

Some projects still use this three-time estimate procedure in order to develop
expected value estimates, but many do not. In the latter case, the expected
times are estimated directly and associated with the various project activities,
as in Figure 4.1. It is also possible, given the three time estimates, to calculate
the activity time variance utilizing the following relationship:

                                 ␴ ⫽
                                   2
                                        冋
                                     TP ⫺ TO
                                        6        册2




The basic purpose of this calculation is to sum the variances along the critical
path and thereby calculate the variance associated with the project end date.
This estimate (or its square root, the standard deviation) yields some measure
of the ‘‘uncertainty’’ of this end date. For those who wish to explore uncer-
tainty in this fashion, the preceding relationships are available. For the re-
mainder of this discussion, we limit our scope to the use of expected values
of activity times.
   Analysis of a schedule, given the basic network and the time estimates,
starts with the determination of the critical path. If we are able to shorten the
critical path, then it may be possible to reduce the overall project schedule.
Thus, each activity along the critical path should be reexamined to see if
reductions in time are feasible. This is especially important if, in a project
that has missed earlier milestones on the critical path, the Project Manager is
looking for ways to get back on schedule. If the reduction of activity times
along the critical path leads to another path becoming critical, then the same
procedure would apply to the new critical path.
   The next aspect of analyzing a network schedule is the examination of
slack along noncritical subpaths so as to establish where the slack is to be
                                     4.2   SCHEDULE ANALYSIS AND MONITORING   95

placed. The Project Manager has that prerogative, and the decisions in this
regard are deceptively complex. The PM can use the conventions discussed
before or can attempt to base a decision on personnel availability. If personnel
are available, the PM may elect to start as soon as possible; if they are not
available, the PM will likely start an activity when they become available as
long as the critical path is not increased. Thus, there is an interaction between
the schedule network and the availability of personnel. In general, the PM
tries to ‘‘level’’ the resources across a project as long as such leveling does
not force an increase in the overall critical path.
    Another aspect of the interaction between personnel assignments and
schedule is the obvious fact that, within limits, it may be possible to reduce
activity times by adding resources. Thus, we have the PERT ‘‘anomaly’’ that
allows one to estimate activity times without explicit consideration of the
resources that will be applied to these activities. Working back and forth
between activity times and personnel assignments can be a complex analysis
task. It may be facilitated by using project management software, as discussed
in Chapter 12. In general, considerable effort may be necessary to ‘‘optimize’’
a complex project schedule, that is, to derive a schedule that meets internal
and customer requirements and also makes the best possible use of personnel
and other project resources (e.g., facilities). Best use includes minimizing
personnel down time (maximizing personnel utilization).
    A final project schedule should be based upon the foregoing considerations
and the Project Controller is often the person who attempts to optimize this
schedule with respect to both time and utilization of resources. Unfortunately,
this process is normally repeated numerous times as the inevitable changes
and slippages occur. Most projects require juggling and rescheduling as the
differences between reality and plan begin to surface. For this reason, a good
PC who is able to reschedule quickly and efficiently can have a major influ-
ence on the success, or lack of it, of a complicated project.
    We pause here to comment upon a subject that does not generally receive
enough attention in the world of schedule and cost analysis and tracking. That
subject is the manner in which input time and dollar estimates are provided.
The GIGO (garbage-in, garbage-out) principle clearly suggests that we can
be in serious difficulty if we are not careful about how we obtain input data.
    Input estimates, of course, are provided as the first order of business as we
prepare schedules and budgets. Once a project is up and running, an infor-
mation system provides automated reports on current status, but we still re-
quire new inputs, at least every month, on time and cost to complete. Treating
these inputs in a cursory manner can be a disaster waiting to happen.
    Following one simple rule can help us solve a host of problems with re-
spect to poor input estimates. That rule is that we require multiple independent
estimates in all areas in which we are likely to run into problems. A more
conservative approach is simply to apply that rule for all schedule and cost
estimates. Following the rule means that we obtain inputs from more than
one person and, further, that the folks who provide the inputs are required to
not discuss the matter with the other estimators before they make their esti-
96      SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


mates. A simple ‘‘rule of 2 or 3’’ is that two people are asked for inputs for
most situations, and three folks provide independent inputs for very important
or critical situations.
   For example, if we are approaching the last 3 months of a one-year project
being carried out on a firm fixed price (FFP) contract, we might consider
invoking the ‘‘rule of 3’’ for time and cost to complete estimating. If we get
similar results from the 3 estimators, we can have considerable confidence in
these inputs. If we get disparate inputs, it’s time to call a meeting to resolve
the disparity. The objective, of course, is to zero in on the best input data we
can produce as we move into the final stretch of an important project. Another
example is that of estimating the cost and schedule of a software development
project. Chapter 10 will define the COCOMO (Constructive Cost Model)
method for providing these cost and schedule estimates, both of which are
seriously dependent upon estimates of delivered source instructions (DSI).
Therefore, if the DSI estimates are incorrect at the beginning, much trouble
is in store for the project. Applying the ‘‘rule of 3’’ for the initial (as well as
updated) estimates is likely to pay great dividends during the life of the
project.


4.3     COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING

As suggested in the previous chapter dealing with the project plan, direct
labor costs are developed from assigning people to the various activities
(tasks) of the schedule. This is often the key element of cost for a project
and is achieved by first constructing a task responsibility matrix (Table 3.3)
and then a project budget (Table 3.4). In order to track costs as a function of
time, a cost budget by week is also developed (Table 3.5). At times, and
certainly if required by the customer, the costs for each time period are also
broken down by task and subtask. Thus, it is possible for the periodic cost
reports for a large project to become quite complex and voluminous.

4.3.1    Cost Monitoring
Bottom-line monitoring of project costs can be carried out by the sample cost
report shown in Table 4.1. This cost report is produced at the end of the
fourth week in the project. The table shown is based on the bottom-line
budgeted costs derived in Table 3.5. Lines 1 and 2 show these budgeted costs
for each of the 8 weeks of the hypothetical project. Line 1 is the cost budgeted
by week and line 2 carries forth the weekly cumulative budget. The items
from the project plan, when accepted, become the budgeted cost numbers
against which actual costs are compared. Lines 3 and 4 in Table 4.1 show the
actual costs, by week and cumulative. In general, of course, these may be
less or greater than the budgeted costs. By subtracting the actual costs from
the budgeted costs, we are able to produce lines 5 and 6 of the cost report.
     TABLE 4.1     Bottom-Line Cost Monitoring: Week 4 of 8
                                                                           End of Week
                                          1         2           3         4          5       6        7        8      Line
     Budget, by Week*                   2,541       8,641       8,641     4,321   17,720    5,592    7,116    5,846    1
     Budget, Cumulative*                2,541     11,182      19,823    24,144    41,864   47,456   54,572   60,418    2
     Actuals, by Week                   2,600       8,800       9,000     5,000     —        —        —        —       3
     Actuals, Cumulative                2,600     11,400      20,400    25,400      —        —        —        —       4
     Budget Less Actuals, by Week        (59)      (159)       (359)     (679)      —        —        —        —       5
     Budget Less Actuals, Cumulative     (59)      (218)       (577)    (1,256)     —        —        —        —       6
     Percent Deviation, by Week         (3.5)      (1.8)       (4.2)     (15.7)     —        —        —        —       7
     Percent Deviation, Cumulative      (3.5)      (1.9)       (2.9)      (5.2)     —        —        —        —       8
     *See Table 3.5.




97
98      SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


These data show that actuals have been greater than budget numbers for each
and every week of the four weeks of the project. By the end of the fourth
week, a total overexpenditure of $1,256 has occurred. The convention adopted
here is that overexpenditures are shown with parentheses around them. Fi-
nally, lines 7 and 8 convert the deviations to percentages on the basis of
budgeted numbers. The sample cost report numbers show a jump during the
fourth week to 15.7% and a cumulative percent deviation of 5.2%. This degree
of overexpenditure is normally considered significant.
   The sample bottom-line cost report signals a problem in that

     1. There has been an overexpenditure every week.
     2. In the last week (week 4), the percent overexpenditure has jumped to
        15.7%.
     3. The overall project is now 5.2% overspent.

These observations would normally lead to the following two questions:

     1. Where have the overexpenditures occurred?
     2. Why have the overexpenditures occurred?

The answer to the former question is usually found by looking at more de-
tailed cost reports, the first of which would be a report similar to Table 3.5,
but with the addition of actual costs. By examination of such a report, it is
possible to track the cost deviations back to the potential sources, namely:

     1. Direct labor costs
     2. Fringe costs
     3. Overhead costs
     4. Other direct costs (e.g., software, training materials, etc.)
     5. General and administrative (G&A) costs

Most likely, but not always, deviations occur in the application of direct labor.
It is then possible to investigate why more hours were required in relation to
the original plan and budget.
    Another type of cost report may be provided that indicates costs by task
or by work breakdown structure (WBS) element. For such cases, these reports
allow tracking back to cost deviations at the task and WBS levels. Ultimately,
reasons for why these deviations occurred have to be explored with project
personnel closest to the task and work elements.
    In at least some cases, the customer designates the form of cost status
information that is required. As an example, Table 4.2, drawn from a real-
world procurement, shows a cost status report format that tabulates both hours
and cost information for the period in question, cumulative sums for that
     TABLE 4.2        Cost Status Report
                          Actual Expended      Cumulative      for   Cumulative      Since
                         From           To     Base / Option         Start    of       the
     Task / Subtask
                                               Period                Contract
        Areas                                                                                 Authorized   Authorized   Remaining   Remaining
                         Hours      Dollars    Hours      Dollars    Hours         Dollars    Hours        Cost         Hours       Cost
       (Col. 1)          (Col. 2)   (Col. 3)   (Col. 4)   (Col. 5)   (Col. 6)      (Col. 7)   (Col. 8)     (Col. 9)     (Col. 10)   (Col. 11)




     Total
     Contract




99
100     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


period, cumulative sums since contract inception, authorized hour and cost
data, and remaining hours and cost listings. In such a situation, the organi-
zation under contract is obliged to provide this type of information to the
customer on a periodic basis. Thus, the issue of whether internal hour and
cost reports provide such information becomes important for the PM. Ideally,
the accounting/finance department can make appropriate adjustments to make
such information available in an automated fashion. If this is not possible,
then it becomes necessary for the Project Manager, usually in conjunction
with the Project Controller, to determine how to provide the needed customer
report, augmenting the ‘‘standard’’ internally generated cost reports. Trans-
lation of internal reports to necessary external reports thus becomes a problem
for the PM. Such specialized customer reports usually have to be signed off
as well by other company personnel before they are sent to the customer.
   The essense of cost tracking lies in the periodic (weekly, monthly) exam-
ination of the foregoing types of cost reports. Budget and actual cost numbers
are arrayed as a function of time, element of cost, task and subtask, and WBS
element. Analysis and further questioning as to deviations reveal both where
the problems are occurring and also why there appear to be cost problems.
Minor deviations are often noted but not investigated. Larger deviations
(reaching levels of 5% or more) are usually triggers for a detailed examination
of sources and reasons.
   For many projects, it is standard operating procedure, at the end of each
reporting period, to reestimate time and cost to complete. With this new input
of data, overall project times and costs are projected and compared to budgets.
Where unacceptable end results are projected, a corrective action is triggered.
This includes revisions of the original plan for both schedule and cost, re-
sulting in new budgeted values. In short, where there is a schedule or cost
problem, future periods have to be examined to see where time or dollars can
be reduced to get back on schedule and perform within overall project cost
budgets. There is a procedure that assesses the current schedule and cost
situation and projects project end results as a function of performance to date.
This procedure, called earned value analysis (EVA), is described in what
follows.

4.3.2   Earned Value Analysis (EVA)
Basic Relationships. Earned value analysis (EVA) is a formal procedure for
estimating cost and schedule variances during a project and extrapolating
these variances to the end of the project. The word variance is interpreted as
a deviation or difference in distinction to a mean square error as in the field
of statistics.
   An overview of the EVA concept can be gleaned from Figure 4.2. Three
cumulative cost curves are depicted, each flowing from the project initiation
time to the current reporting time. These cost curves are
                                           4.3   COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING   101

         Cost
         BAC




                                 S
                              W                      Schedule
                            BC                       variance
                                 P      Cost
                               W        variance
                            AC
                                 P
                               W
                            BC



                                                                 TAC    Time
                               Current
                                review
                                 time
                BCWS = Budgeted cost of work scheduled
                ACWP = Actual cost of work performed
                BCWP = Budgeted cost of work performed
                  CV = Cost variance = BCWP – ACWP
                  SV = Schedule variance = BCWP – BCWS
                  Figure 4.2 Earned value analysis (EVA) terminology.




  1. Budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS)
  2. Budgeted cost for work performed (BCWP)
  3. Actual cost of work performed (ACWP)

The EVA concept specifically accounts for the degree to which work that has
been scheduled has also been accomplished. In that sense, it does more than
simply compare budgeted versus actual costs without regard for the extent to
which work has been executed. For example, a project can be at month nine
of a 10-month period and also have spent 90% of the budget. In that simple
sense, both time and cost are tracking until one realizes that perhaps only
50% of the work may have been accomplished. Many a naive Project Manager
has been caught in this trap by not considering the work progress in relation
to schedule and budget.
   By comparing the actual versus budgeted cost of work performed (ACWP
vs. BCWP), at each point in time, we have a true measure of the ‘‘cost
variance’’:
102    SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


                   Cost variance (CV) ⫽ BCWP ⫺ ACWP

In this context, both budgeted and actual costs are computed on the same
basis, namely, the work that has been performed. Therefore, the PM and PC
ask the question: How much work has been performed (i.e., which tasks or
WBS elements have we actually accomplished) at this point in time? The
budgeted cost for these tasks/WBS elements is then calculated (BCWP) and
compared against actual expenditures for these same tasks/WBS elements
(ACWP). If the BCWP is greater than the ACWP, we have underspent; if the
BCWP is less than the ACWP, we have a cost overrun. The definition of cost
variance, as shown before, will yield positive numbers if we are underspent
and negative values if we have overspent. Thus, a negative cost variance
indicates a problem. Figure 4.2 shows a negative value for the cost variance
and therefore reveals an issue that must be further investigated.
   Perhaps a more difficult concept is the meaning of the discrepancy between
budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP) and the budgeted cost for work
scheduled (BCWS), both of which are shown in Figure 4.2. The difference
between these two is defined as the ‘‘schedule variance’’:

                Schedule variance (SV) ⫽ BCWP ⫺ BCWS

Here it is recognized that the work scheduled and the work performed, at
each point in time, may be different. As an example, halfway through the
project in time, we may have scheduled to finish fifty WBS elements but
actually have completed only forty WBS elements. We budgeted $100,000
for the fifty elements and $80,000 for the forty elements. Therefore, the sched-
ule variance is

                  SV ⫽ $80,000 ⫺ $100,000 ⫽ ⫺$20,000

We note that the schedule variance, for the EVA construct, is measured in
dollars, not time. Clearly, at this point, by completing only forty of the fifty
planned WBS elements, we are behind schedule. Our actual and planned rate
of completing work elements is the same, namely, $2,000 per work element.
For some reason, possibly because we did not staff the project as quickly as
our plan called for, we are some ten work elements behind. In principle, we
are not overrun in cost, but lag in the rate at which we have been able to get
the work done. This is basically a schedule issue. Further, this lag in time
shows up in the negative value for the schedule variance.
   The estimates of BCWP, BCWS, and ACWP also allow us to carry out a
linear extrapolation as to the estimated cost at completion (ECAC) and the
estimated time at completion (ETAC). This can be found through the follow-
ing relationships:
                                         4.3   COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING    103

                                     ACWP
                           ECAC ⫽         ⫻ BAC
                                     BCWP
                                     BCWS
                           ETAC ⫽         ⫻ TAC
                                     BCWP

where BAC is the original budget at completion, and TAC is the original time
to completion. The BAC is either increased or decreased as it is multiplied
by ACWP/BCWP. If ACWP is greater than BCWP, then the budget at com-
pletion (BAC) is augmented, representing a linear extrapolation of the current
cost overrun to the end of the project. It must be recognized that this is only
an extrapolation and is not based on a detailed analysis of the reasons for the
current overrun condition.
   Similarly, the estimated time at completion (ETAC) is determined by
multiplying the original time at completion (TAC) by BCWS/BCWP. If
BCWS ⬎ BCWP, then ETAC will be greater than TAC. This, too, is a linear
extrapolation, but in this case in the time dimension. The PM and the PC are
urged to look more deeply into schedule and work performance issues and
problems before accepting the new ETAC as a fully accurate representation
of the project schedule status.

Illustrative Example of an EVA. An example of the results of an EVA can
be posed by the following situation:

  As a PM, you are at the 18-month point of a 24-month project, with a $400,000
  budget. Your original project plan and a review of work performed reveal that
  BCWS ⫽ $300,000, ACWP ⫽ $310,000, and BCWP ⫽ $280,000. What are
  your current estimates of the cost variance (CV), schedule variance (SV), cost
  at completion (ECAC), and time at completion (ETAC)?

This example is depicted in Figure 4.3. From the given data, we calculate the
cost and schedule variances as

       CV ⫽ BCWP ⫺ ACWP ⫽ $280,000 ⫺ $310,000 ⫽ ⫺$30,000
       SV ⫽ BCWP ⫺ BCWS ⫽ $280,000 ⫺ $300,000 ⫽ ⫺$20,000

The estimated cost and time at completion are

                 ACWP         310,000
       ECAC ⫽         ⫻ BAC ⫽         ⫻ 400,000 ⫽ $442,857
                 BCWP         280,000
                 BCWS         300,000
       ETAC ⫽         ⫻ TAC ⫽         ⫻ 24 ⫽ 25.7 months
                 BCWP         280,000

Thus, the original budget of $400,000 is now reestimated to be $442,857 and
104     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


           Cost

        400,000

                                     ACWP =




                                                          S
                                                         W
                                     310,000




                                                       BC
        300,000

                                                    BCWP =
                                                    280,000
        200,000




                          6          12          18           24       Months

                                             Time now
                  Figure 4.3 Example of earned value analysis (EVA).



the new time at completion is estimated to be 25.7 months instead of the
original 24 months. The example indicates overruns in both cost and schedule
and suggests a more definitive analysis to determine status and what can be
done to meet the original budget and schedule.
   We note here the earlier comment in this chapter regarding the procedure
to reestimate time and cost to complete. The EVA process leads automatically
to such estimates, although they are linear extrapolations of the current situ-
ation. In the preceding EVA example, these estimates are

   Estimated cost to complete ⫽ $442,857 ⫺ $310,000 ⫽ $132,857
  Estimated time to complete ⫽ 25.7 months ⫺ 18 months ⫽ 7.7 months

If the EVA indicates the existence of a problem, as does the preceding ex-
ample, it is suggested that further detailed and project-specific estimates of
cost and time to complete be made, leading, we hope, to necessary corrective
actions.

4.3.3   Other Cost Considerations
Monitoring Other Direct Costs (ODCs). The overall project budget shown
in Table 3.4 shows other direct costs (ODCs) as a separate category of costs,
which may include such items as travel, computer services, equipment, con-
sultants, subcontractors, mailing, reproduction, telephone, materials, software,
                                        4.3   COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING   105

and other types of costs. Many of these costs come in late and therefore lag
the normal reporting cycle times. The PM must be aware of these costs and
commitments and make sure that they are not lost in the reckoning of the
project cost picture. Many PMs have been surprised by late inputs of these
types of costs simply because they were forgotten or lost in company proc-
essing. The PM should assign this tracking responsibility to the PC so that
these costs do not appear as a late and not very welcome surprise.
   A particular type of ODC requiring special attention is subcontracting. If
a PM is in a position where subcontracting is a major part of the project, or
critical path events depend on the delivery of a subcontract product or service,
then unique steps may need to be taken to assure there is no victimization by
the subcontractor. Some very large projects have dozens of subcontractors,
thus increasing manyfold the likelihood of a significant problem. Some ac-
tions for a PM under these circumstances include:

  1. Placing project personnel at the subcontractor’s facility to monitor status
     and progress
  2. Establishing interface control and documentation as a more prominent
     aspect of the systems engineering effort
  3. Holding more frequent status review sessions for subcontractors
  4. Meeting with the management of the subcontractors to obtain commit-
     ment to cost, schedule, and performance requirements
  5. Providing parallel developments and backup sources as insurance, if
     they can be afforded
  6. Using incentive award contracts for on-time, high-quality deliveries

Monitoring for Different Contract Types. The way in which information
is aggregated and reported is also related to the type of contract under which
the project is being carried out. We discuss some of the vagaries of monitoring
for three generic contract types:

  1. Cost contracts
  2. Fixed-price contracts
  3. Time and materials (T&M) contracts

Cost contracts include cost-plus-fixed-fee (CPFF), cost-plus-incentive-fee
(CPIF), cost-plus-award-fee (CPAF) contracts and variations on this basic
theme. All such contracts mean that the customer pays the basic costs of the
contract and the fee can be fixed or variable. Such contracts are prevalent in
the world of government contracting and are almost never used in the com-
mercial arena. Under an arrangement where under most conditions all costs
are covered and guaranteed, there is sometimes not a strong incentive for a
company to control costs to the budgeted numbers. However, it is strongly
106    SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


recommended that the PM adopt a point of view that such control is man-
datory. It is generally not a good idea to lose the discipline of cost control,
even when there is not a strong penalty for overrunning a contract. Cost
reports for a cost contract are precisely those that have been shown in this
chapter. Each element of cost is monitored and tracked, and corrective action
is taken whenever actual costs begin to exceed budgeted values.
   Incentive- and award-fee cost contracts are recommended in order for the
system acquisition agent (customer) to make sure the contractor focuses on
meeting the cost, schedule, and performance requirements. Incentive- and
award-fee parameters can be defined so as to reward contractors for empha-
sizing the items most important to the customer. Experience has shown that
these types of contracts are quite effective in motivating contractors. Explicit
evaluations and scoring by the customer also provide periodic feedback to
the contractor so that the positions and issues of both parties are known as
the contract proceeds. A PM who is not getting good evaluation scores is
likely not to be achieving fee (profit) goals. This gets the immediate attention
of both the PM and management.
   Fixed-price contracts basically mean that the contractor works on the con-
tract until all requirements and specifications are satisfied. Costs in excess of
the original budget are borne by the contractor. Thus, if budgeted costs are
exceeded, profit dollars are jeopardized. Such contract forms are utilized al-
most exclusively in the commercial world, and increasingly in the government
arena.
   A PM working under a fixed-price contract should be aware that every
dollar ‘‘saved’’ is one that could be added to the profit made under that
contract. There is a tendency, therefore, for such contracts to be monitored
extremely carefully, always looking for a better solution that will satisfy re-
quirements within cost and schedule constraints. It should also be noted that,
at times, such contracts have penalty clauses. A typical clause of this type
penalizes the company for late delivery of the product. In this fashion, the
customer makes it clear that meeting schedule is a very important issue, and
failure to do so may force both the contractor and the customer to experience
increased costs.
   Cost reports for fixed-price contracts can take the same form illustrated in
this chapter, as each element of cost is tracked on a periodic basis. A PM
may wish to shorten the periodicity of such reports, such as getting a weekly
reading of costs instead of the more usual monthly report. This can place a
strain on the company accounting system, which may not be geared to such
rapid reporting. In such cases, PMs have been known to generate their own
interim cost reports in order to satisfy their needs. This may be done by
capturing weekly time charges on Friday afternoon and feeding them in to a
spreadsheet developed by the Project Controller, so that by the Monday fol-
lowing the week in question, a weekly cost report is available. This type of
special reporting is recommended for all contracts as they near their comple-
tion times when it may be necessary to exercise more stringent controls.
                                        4.3   COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING   107

   Both cost and fixed-price contracts may also include the requirement of a
minimum delivery of hours. At times, a ‘‘window’’ of 10% of the bid
number of hours is established and placed into the contract document itself.
Thus, if more experienced personnel than originally proposed are used on the
work, it may turn out that the ‘‘⫺10%’’ requirement is not satisfied. This
normally results in some type of fee penalty. Where there is a requirement
for delivery of hours, the PM must also be monitoring hours expended, by
category, to make sure that the hours are actually delivered as per the contract.
In this regard, we note the ‘‘hours’’ columns in Table 4.2. ‘‘Hours expended’’
reports for such a situation must become part of the normal process of track-
ing projects.
   A time and materials (T&M) contract is usually set up on the basis of a
customer requirement that a certain number of hours be purchased, at a fixed
rate by personnel category. The customer is thus buying expertise, by the
hour, for various categories of personnel. The essence of the contract lies in
the delivery of such expertise, and the customer paying a fixed amount for
each hour delivered. Of course, the expertise must be sufficient to satisfy the
customer’s requirements. If it is not, the customer will insist upon a change
of personnel. Materials called for under the contract (e.g., computers and
COTS software) are delivered separately, with an agreed-on markup or at
cost. The overall contract, of course, has a ceiling price that the customer has
agreed to.
   Monitoring a T&M contract normally requires cost reports different from
those shown previously in this chapter. Not only does overall cost need to be
tracked, but hours by category and associated costs must be monitored in
detail. The basic reason is that the actual people assigned to work may be at
the ‘‘high end’’ of their categories. Because bid costs by category are often
constructed as an average of the people in a given category, high-end person-
nel cost more than the bid and contracted rate. This leads to losing money
(spending nominal profits) for such categories. The more hours that are
worked by such personnel, the more money is lost. A PM who is not aware
of this possibility will be in for a significant shock when management declares
that the contract may not have overrun total budget but has spent corporate
profits.
   A cost report that might be used to monitor a T&M contract lists the
specific people, by name, together with their actual costs, and compares these
costs, by hour, with the rates in the contract. When the contract rates are
higher, a profit is achieved. When the contract rates are lower, the contract is
losing money.
   For example, assume that three senior engineers are working full time at
hourly rates of $61.18, $67.35 and $64.82, with the contract rate for senior
engineers being $65.50. This means that the project makes money each hour
for two people (in the amounts of $4.32 and $0.68) and loses money each
hour for the third person ($1.85). On a weekly basis, the reader can confirm
108     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


that the total profit for the three engineers will be $126, but only for all three
engineers working 40 hours each week.
    It can be seen that considerable up-front planning is required in order to
staff a T&M contract. It is not necessarily a terrible circumstance to be losing
money on an individual, as long as, in the aggregate, the contract is making
its nominal profit across all assigned persons. The mixture of people and rates,
and the often dynamic nature of assignments over time, however, make it
critical that all new assignments be considered on the basis of cost as well
as capability to do the job. If such a contract is long-term, perhaps several
years, it is standard practice for a company to escalate the rates from year to
year in its bid so as to cover salary increases and thereby avoid the problems
cited. Within certain boundaries, customers will accept year-to-year rate in-
creases as a normal way of doing business. In all cases, the PM must be
aware of the form of contract and the specific provisions of the contract that
must be satisfied. For this reason, as a project plan is about to be prepared,
it is recommended that the PM sit down with a ‘‘contracts’’ person and make
sure that all the key contract requirements are understood.

Corporate Rate Changes. Many a Project Manager has been surprised
when corporate rates have changed at midstream in a project, causing unex-
pected cost increases. Although these are usually not the responsibility of the
PM, increases in corporate fringe, overhead, and G&A rates can force the
PM to ‘‘make up’’ for the problem by finding ways to reduce future costs.
For at least this reason, the PM should track these rates in cost reports and
also try to keep abreast of overall company problems that might cause rate
increases. This type of unexpected change also reinforces the prudent action
of keeping reserves whenever possible. The cost elements that impact fringe,
overhead, and G&A rates are shown in Exhibit 4.1.

  Exhibit 4.1: Fringe, Overhead, and G&A Cost Elements

  A. Fringe
      1. Sick Leave
      2. Holiday
      3. Vacation
      4. Severance
      5. Compensation Insurance
      6. Unemployment Insurance
      7. FICA Tax
      8. Group Insurance
      9. Travel Expenses
     10. Recruiting
     11. Training
     12. Employee Pension
                                        4.3   COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING   109

  B. Overhead and G&A
     1. Salaries and Wages
        1.1 Indirect Labor
        1.2 Other Compensation
        1.3 Overtime Premium
        1.4 Sick Leave
        1.5 Holiday
        1.6 Vacation
        1.7 Severance
     2. Personnel Expenses (see ‘‘Fringe Items’’)
     3. Supplies and Services
        3.1 General Operating
        3.2 Office and Printing
        3.3 Utilities
     4. Fixed Charges
        4.1 Depreciation
        4.2 Equipment Rentals
     5. Office Space Facility Rental/Mortgage

Reserves. It is strongly recommended that a PM keep a cost reserve, espe-
cially on fixed-price contracts. Suggested amounts are (1) 2 to 5% on cost
contracts and (2) 8 to 12% on firm fixed-price contracts. The basic idea, of
course, is to plan to perform the contract for an amount equal to the base
contract value less the reserved amount. Selecting a precise reserve percent-
age, given the preceding ranges, should be based on the risk analysis and
particular circumstances surrounding the project. However, on a cost-
reimbursible contract, reserves can be given up as the project approaches
completion unless there is a specific incentive fee for underspending the orig-
inal cost budget.
   It is also prudent for a PM to ascertain whether upper management has
also taken reserves on the project. This will normally affect how much reserve
the PM should set aside.

Cost Item Limitations and Trades. Some contracts contain explicit limits
on certain cost items. For example, limits may be placed on travel, consultant
services, and various categories of other direct costs (ODCs). Here again, the
PM must be aware of these limitations and control these costs so as not to
exceed the limits. This also raises the question as to whether the PM may
‘‘trade’’ one type of cost for another. To illustrate the point, suppose it turns
out that only $6,000 is needed for consultant services when the original plan
and budget estimated a requirement for $8,000. Unless the contract prohibits
such action, the PM is normally free to move the $2,000 difference to, for
example, the direct labor budget in order to obtain additional hourly work, if
necessary. A good rule for the PM to follow, where actual expenditures differ
110     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


from budgeted expenditures (and they usually do), is to check the contract
provisions to assure that all changes are made in consonance with the terms
and conditions (Ts and Cs) of the contract document.

Cost Graphs. It is also recommended that the PM convert project cost report
data to graphs of monthly and cumulative expenditures, compared to budget,
for various categories of cost. This may be achieved by taking data received
from accounting/finance and feeding them into a spreadsheet that has a graph-
ing capability, which most of them do. The purpose is to be able more readily
to ascertain cost slopes and trends. This is usually difficult to see with a large
set of numbers in a tabular format.

Cost Reporting to Customers. The customer usually requires some type
of cost reporting on a periodic (e.g., monthly) basis. Exceptions might include
fixed-price contracts. Such reports are usually prepared by accounting/fi-
nance, go to the contracts department, and from there are sent to the customer.
Often, the PM and PC are out of the loop for this type of reporting. This is
not a recommended practice. The PM and PC, as a minimum, should be given
copies of all reports sent to the customer in satisfaction of contractual obli-
gations. A more desirable practice is to assure that the PM and PC concur
with the cost information that is being sent to the customer.
   It is emphasized that all contractual cost reporting requirements should be
meticulously satisfied and the PM should attempt to assure that this is
achieved, even when company procedures do not keep him or her ‘‘in the
loop.’’ At the same time, the contracts department should list and check all
contractual deliverables and contact the PM and PC to determine and confirm
status. For example, some cost contracts require that an anticipated overrun
in cost be flagged for the customer when expenditures reach 75 or 85% of
the contract value. The PM and PC should be best qualified to determine
whether or not such an overrun is expected. If they miss the flagging notifi-
cation, the customer may not pay the overrun costs. A good contracts de-
partment tracks the situation and alerts the PM and PC as to the flagging
requirement. Good communication between PM, contracts, accounting/fi-
nance, and the customer is thus seen as critical in order to achieve project
success.


4.3.4   Special Focus on Firm Fixed-Price Bids and Contracts
We add here to the previous discussion of fixed-price contracts our ‘‘top
dozen’’ list of actions to consider in order to reduce the risk associated with
bidding and accepting such contracts; the possible actions include walking
away from a particularly high risk project. This list is provided below as
Exhibit 4.2. Further explanation of the items follows the list.
                                        4.3   COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING   111

  Exhibit 4.2: ‘‘Top Dozen’’ List for Firm Fixed-Price Bids/Contracts
   1. Assure high performance team (HPT) with proven track record.
   2. Construct a contingency plan.
   3. Set aside reserves.
   4. Perform no out-of-scope work.
   5. Assure ‘‘chunking’’ of work with associated payments.
   6. Establish clear, measurable acceptance criteria.
   7. Limit software warranties.
   8. Have limits on penalty clauses.
   9. Incorporate the proposal by reference.
  10. Establish special rewards for the project team.
  11. Set up a cost information system.
  12. Know when to walk away.

High Performance Team (HPT). Since you are dealing with a firm fixed-
price (FFP) effort, it is critical to use the very best team that you have. This
normally means that the core team has worked together for the past three to
five years and has proven that it consistently achieves high-level results. Add-
ing new senior people to a proven HPT should be done carefully to make
sure the new folks are team players. If not, act quickly to remove them before
they’re able to cause damage to the team’s spirit and productivity. Never
micromanage an HPT. Doing so invariably leads to negative consequences. If
the team has a proven track record, as you should insist be the case, give
them the job to do and manage largely by facilitating.

Contingency Plan. Even with an HPT starting the project, you still need a
contingency plan if the work is being done on a FFP basis. A contingency
plan flows from the project risk analysis (see elements of a project plan in
Chapter 3) in that it is focused upon the actions that might be taken if various
risks actually occur. Although risks to a project can be quite numerous, one
of the most serious is the loss of key personnel, for whatever reason. We used
to ask the generic question—‘‘What if your lead engineer gets hit by a truck?’’
That worst case scenario required the PM to think through how the project
would be completed without experiencing a serious setback.
   A contingency plan does not have to be a long document. It can be a one-
pager listing the risks on one side and the plans to mitigate those risks on
the other.

Reserves. As referred to under Section 4.3.3, reserves are especially impor-
tant in FFP contracts, with recommended amounts in the 8–12% range. The
lower end of reserve is used when the project is one of many similar ones
112    SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


that have been carried out in the past. The 12% may be expanded to 15%
when there are a few new challenges presented on the project. Such challenges
should not be, for example, pushing the state-of-the-art. They should be well
within what the project team believes is workable. Project reserves for FFP
contracts should be under the control of the PM and signed off by the PM’s
boss. Other ‘‘pots of money’’ might be made available as reserves above the
project level, for example, by the cognizant vice president. Knowing how to
deal with reserves in a corporate enterprise context is an important element
of overall risk management.

Out-of-Scope Work. Out-of-Scope (OOS) work is all activity that is carried
out in support of project goals and/or objectives that are not in the terms of
reference of the contract. It is also any ‘‘gold-plating’’ that was not part of
the original bid that was signed off by the customer. The bottom line with
respect to OOS work is simply that it should not be permitted since it nor-
mally increases risk and spends potential profit dollars. Whether suggested
by the internal team or by the customer, OOS work can be kept on a list for
consideration in a future contractual effort (not the current one). If there is a
question as to whether or not a piece of work is in- or out-of-scope, then a
most serious meeting needs to take place with the most senior people of the
project in attendance. If you and your customer disagree on this type of issue,
an extensive and immediate meeting is necessary to resolve this conflict.
Failing to do so usually leads to great difficulties down the road.

‘‘Chunking’’ of Work. Work on a project is normally defined in ‘‘chunks,’’
whether they are elements of a work breakdown structure (WBS) or task
statements that are part of a statement of work (SOW). The added ingredient
here, however, is to connect the completion of these work elements to con-
tractual requirements to get partial payments on an ‘‘as-you-go’’ basis. So,
for example, if there are ten major and approximately equal effort tasks to be
accomplished, it is highly desirable that you get paid one-tenth of the contract
value as you complete each of these tasks. Under these circumstances, if there
is a controversy at the end of the contract, you will have received 90% of the
payments due under the total contract. This, of course, reduces the overall
financial risk. It may be compared to the case in which there are no payments
made until all ten tasks are completed. In this case, a controversy at the end
has quite different dynamics as well as psychology. This overall strategy
might well have the subtitle ‘‘progress or partial payments.’’

Acceptance Criteria. Many FFP contracts give to the customer the exclusive
right to determine whether or not a contractual deliverable is acceptable. In
this situation, the customer may look at a deliverable and say ‘‘This isn’t
acceptable; go back and work on it until it is.’’ Of course, this would normally
lead to a request for specifics as to why it isn’t acceptable. All of this hinges
                                        4.3   COST ANALYSIS AND MONITORING   113

upon the existence of written acceptance criteria that form the basis for judg-
ing acceptability. If such criteria do not exist, then a fuzzy set of conditions
is likely to prevail, and you may be asked to continue to work the problem
indefinitiely. This argues for establishing firm acceptance criteria for all de-
liverables, one at a time, or as a group. Limits on review times as well as
number of deliverable iterations can often serve adequately when it is difficult
to be definitive about acceptance criteria.

Software Warranties. Some customers will request software warranties.
One form of such warranty is that the software be free from latent and patent
defects. This should be viewed as a red flag since it may lead to (a) down-
stream rejection of the software product, even after it has initially been ac-
cepted, and (b) the invocation of penalty clauses as a result of defective
software. A more useful construction is simply to agree to fix software (at no
additional cost) found to be defective during the six month period after it has
been accepted and paid for. This normally limits the liability in ways that
should be acceptable. The potential cost of this type of warranty should be
built into the price of the software in the initial bid, usually on an expected
value basis. If a ‘‘worst case’’ cost scenario is built into the bid, it may be
that the probability of winning such bids will sink to unacceptably low levels.

Penalty Clauses. Penalty clauses require the developer to step up to various
types of penalties if the delivered product is not satisfactory. These types of
clauses vary in their difficulty, and at times can be viewed as a double red
flag. Penalties can be sought when the product is simply not delivered on
time. Typically, there would be a charge for each day of delay in the delivery
schedule. This can be quite onerous and should be avoided in most situations.
A second type of penalty is associated with the discovery of product defects
(eg., bugs in the software). Here again, great care should be exercised in
accepting this type of penalty clause. If the product is proven and mature,
one can be less nervous about these clauses. Another alternative is to request
extra (bonus) payments for early delivery, for example. This can provide
offsets and incentives that work for both developer and customer.

Incorporation of Proposal by Reference. Some customers like to incor-
porate the proposal into the contract between the two parties. This means that
the developer must live up to any and all promises made in the proposal.
When these are overstated so as to increase the chances of winning, major
problems can result when the proposal becomes part of the contract. The two
most obvious countermeasures are (a) to not accept incorporation of the pro-
posal into the contract, and (b) to try to go back and ‘‘scrub’’ the proposal
so that all questionable promises are deleted. Here’s where the company law-
yers need to earn their keep by focusing on these promises and working as
part of the team, together with the PM, CSE, and PC for the project.
114     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


Special Rewards. Since FFP contracts represent special potential risks for
the company, it should be worth real dollars to mitigate such risks. One way
to do this is to offer bonuses to key project personnel if the project is executed
within schedule, budget, and performance specifications. Further, such bo-
nuses should be commensurate with the effort required as well as the benefit
to the company. In other words, they should be real motivators for the team
to do an outstanding job. At times, possible promotions are connected to high
levels of achievement on a particularly important project. Business as usual
rewards typically result in business as usual performance. Companies should
not be worried about treating some people in a special way when the circum-
stances call for special treatment.

Cost Information System. The project cost information system needs to be
finely tuned in at least three dimensions for FFP contracts. The first dimension
is the cycle time for cost reporting. Monthly cost reporting should be changed
to every two weeks for FFP efforts, for example. If the standard cost reporting
system cannot respond quickly enough, investing in a special system is likely
to be worth it. Second, cost to complete estimates need to be provided on the
same two-week cycle time, requesting such estimates from more than one
person if necessary. Third, the PM and CSE should ask the PC to take per-
sonal responsibility for presenting a project status overview at a meeting every
two weeks. This includes looking very carefully at potential schedule slip-
pages that, in turn, might lead to cost increases. The PC should also be in a
position to look for biased cost and time to complete inputs that might present
an overly optimistic view of project status. In FFP contracts, one needs to
search for the truth, and as early as possible.

Walking Away. If you are unable to successfully negotiate an appropriate
number of the above items, especially on a FFP software product delivery
that needs to be developed from scratch, it may be time to simply walk away.
One form of doing so is to add large reserves to account for all risk areas
such that you drive your price into a noncompetitive range. This strategy may
backfire if your intent was to truly walk away in that your competitors may
have done the same thing, leaving you the winner. Walking away from what
many people in your company believe is a real opportunity may be quite
difficult. But signing up to a losing contract can be a disaster in that one not
only loses money, but also experiences significant opportunity costs. Having
your best people working ten to twelve hours a day leaves them unavailable
to tackle other ongoing contracts as well as new bid opportunities. Here’s a
case in which discretion may truly be the better part of valor.
                                                4.4   SITUATION ANALYSIS (SA)   115

4.4     SITUATION ANALYSIS (SA)

4.4.1    Overall Situation Analysis Process
Maintaining sharp and continuous monitoring of project schedule, cost, and
performance is, of course, an essential element of effective project manage-
ment. Indeed, the ‘‘nuts and bolts’’ of project management involves the con-
tinuous positing of these questions:

  1. Are we on schedule?
  2. Are we within budget?
  3. Are we satisfying all performance requirements?

However, if we get a ‘‘no’’ answer to any of these questions, or if other issues
surface that could adversely affect them, the question then becomes: What
else should the PM be doing? The answer lies in situation analysis (SA),
which is fundamentally a problem-solving process at the project level. It is
an adaptation of the ‘‘case study’’ approach utilized in some business schools.
It may also be viewed as follows: Case studies are to an overall enterprise
(or key portion of an enterprise, such as a division) as situation analysis is to
a project. Situation analysis is a sequence of steps to be undertaken by the
project triumvirate (PM, PC, and CSE) once one or more problems or poten-
tial problems have surfaced.
   The general situation analysis process is depicted in Figure 4.4. The first
step (Box 1) in such a process is, as might be expected, to gather up, or
restate, the facts that are known in the given situation. Such facts are usually
in the domains of schedule, cost, or performance, but might be other facts
not as immediate or obvious. Examples of the latter type of facts might be

  1. A strike at the plant of a major supplier or subcontractor
  2. Serious conflict between members of the project team
  3. Resignation of a key member of the project

After such facts have been identified, two paths are suggested. One leads to
a set of evident problems (Box 2) and the other to potential or inferred prob-
lems (Box 3). The former represent clear and irrefutable problems, normally
of a high priority, that must be dealt with. Examples include:

  1. Schedule slippage on the critical path
  2. Expenditures greater than budgeted amounts
  3. Missed contractual delivery dates
  4. System testing failures
116
                                                                                                  No
                                                                                                       7
      1   Known    2                 4                    5                     6                                    8
                                         Problem                Plan                 Risks/         Plan       Yes
           facts         Evident
                                         priorities              for                benefits/   satisfactory         Implementation
          a.            problems
                                         1.                   solutions              costs            ?
          b.                             2.
          c.                             3.
                   3
                        Potential
                       or inferred
                        problems                                Who
                                                               What                                                      Monitoring
                                                               When
                                                               Where
                                                                Why
                                                                How

                                           Figure 4.4 General situation analysis process.
                                                4.4   SITUATION ANALYSIS (SA)   117

All are evident problems, almost by definition. How significant these prob-
lems are remains to be investigated in detail.
   In the category of potential or inferred problems, we normally find occur-
rences that may or may not lead to significant problems. In this regard, one
finds secondary events that might eventually do serious damage to the project.
Such events might be:

  1. Project staff perturbations or conflicts
  2. A change in the PM’s immediate supervisor
  3. Company reorganizations
  4. Loss of key people, not on the project team, but in support organizations
     such as accounting/finance, contracts, and human resources
  5. Changes in subcontractor/supplier organizations

   The point of separating evident (obvious) problems from potential or in-
ferred problems is to assist in the eventual step of sorting these problems in
order of priority (Box 4). A priority list is intended to force a discipline that
assures that key problems cannot be ignored or placed on the back burner.
Without this discipline, a PM might be otherwise inclined to tackle more
tractible issues that are of little or no real importance and avoid handling
critical problems that might be difficult to confront. Such behavior may be
difficult to understand, but it is part of human nature to not want to face
unpleasant and stressful tasks.
   Given the problems in priority order (Box 4 of Figure 4.4), the next step
is to develop plans for solutions (Box 5). Plans at the top of the list must be
addressed; plans at the bottom of the list might be deferred until further data
are obtained. This is a judgment call that should be decided by the project
triumvirate. The usual journalistic questions of who?–what?–when?–
where?–why?–how? should be considered, noting that a plan for situation
analysis is not the same as a project plan. Plans must be evaluated in terms
of risks (assuming that the plan is implemented), benefits, and costs (Box 6).
Alternatives are recommended so that all reasonable solutions are at least
placed in evidence. Leaping to premature or incorrect ‘‘solutions’’ can be
more damaging than the original problem.
   An important footnote to the formulation of the plan for solutions (Box 5)
is the question of who it is that devises such solutions. Overall responsibility
rests with the PM, PC, and CSE, but it is suggested that a team approach to
problem solving be undertaken. In other words, information and proposals for
solutions should be consciously elicited from members of the project team.
Full or partial team meetings are a good way to kick off such a process. In
this manner, participative management can be demonstrated in addition to
being expounded. More importantly, it usually leads to clearer definitions of
problems and more effective solutions. More is discussed in this regard in
Chapter 6.
118     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


   Another implicit question is: When does the PM give an alert to the boss
when there is a problem? The recommended answer is, for most situations,
after the PM has developed an appropriate plan for solving the problem. In
general, do not ‘‘hide’’ problems from bosses. At the same time, it is prudent
to come to the boss with a complete plan for solution. This shows the boss
that the PM is on top of the problem. It also gives the boss a last opportunity
to provide input into the plan, or to modify the plan if necessary. Imple-
menting a solution without consulting the boss carries some risks with it,
especially if the problem is severe.
   Thus, the situation analysis process shown in Figure 4.4 involves two ad-
ditional and very important considerations:

  1. When and how to involve the project team
  2. When and how to involve the PM’s immediate supervisor

   Interim plans that are not considered satisfactory (Box 7) have to go back
around the loop for improvement and consideration of alternatives. Once the
plan is approved, implementation starts (Box 8). After that, the normal mon-
itoring function is resumed.


4.4.2   Example of situation analysis
We pose a ‘‘situation’’ facing the PM as follows:

  It is Wednesday afternoon and Jack, the Project Manager, receives a call from
  the Project Controller who claims that the latest cost report shows the project
  to be overspent, compared with budget, by 11%. Jack, meanwhile, had been
  thinking about his lead hardware and software engineers, who incessantly com-
  plain to him about each other. Jack now also begins to think about the project
  review session with his customer that is scheduled for 2 P.M. next Monday. What
  should Jack do, and in what sequence?

A response to this situation, that is, a situation analysis, follows.
Step 1: This step calls for assembling the known facts, which, at this point,
   appear to be
   a. The project is 11% overspent.
   b. The lead hardware and software engineers are complaining about each
      other.
   c. There is a project review session planned with the customer in approx-
      imately five days (three working days).
Jack next picks up the phone and asks the Project Controller (PC) and Chief
   Systems Engineer (CSE) to come to his office immediately. The PC is
                                               4.4   SITUATION ANALYSIS (SA)   119

   asked to bring all cost and schedule data that are relevant. The project
   triumvirate then reviews the facts and overall situation from top to bottom.
Step 2: The cost overexpenditures are identified as an evident problem.
Step 3: The hardware and software engineers issue and planned meeting with
   the customer are placed in the ‘‘potential or inferred’’ problem category.
Step 4: The project triumvirate identifies the problem priorities as
   1. Cost overrun
   2. Scheduled customer meeting
   3. Hardware/software engineer issue
They decide that the scope of the plan for solution will not include the
   hardware/software engineer issue. They also analyze, to the extent that
   they are able to, the data they have involving:
   1. The cost elements that have been overspent
   2. Why these cost elements are overspent
   3. Potential effects on schedule
   4. Potential effects on technical performance
This activity takes most of the rest of Wednesday afternoon. The project
   triumvirate agrees that more data are needed. Jack calls for a project team
   X meeting at 8:30 the next morning (Thursday). He does not reveal the
   precise purpose of the meeting. Project team X is a subset of the overall
   project staff and is handpicked for its ability to solve a problem of this
   type. Jack asks that the PC and CSE think about the situation but not
   convey it to anyone else until the meeting the next morning.
Step 5: The project team X meets on Thursday morning to discuss the two
   top-priority problems, in the following sequence:
   1. Cost overrun
   2. Meeting scheduled with the customer
Reasons for the cost condition are ascertained at this meeting. A basic plan
   (Plan A) for how to fix the overrun situation is set forth.
Step 6: At the same meeting, which is proceeding through the entire morning,
   Plan A is reconsidered with respect to risks, benefits, and costs.
Step 7: Based upon the preceding scrutiny, team X does not believe the plan
   is good enough. It is also 11:30 A.M. on Thursday morning. Jack asks all
   members of team X to reconvene at 2 P.M., coming to the table with new
   and hopefully better ideas. Team members are encouraged to talk to other
   project personnel if it is considered helpful. All project personnel are re-
   minded that the situation is to be kept within the project staff for the time
   being.
Reiteration of Steps 5, 6, and 7: Team X meets at 2 P.M. and a new plan is
   devised that is considered satisfactory and, indeed, the best the team can
120     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


   formulate. This is a plan for correction of the cost overrun. Jack now
   focuses the team on the matter of the project review session with the
   customer, scheduled for next Monday. The team agrees that:
   1. The customer is very likely to accept the plan.
   2. There is no good reason to alert the customer to the problem before
      Monday.
   3. They should confirm the Monday meeting with the customer,
Jack suggests to the team that now is the time to alert his supervisor as to
   the set of problems as well as the plan for solution. The team agrees that
   this is an important step prior to the implementation of the plan.
Step 8: As a precursor to implementation, Jack, the PC, and the CSE meet
   with Jack’s boss. The boss appreciates the steps taken and being kept
   informed. He also agrees with the plan, but insists on being present at the
   meeting with the customer on Monday. Jack and his boss agree on how to
   make the presentation to the customer, who else should attend, and what
   the roles of all participants should be.

   This example illustrates the SA process as well as some of the vagaries of
that process. The basic issue for SA is not how well one can analyze schedule
charts and cost reports. The issue, rather, is how to mobilize a team effort to
prioritize and find solutions to problems that invariably arise during the course
of a project. The reader is invited to practice situation analysis for the situ-
ations that are included in the questions and exercises that follow.


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

4.1 For the activity data related to a small project, as shown, draw the PERT
    chart and find
    a. the critical path and its expected time
    b. the slack in all other paths
    c. the standard deviation associated with the project end date

      Activity                                   Three Time Estimates (weeks)
       A–B                                                   1–3–5
       B–D                                                   1–2–3
       A–C                                                   1–2–3
       C–D                                                   2–4–6
       C–F                                                   4–6–8
       C–E                                                   1–4–7
       D–F                                                   1–2–3
       E–F                                                   1–3–5
                                                  QUESTIONS / EXERCISES   121

4.2 Design a cost monitoring report that expands the data provided in Table
    4.1.
4.3 You are at the 18-month point of a 24-month project with a $400,000
    budget. The schedule variance has been estimated as $30,000 and the
    cost variance as $20,000. Find the following:
    a. BCWS
    b. ACWP
    c. BCWP
    d. ECAC
    e. ETAC

     Compare these results with those in the EVA example in the text. Why
     are they different?
4.4 In general, for a project:
    a. If BCWP ⬎ BCWS, is the project early or late? Explain.
    b. If ACWP ⬎ BCWP, is the project over or under cost? Explain.
    c. If ACWP ⬍ BCWS, what conclusion, if any, can you draw? Explain.
4.5 What role does the Project Manager play in controlling fringe, overhead,
    and G&A costs and rates? How does the PM deal with increases in
    these rates that might result in a cost overrun?
4.6 Enter the data from Table 4.1 into a spreadsheet. Print out graphs of the
    results. Do the graphs provide insights into cost status that might not
    be revealed in columns of numbers? Explain.
4.7 The chapter provides twelve suggestions for dealing with firm fixed
    price bids or contracts. Identify three additional actions that might be
    employed in this regard in order to reduce risk. Explain your rationale.
4.8 Carry out a situation analysis for the following situations:
    a. As a PM, you discover, at month 8 in a ten-month project, that you
       are 8% over cost. Your Chief Systems Engineer tells you that you
       can meet budget if the entire project team works a 48-hour week.
       Your Project Controller estimates only a 50% chance of success with
       that strategy, but claims that 5% of the work done has been ‘‘out of
       scope.’’ You have a project status review planned with the customer
       in two days. What should you do, and in what sequence?
    b. As a PM, it is Friday afternoon at 4 P.M. and you receive a call from
       your customer complaining about the quality of your company’s last
       report and a bad attitude on the part of your on-site lead engineer.
       Your customer wants to see you in his office at 9 A.M. next Monday.
       What should you do and in what sequence?
122     SCHEDULE, COST, AND SITUATION ANALYSIS


REFERENCES

4.1 Frame, J. D. (1991). Managing Projects in Organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-
    Bass.
4.2 Kezsbom, D. S., D. L. Schilling, and K. A. Edward (1989). Dynamic Project
    Management. New York: John Wiley.
4.3 Kerzner, H. (2000). Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Sched-
    uling and Controlling, 7th edition. New York: John Wiley.
4.4 Malcolm, D. G., J. H. Roseboom, C. E. Clark, and W. Fazar (1959). ‘‘Application
    of a Technique for Research and Development Program Evaluation,’’ Operations
    Research 7: 646–669.
                5
THE PROJECT MANAGER
AND LEADERSHIP




5.1   INTRODUCTION

This chapter focuses more sharply on the specific attributes of a Project Man-
ager (PM) that are needed in order to be both a manager and a leader. Much
has been written about the differences between a manager and a leader, mak-
ing the point that even a good manager is not necessarily a leader. Students
in my classes regale me with stories of their bosses who do not seem to have
even the barest minimum of skills and awareness to deal with the human
aspect of managing other people. At times, it appears as if this is the rule
rather than the exception, leading to a great deal of frustration in the work
environment. Bad managers may know the ‘‘nuts and bolts’’ of project man-
agement, but if the execution is devoid of an understanding of how to relate
to people, the project will usually get into trouble. People just do not put
forth their best efforts for a bad boss.
   This chapter, then, attempts to shed some light on three basic questions:

  1. What are the personal skills that the project manager must have or
     develop, especially with respect to human interactions?
  2. How can the project manager deal more effectively with a poor or bad
     boss?
  3. What are some of the key issues in dealing with the customer?

Going beyond these questions, the chapter ends with a discussion of tran-
scending the basics of management into the domain of leadership.

                                                                          123
124    THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


5.2   PROJECT MANAGER ATTRIBUTES

The first place to look in terms of exploring the desired attributes of a PM is
the set of tasks that a PM must be able to carry out. These tasks, reiterated
from Chapter 1, are:

  1. Planning
  2. Organizing
  3. Directing
  4. Monitoring

   Planning and organizing are important tasks of the PM and tend to be done
well by a person who enjoys process. Although a good plan is more often
than not the results of a team effort, a PM who likes to plan may have a
tendency to take on the entire plan. The PM who enjoys planning will see
organizing as just another part of a good plan, which indeed it is. Such a
person may tend toward introversion and requires considerable order and dis-
cipline. When we move on to the tasks of directing and monitoring, however,
we see a requirement for another type of perspective. These tasks involve
interactions with people. Directing requires that people be given assignments
and that they be guided through these assignments through monitoring and
feedback. These ‘‘people’’ interactions are often best accomplished by an
extroverted type of person who likes to discuss situations with people and
may not enjoy the paperwork associated with planning and reporting. Through
this simple discussion, we note that the PM is called upon to do many things
that require a balanced personality. The PM is a well-integrated person who
can shift gears as well as pay attention to and keep in balance the many issues
that inevitably come across the desk.
   Although it is possible to further analyze the attributes of a good project
manager in terms of the required skills associated with planning, organizing,
directing, and monitoring, we prefer to list, in Exhibit 5.1, twenty critical
aspects of a PM. A brief discussion of each follows. These same twenty
attributes may also be interpreted as the characteristics of a good boss.

  Exhibit 5.1: Twenty Attributes of a Project Manager
   1. Communicates well and shares information
   2. Delegates appropriately
   3. Is well-organized
   4. Supports and motivates people
   5. Is a good listener
   6. Is open-minded and flexible
   7. Gives constructive criticism
   8. Has a positive attitude
   9. Is technically competent
                                         5.2   PROJECT MANAGER ATTRIBUTES   125

  10. Is disciplined
  11. Is a team builder and player
  12. Is able to evaluate and select people
  13. Is dedicated to accomplishing goals
  14. Has the courage and skill to resolve conflicts
  15. Is balanced
  16. Is a problem solver
  17. Takes initiative
  18. Is creative
  19. Is an integrator
  20. Makes decisions

5.2.1   Communication and Sharing Information
One of the major complaints of people working on a project is that they are
not kept informed. The Project Manager must pay special attention to letting
people know what is happening on the project, in all of its dimensions. The
PM must also try to assure that the cross-communication between members
of the project team is effective and that all personnel share important
information.

5.2.2   Delegation
The effective PM must be careful not to take on all the key tasks. If this is
done, the project team members will quickly learn that they are not trusted
to do anything important, which will soon lead to nonteam playing and dis-
aster. Effective delegation is a critical task of the PM, and it is coupled with
resisting any temptation to ‘‘micromanage.’’ Once a task is delegated, the PM
should stay in touch and guide rather than hover over, criticize, and redo.

5.2.3   Organization
In this context, being well-organized is to know where everything is (project
status), know where it is going, assure that all members of the project have
what they need to do their jobs, and to be prepared to solve problems. Some
project managers take on too many internal project tasks and cannot pay
attention to the project as a whole. From this position, they become disor-
ganized and struggle to keep up with the overall project needs. Being well-
organized will keep the overall project moving forward and will help assure
that other people’s efforts are efficiently performed.

5.2.4   Support and Motivation
Project managers sometimes underestimate the power that they have in the
eyes of the project team. Team members usually look to the PM for attention
126     THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


and support. Without this, some personnel begin to feel that nobody cares
what they do or don’t do. In some cases, the PM may have to use special
motivations to assure performance, recognizing that all people are different
and respond in different ways to the pressures of a project. The PM must
also behave impartially so that all members feel they are being fairly treated.


5.2.5   Listening
Effective listening is so important that it is singled out as a separate attribute.
Listening, or not listening, can be very subtlely executed. A good listener
sustains eye contact and responds at the right times with a nod of the head
or appropriate words. Good listening conveys the message that what is being
said is important, and also that the person is important enough to be listened
to. This helps to build trust and encourages further communication and shar-
ing of information. Not listening leads to frustration and gives the message
that you and what you are trying to say are not significant. This can be
devastating, especially to a young project member, and often leads to poor
performance.


5.2.6   Open-Mindedness and Flexibility
Open-mindedness relates to listening but is the next step in the process. It
implies that new information is received appropriately and used to make ad-
justments. Studies by psychologists have shown that some managers work on
mental models based only on past experiences and are not able to absorb new
information. Complaints about such managers are that their ‘‘minds are al-
ready made up.’’ In this context, the PM must be aware of prior prejudices
and be open to the input of new data. Such a person will then be able to
respond to each situation on its own merits and will be able to behave in a
much more flexible manner.


5.2.7   Constructive Criticism
Giving constructive criticism is a crucial job of the PM and it is surprisingly
difficult to do. If a project task is not being adequately performed, it is often
up to the PM to critique the work in such a way as to encourage change
without destroying the ego and motivation of the person working on the task.
This is usually best achieved one on one, but at times may be accomplished
through peer pressure in a group setting. All of this requires careful consid-
eration of the recipient of the criticism and the most effective way of reaching
him or her. Words must be chosen with considerable skill so as to get the
message across in a supportive and encouraging manner.
                                           5.2   PROJECT MANAGER ATTRIBUTES    127

5.2.8    Positive Attitude
The PM must be a positive person who reflects a ‘‘can-do’’ attitude to the
project team, the boss, and the customer. This helps to propagate such a
perspective to all parties and generally leads to an overall sense of accom-
plishment and moving forward. There are many hurdles that the project team
has to deal with and a positive PM makes the job of getting over these hurdles
a learning experience. Conversely, a negative attitude on the part of the PM
likewise tends to spread like wildfire and the team members find themselves
either preferring to be victimized or intensely frustrated.


5.2.9    Technical Competence
This attribute refers to the nuts and bolts of the project demands, from the
domain knowledge of the project to the skills required to read and understand
schedules and cost reports. Without these capabilities, the PM soon drowns
and loses the confidence of the entire project team. A person without these
basic skills should not take on the difficult job of Project Manager.


5.2.10    Discipline
Many projects go astray simply because the PM has not assured a disciplined
approach on the part of all team members. Each and every task must be
viewed as critical in terms of adherence to schedule, cost, and technical per-
formance requirements as well as the impact that they have on other tasks.
Company and project standards, methods, and procedures should be followed
unless there is an excellent reason not to. Experience has shown that projects
with a large component of software development have to be particularly well-
disciplined in order to be successful. If there ever was a ‘‘silver bullet’’ for
the process of developing software, discipline is its name.


5.2.11    Team Builder and Team Player
We explore the matter of team building in the next chapter because it plays
such a central role in the success of a project. Given that perspective, a critical
skill of the PM is to build a team as an effective and organic element of a
project that succeeds. At the same time, the PM must assume the position of
being part of a larger team, the enterprise within which the project is being
executed. Project Managers who take the view that the project is ‘‘we’’ and
the rest of the enterprise are ‘‘they,’’ and that ‘‘we’’ do everything right and
‘‘they’’ are incompetent are very likely to fail. The project exists and works
within the context of the corporate enterprise and, ideally, the two entities
should be mutually supportive.
128      THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


5.2.12    Evaluation and Selection of People
A key activity of the project is to staff it with people who function as a team
and who are competent in the various disciplines required by the project. The
PM should have a special eye for this activity, knowing whom to select and
where to have them assigned. A weak team member tends to pull the entire
project down as people spend their valuable time fixing problems that have
been created by such a person. Work elements or tasks that have to be con-
tinually redone create resentment as well as schedule and cost problems. In
addition, when a weak person cannot be brought up to minimum standards
of performance, the PM also has to recognize that action has to be taken to
fix the problem.

5.2.13    Dedication to Accomplishing Goals
This attribute might also be called determination. Because it is the rule rather
than the exception that problems will arise on essentially every project, the
PM must be dedicated to getting through each and every problem in order to
accomplish the stated project goals. This means not allowing oneself to be
victimized by the ‘‘system,’’ management, or the customer. After a frustrating
day, the PM should have the energy and determination to come back the next
day with a renewed sense of how to relieve the frustration and find effective
work-arounds, if necessary.

5.2.14    Courage and Skill to Resolve Conflicts
Because projects are staffed by people, and people have conflicts, then it is
expected that projects will experience and be affected by conflicts. These can
be internal conflicts, as with two members of the project team not getting
along, or external conflicts, as between a member of the team and a support
organization such as accounting/finance, contracts, human resources, and so
forth. The management of conflict, which is examined in some detail in the
next chapter, requires both courage and skill. Courage is necessary because
it can be quite difficult to confront the conflict, especially if the PM is part
of the conflict situation. Skill is needed because conflict is delicate and wrong
moves can exacerbate the conflict rather than calm it down and resolve it.

5.2.15    Balanced
The PM must be balanced, as a mimimum, in terms of handling people with
a basic sense of fairness and equity, and also in terms of balancing the effort
that goes into satisfying cost, schedule, and performance requirements. In the
former area, for example, prima donna behavior should not be accepted while
other personnel are working with dedication for the common good of the
project. In the latter domain, balance involves understanding how to respond
                                         5.2   PROJECT MANAGER ATTRIBUTES   129

with equilibrium to the forces that would tend to push the project off course.
The PM is ‘‘steering the ship,’’ and demands come from many directions. A
balanced approach to these often conflicting demands will be respected and
supported and will increase the likelihood of success.

5.2.16   Problem Solver
The PM must be a problem solver. This means going beyond the discussion
of a problem and its symptoms and causes. It also requires driving toward a
solution and then implementing that solution. Too many PMs behave as if the
mere examination of a problem is the same as taking the actions necessary
to solve the problem. Also, too many PMs develop a series of solutions but
then procrastinate in the implementation because the solution involves doing
some difficult things such as confronting a supervisor or approaching the
customer. A problem solver is action-oriented and is not fearful of making a
mistake.

5.2.17   Initiative
The PM is active rather than passive and is always aware of the need to take
action when it is appropriate to do so. This can apply to interactions with the
customer as well as with the project team. The PM is always asking the
question: What can be done to improve the project and the situation in which
the project is being carried out? Opportunities do not pass by the PM with
initiative. Such a PM is also on the lookout for ways and means to achieve
continuous improvement.

5.2.18   Creative
The best PMs are creative people who look for new ways of solving problems
or new approaches to the project tasks. This type of creativity is disciplined
and does not resort to new methods unless they show promise of bringing
higher efficiency and productivity to the project. This type of PM also does
not impose his or her creativity on the project team. Rather, there is an un-
derstanding that creativity can and should be expressed by any member of
the project, and all good ideas are solicited and welcomed. By being a creative
person, creativity in others is recognized and valued. This attitude pervades
the project and the excitement of creative solutions is experienced by the
entire team.

5.2.19   An Integrator
The PM must be able to integrate in many dimensions. One such dimension
is the synthesis of technical inputs, finding ways to blend such inputs to
construct an overall solution. Another dimension is to see where and how
130      THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


people can be utilized so that they are challenged rather than bored. A third
dimension is to see the project as a whole, seeking balance in terms of cost,
schedule, and performance. Yet another dimension is to integrate the human
side of managing with the nuts and bolts of planning, organizing, directing,
and monitoring. This type of person is able to perceive relationships between
different parts of a project.

5.2.20    Decision Maker
Finally, but not by any means last in importance, is that the capable PM makes
decisions when it is necessary to do so. The PM knows when it is time to
stop analyzing the problem at hand and bring any given situation to closure.
This type of PM has a sense of when further examination of an issue brings
diminishing returns. The PM is also keenly aware of the level of urgency
associated with all situations and behaves accordingly. Project personnel react
particularly well to a PM who makes decisions and moves forward. If a
decision was made that later is shown to be incorrect, the effective decision
maker is not afraid to admit to a mistake and backtrack, as necessary, to
rectify a bad decision.
   Whereas the preceding attributes have been associated with the Project
Manager, it should be recognized that the Chief Systems Engineer (CSE) is
also a manager, taking responsibility for the system design team and the
overall engineering effort. Therefore, most of the attributes discussed here
apply as well to the CSE. The difference lies mostly in the scope, orientation,
and focus of the work to be performed. Above all, the PM and the CSE must
be able to work harmoniously together and both be dedicated to the success
of the project.

5.2.21    Learning from the Negative
The above text described and briefly discussed twenty positive attributes of a
Project Manager. A study of the leadership characteristics of American Project
Managers [5.1] explored significant aspects of effective PMs, but also looked
at factors that contribute to making a PM ineffective. These factors give us
some insight into what the current or prospective PM needs to avoid where
and whenever possible. At times, we learn more from the negative than we
do from a long list of positives. Thus, the top five negative factors for the
PM are, with the top-listed item the worst:

  • Sets a bad example for the team
  • Is not self-assured
  • Does not have sufficient technical expertise
  • Is a poor communicator
  • Is a less than acceptable motivator
                                                     5.3   SELF-EVALUATION   131

Thus, if these problems have been related to issues that you have had to
struggle with as a PM, you probably would do well to commit yourself to
making improvements in these areas. If you do not do so, you may well be
on the road to failure as a PM.
    In addition to the above personal attributes that a PM might have, the cited
study [5.1] also explored organizational factors that had a negative effect upon
the effectiveness of the PM. These factors are, with the most negative listed
first:

  • Lack of the commitment and support of top management
  • Overall resistance to change
  • A reward system that is inconsistent
  • Reactive behavior instead of planning in advance
  • Insufficient resources

The implication of the above listing is that if you, as a PM, find yourself in
an organization that exhibits these types of behavior patterns, you have an
increased likelihood of getting into trouble. It also may be that efforts you
put forward toward solving these types of organizational problems may serve
you and others in good stead. However, for a PM to be the force behind the
solution of rather large organizational problems is a rather daunting task.
   Finally, and in relation to the same study cited above, we can look at
reasons why projects may tend to experience problems in terms of completion
within budget and schedule. The top five reasons identified, with the most
cited at the top of the list, are:

  • Tools to manage the project in a systematic manner are not employed.
  • The PM is a poor leader.
  • The customer/client is slow to respond.
  • Decisions and corrective actions are not taken in a timely manner.
  • Interorganizational communication is poor.

Here again, the above items provide a ‘‘view of the negative’’ that might be
helpful to the project triumvirate in terms of trying to increase the chances
of success.


5.3   SELF-EVALUATION

The effective PM knows himself or herself. Such a person has a level of
awareness of tendencies toward certain types of behavior and is sensitive to
the behavior patterns of others. To some people, it is not difficult to achieve
this type of sensitivity and understanding. To others, ‘‘knowing oneself’’ is
132      THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


an alien concept. However, it is possible to gain a better understanding
through processes of self-evaluation and taking the time to examine one’s
behavior in a variety of situations. This yields a keener sense of self-
awareness, which is always helpful to a PM. By doing so, it becomes easier
and easier to deal with problem people and problem situations, both of which
improve the likelihood of success. In this section, we explore a few formal
procedures that the PM or the prospective PM (or CSE) can employ in order
to carry out a rudimentary self-evaluation.


5.3.1    Scoring Yourself
Given the attributes of a successful PM, as discussed earlier in this chapter,
it is a simple matter to do a first-order self-evaluation by scoring oneself
against this set of attributes. Table 5.1 places the twenty attributes in a scoring
context, and the reader is asked to take a moment to evaluate himself or
herself directly on the scoring sheet of the figure. A score of ‘‘5’’ should be
given if the reader almost always behaves according to the stated attribute,
and so forth as listed in the table. Take some time now to score yourself.


TABLE 5.1      Evaluation versus Attributes
                                       Attributes                                      Scores*
 1.                     Communicates / shares information                               [      ]
 2.                     Delegates appropriately                                         [      ]
 3.                     Well-organized                                                  [      ]
 4.                     Supports and motivates people                                   [      ]
 5.                     Good Listener                                                   [      ]
 6.                     Open-minded and flexible                                        [      ]
 7.                     Gives constructive criticism                                    [      ]
 8.                     Positive attitude                                               [      ]
 9.                     Technically competent                                           [      ]
10.                     Disciplined                                                     [      ]
11.                     Team builder and player                                         [      ]
12.                     Able to evaluate and select people                              [      ]
13.                     Dedicated to accomplishing goals                                [      ]
14.                     Courage and skill to resolve conflicts                          [      ]
15.                     Balanced                                                        [      ]
16.                     Problem solver                                                  [      ]
17.                     Takes initiative                                                [      ]
18.                     Creative                                                        [      ]
19.                     Integrator                                                      [      ]
20.                     Makes decisions                                                 [      ]
                                                       Total:
*Scoring: 5: almost always; 4: most of the time; 3: often; 2: sometimes; 1: rarely; and 0: never.
                                                      5.3   SELF-EVALUATION    133

   If your aggregate score is in the range 80–100, you are likely to be an
excellent project manager. Essentially, no fine-tuning is necessary and you
should be pleased that you have all the necessary skills to be successful in
just about any management role. If you scored between 60 and 79, you are
doing well but probably have a few areas that need improvement. Those are
likely to be represented by the attributes that you scored yourself as a ‘‘2’’
or lower. If your score was in the range 40–59, you still may be a good
candidate for a PM or manager position but need to work in a disciplined
way to improve your skills. This may involve more substantial training to
develop these skills as well as a deeper sense of self-awareness of your own
behavior and the way that it might be affecting others. If your score was
between 20 and 40, some type of continuous training program is recom-
mended, depending on whether the score was closer to 40 or in the 20 range.
If your score was less than 20, you have a long way to go to become an
effective PM or manager. This does not mean that you cannot get to a PM
or manager position, but it is likely to take a lot of hard work over an extended
period of time.
   Developing PM and manager skills is rarely achieved by reading a few
books on the subject. Reading is only one component of the process. Broadly
speaking, there are two other critical elements. One has to do with the afore-
mentioned self-awareness of your own behavior as well as the behavior of
others. Without this consciousness, one is not absorbing and assessing data
in the real world. The other critical component is experiential learning. This
may be achieved through workshops in which you are asked to carry out
exercises that simulate situations in the real world. By actually experiencing
the processes that evolve from this type of training, learning occurs relatively
quickly and it is possible to improve skills and awareness rather rapidly. Low-
scoring readers who aspire to PM or management positions are urged to
consider some type of experiential training program over a long period of
time. Many such programs also utilize ‘‘personality tests,’’ such as those
briefly described in what follows.


5.3.2    The Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)
The Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) is a very well-known personality
construct [5.2, 5.3] that is based upon the following four polarities:

        Extrovert (E)               versus                    Introvert (I)
        Sensing (S)                 versus                    Intuitive (N)
        Thinking (T)                versus                    Feeling (F)
        Judging (J)                 versus                    Perceptive (P)

By filling out a questionnaire, the user obtains a scored self-profile in each
134    THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


of the eight dimensions. Scores can be very close to the center of a given
polarity or they can show a very distinct preference for one dimension over
another. Each of these aspects of the MBTI is briefly discussed in what fol-
lows. The reader is urged to see if he or she can identify with the various
types.

Extrovert (E). The extrovert is what you might expect from a simple
dictionary definition. This person is sociable and enjoys a multiplicity of
relationships. He or she is usually gregarious, outgoing, energetic, and con-
veys a breadth of interests. According to data collected over a long period of
time with respect to the MBTI, about 75% of the population falls into this
category [5.3].

Introvert (I). This type of person is more closed, turned inward, territorial
and conservative of expending energy. It may be difficult to find out what
such a person is thinking because there is a tendency toward not speaking,
especially in a group situation. Such a person may be concentrated, watchful,
and have limited interactions and relationships with only a few good friends
or colleagues. About 25% of the population at large exhibit this type of
behavior.

Sensing (S). In this category, one finds people who focus on facts, figures
and real-world data and experience in order to grasp and relate to what is
going on around them. Such a person is very practical, down to earth, sen-
sible, realistic, and prone to adopt the perspective that if it cannot be seen or
measured, it is not likely to exist or be true. Past experience is very important
and has a strong influence on views of the current or future situations. Some
75% of the population exhibit this tendency.

Intuition (N). The intuitive person likes to speculate about the future and is
often imaginative, inspirational, and ingenious. This type of individual may
be prone to fantasizing and searching for new ways of doing things. ‘‘Gut’’
reactions may be much more important than facts and figures, which may be
discounted in considering what to do in a project situation. A high ‘‘N,’’ with
respect to this point, may have a serious clash with a high ‘‘S’’ because the
latter will not understand how gut reactions play a role in evaluation and
remediation of problems. About 25% of the population have an ‘‘N’’ score.

Thinking (T). This type of person takes pride in using analytical skills in
puzzling through problems. Some might refer to such a person as ‘‘left-
brained,’’ relying on abilities to be objective and impersonal to analyze and
resolve situations. Such a person attempts to use standards, policies, and laws
to create order and a sense of equity and fairness. Subjective evaluations
might make such a person uncomfortable because objective measurements are
                                                      5.3   SELF-EVALUATION   135

distinctly preferred. The literature suggests that 50% of the population would
tend to qualify as a ‘‘T’’ in the MBTI.

Feeling (F). Representing the opposite polarity from ‘‘thinking,’’ the ‘‘feel-
ing’’ person relies on visceral reactions and human connections. Often, the
‘‘F’’ person looks behind and beyond the words at such things as reactions,
facial expressions, and body language to try to understand what is actually
happening in a given situation. Such a person is comfortable with subjectivity
and emotions in others and himself or herself. As a manager, he or she tends
to empathize with the situation of subordinates and shows a great deal of
patience and understanding. This type of person likes harmony and spends
time to try to persuade other people on a preferred position. About 50% of
the population score in this category.

Judging (J). The judging person likes to make decisions and move on to the
next problem. This person insists on closure and has an internal sense of
urgency about almost all matters. He or she responds very well to deadlines
and works very hard to assure that all milestones on a project are met. Such
a person likes to plan and then proceed with measuring against the plan. The
‘‘J’’ person is not very patient and likes to converge to core issues as quickly
as possible. About 50% of the population have a ‘‘J’’ profile.

Perceiving (P). As an opposite from the ‘‘J,’’ the perceiving individual is
happier with open-ended assignments and situations that allow more flexible
responses. Such a person might tend to want to collect more data about a
given problem, with little consciousness regarding the time that it takes to do
so. The ‘‘go with the flow’’ position of the high ‘‘P’’ often drives a high ‘‘J’’
to anxiety and anger. Whereas the ‘‘P’’ person may adopt a ‘‘wait and see’’
attitude, the ‘‘J’’ wants to ‘‘get the show on the road’’ [5.3]. About 50% of
the population have this type of characteristic.

   One of the conclusions that might be drawn from the MBTI is that people
with extreme and opposite scores for a given polarity may have a tendency
to clash with one another. For example, if a PM is a high ‘‘S’’ and a project
staff member is a high ‘‘N,’’ these two people, with their different views of
the world and behavior tendencies, may frustrate each other. Although this is
not a hard-and-fast rule, it is a point that may explain certain personal antip-
athies. This may be generalized to a main application of the MBTI as well
as other such tests, namely, that it may be used to try to understand why
people do not get along on a project and what each may do to try to better
understand why and what might be done to bridge such a gap of understand-
ing. Further, if any two people have absolutely opposite MBTI profiles, as
for example an ENTJ versus an ISFP, the gap may be even broader and
deeper. Having an awareness of these natural differences helps to explain
136     THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


various types of conflict. It may also provide a basis for an appreciation of
differences, which could serve to strengthen a project team and its overall
performance.
   Another obvious question regarding the MBTI: Is there a preferred MBTI
profile for a project manager? Some investigators of the field of management
believe that this is true. For example, J. Davidson Frame [5.4] appears to
select the ESTJ profile as the preferred type for a PM. However, he also
points out that, for research projects, ‘‘ESTJ project managers who are una-
ware of the differences in psychological type are likely to be exasperated by
their workers,’’ based on the differences in how they deal with and see the
world. The key word, from this author’s point of view, is ‘‘awareness’’ and
that people who have a strong awareness of both similarities and differences
can make both a strength in a project situation. Research-oriented people can
be doing the research tasks and extroverts can be doing the marketing and
project presentations. Facts-and-figures people can be happily devoted to the
project control activities and high Js can help to bring focus and closure to
interminable meetings. In short, we are all different and we perform best when
we are working in areas of strength rather than weakness. The aware Project
Manager knows this and spends the time necessary to understand differences
and assure that individual strengths and tendencies are fully utilized and that
the effects of weaknesses are minimized. Thus, even if a PM is an INFP, in
distinction to Frame’s ESTJ, excellent results can be achieved on the project
if such a PM has the awareness, skill, and discipline to use a team approach
that fully utilizes the complementary capabilities of that team.


5.3.3   Other Personality Considerations
The MBTI is not the only ‘‘test’’ that might be employed to carry out some
type of self-evaluation. There are literally dozens of others that will be helpful
in a lifelong process of trying to better understand oneself. Another such
approach is cited as a Communication Self-Assessment Exercise [5.5] and it
is based on numerical scoring for the following ‘‘styles’’:

  • Action
  • People
  • Process
  • Idea

The maximum score for any one style is 20 and the total score for all the
styles adds to 40. Thus, a completely balanced score would be 10–10–10–
10. A summary of what the various people with these styles like to talk about
as well as how they tend to behave is provided in Table 5.2 [5.5]. We see
from these descriptions that there is a great potential for conflict between
people who have widely differing scores. For example, the action-oriented
                                                            5.3    SELF-EVALUATION       137

TABLE 5.2      Communication Styles [5.4]
Styles / Features                   Content                                   Process
Action (A)          They talk about:                              They are:
                    ● Results             ● Feedback              ● Pragmatic (down to
                    ● Objectives          ● Experience              earth)
                    ● Performance         ● Challenges            ● Direct (to the point)
                    ● Productivity        ● Achievements          ● Impatient
                    ● Efficiency          ● Change                ● Decisive
                    ● Moving ahead        ● Decisions             ● Quick (jump from one
                    ● Responsibility                                idea to another)
                                                                  ● Energetic (challenge
                                                                    others)
Process (PR)        They talk about:                              They are:
                    ● Facts               ● Trying out            ● Systematic (step by
                    ● Procedures          ● Analysis                step)
                    ● Planning            ● Observations          ● Logical (cause and
                    ● Organizing          ● Proof                   effect)
                    ● Controlling         ● Details               ● Factual
                    ● Testing                                     ● Verbose
                                                                  ● Unemotional
                                                                  ● Cautious
                                                                  ● Patient
People (PE)         They talk about:                              They are:
                    ● People              ● Self-                 ● Spontaneous
                    ● Needs                   development         ● Empathetic
                    ● Motivations         ● Sensitivity           ● Warm
                    ● Teamwork            ● Awareness             ● Subjective
                    ● Communications      ● Cooperation           ● Emotional
                    ● Feelings            ● Beliefs               ● Perceptive
                    ● Team spirit         ● Values                ● Sensitive
                    ● Understanding       ● Expectations
                                          ● Relations
Idea (I)            They talk about:                              They are:
                    ● Concepts            ● What’s new in         ● Imaginative
                    ● Innovation              the field           ● Charismatic
                    ● Creativity          ● Interdependence       ● Difficult to understand
                    ● Opportunities       ● New ways              ● Ego-centered
                    ● Possibilities       ● New methods           ● Unrealistic
                    ● Grand designs       ● Improving             ● Creative
                    ● Issues              ● Problems              ● Full of ideas
                                          ● Potential             ● Provocative
                                          ● Alternatives
(Reprinted by permission–Reference 5.4)
138     THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


person may have little patience with the process-oriented person, who may
be perceived to be too slow and interested only in form rather than substance.
Similarly, the latter may regard the people-oriented person as too emotional
and subjective and not understand how such attitudes fit into the disciplined
world of project management. Potential trouble spots on a project may be
predicted from the examination of the interaction of these different styles,
which is explored in Section 5.4.


5.3.4   Psychological Decision Theory
The personality types represented by the above Myers–Briggs test, as well as
the action–people–process–idea notion, indicate that we have different ten-
dencies in the way that we look at the world and the problems with which
we are faced. These usually result in different approaches to our jobs, and in
the case of this text, different ways of dealing with the many issues that arise
in managing a project. However, various researchers have studied human be-
havior patterns and have found that there are certain tendencies that are more-
or-less common to large numbers of us. These can be thought of as fitting
within the general category of psychological decision theory, championed by
D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky [5.6], among others. These behavior
patterns are relevant to our subject because they may affect how we might
behave as project managers or as members of a project team. Three aspects
of the results provided by these researchers are:

  • Regression to the mean
  • Representativeness and availability
  • Loss avoidance

   Regression to the mean refers to a general tendency to let down after a
stellar performance and to improve after a poor performance. Its application
to the world of project management might suggest that after a high-
performing core team of software engineers has been working overtime for
months in order to complete a software system, it is likely that for the next
assignment they might well ‘‘regress to the mean.’’ So what might be done
about this? Depending upon the situation, one might consider (a) giving the
team some time to decompress, and/or (b) starting the next difficult assign-
ment off with a different core team, if possible.
   Representativeness and availability both refer to setting up a mental model
that is based upon prior experience rather than current facts and likelihoods.
Its relevance to project management has to do with what people might do
when trying to solve a particularly knotty problem. A thought pattern, for
example, might be expressed as: ‘‘When we saw a problem like this before,
we cut back the staff and that solved the problem.’’ The person with this
particular thought and suggested solution might be viewed by other members
                                   5.4   INTERACTIONS WITH YOUR SUPERVISOR   139

of the team as (a) not seeing how the current problem differs from the pre-
vious problem, (b) stubborn in not being receptive to other solutions, and (c)
headed down the road of doing some serious damage to the project by re-
moving some people from the team. We all learn valuable lessons from prior
experience, but we must also be open to new solutions that are based upon
the data and information of the situation we are in today.
   Loss avoidance is the possible tendency for people to avoid virtually sure
losses in favor of cases where expected value losses may be much greater.
This might well account for why people are reluctant to sell stock holdings
at a loss, hoping (against hope) that all will be better in the future. In terms
of project management, it may be relatable to not being willing to take a poor
performer off the job, or moving on to a different product or customer even
though you are not being successful with the ones at hand. Losses are hard
to accept in many situations, but the project triumvirate needs to be able, at
certain times, to take a loss and then move on. Perhaps you can think of
project management situations you have been involved with in which such an
approach would have been the correct one.


5.4     INTERACTIONS WITH YOUR SUPERVISOR

Poor interactions between boss and subordinate often appear to be the rule
rather than the exception in projects as well as all domains within the broad
field of management. Indeed, this is the most dominant and important problem
yet to be solved in the management arena. Almost everyone seems to have a
‘‘bad’’ boss and the worlds of industry, government, and academia are rife
with ferocious complaints about the boss.
   As a means of exploring this issue, the reader is asked to page back to
Table 5.1 and now score your boss with respect to the cited attributes and
scoring system. Compare your own score with the score that you gave your
supervisor. Are you one of the very large population that indeed has a bad
boss?

5.4.1    The Bad Boss
In the context of a project, the ‘‘bad’’ or difficult boss shows up in two
relationships: between the PM and his or her supervisor and between the PM
and the project personnel. The PM may have a bad boss who interferes with
and fails to support the activities of the PM. The project staff, similarly, may
have a bad boss (the PM or CSE) who has few of the attributes discussed
earlier in this chapter. Beyond the realm of these attributes, the boss may be
a ‘‘pathologic’’ type who sabotages his or her people at every turn.
   Although there are numerous studies and descriptions of bad bosses, a
particularly interesting treatise is presented by Robert Bramson [5.7], who
identifies seven bad boss types, namely:
140    THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


  1. Hostile-aggressives
  2. Complainers
  3. Silent and unresponsives
  4. Super-agreeables
  5. Know-it-all experts
  6. Negativists
  7. Indecisives

Bramson describes the hostile-aggressives as Sherman tanks, snipers, or ex-
ploders. Such bosses are not likely to be sympathetic to the many problems
that invariably arise on a project. Instead, they are prone to being actively
abusive and to run over all people who are perceived to have caused the
problem or who are not able to provide an instantaneous solution. Interactions
with such a boss are enervating and leave one either exhausted or extremely
angry. Hostile-aggressives are very toxic people.
    The complainers tend to find everything incomplete and inadequate and
adopt the position that all would be well if only he or she had competent
people on the job. The complainer can also be less negative about immediate
subordinates, but focused instead on his or her boss and other people in the
enterprise that are not cooperating and doing their jobs. This type of person
prefers to be a victim and contaminates all who would listen with incessant
complaining. In its most virulent form, the targets of the complaints are the
subordinates.
    The silent and unresponsive bosses appear to soak up inputs and requests
for help but provide no feedback or assistance. In distinction to the hostile-
aggressives, these people may be passive aggressives or they may be simply
unable to keep up with the numerous issues and problems of project man-
agement. Their own inadequacy may be reflected in their unresponsiveness
because they may be fearful of appearing to be stupid or uninformed.
    Super-agreeables are pleasant to a fault and avoid ruffling feathers and
confronting difficult situations and people. They therefore refuse to deal with
controversial issues for fear of making someone else angry or, indeed, coping
with their own submerged anger. Because many project-oriented problems
require straight talk and confrontation of problems, such bosses are likely to
be of no help whatsoever. At best, they may be empathetic but will not engage
in even a minor battle to move a project forward. As PMs, super-agreeables
find it extremely difficult to carry out a complex negotiation with a customer
or with superiors.
    The know-it-all expert tends to undermine the work of all subordinates.
Either as PM or CSE, this type of boss frustrates subordinates by always
having the ‘‘best’’ answer to a problem, whether it be administrative or tech-
nical in nature. This behavior pattern oftens leads to a ‘‘clamming up’’ by
subordinates because they perceive the boss as someone who is not able to
listen to and elicit a variety of opinions and solutions. ‘‘Because the boss
                                    5.4   INTERACTIONS WITH YOUR SUPERVISOR   141

knows all the answers,’’ they reason, ‘‘let’s withold our views and any con-
structive thinking about the problem.’’ This, of course, can lead to disaster in
terms of putting best efforts forward, which, in turn, leads to sabotaging a
project.
   The negativists cannot find something good in anything that is done on a
project. They embody this negative attitude that causes subordinates to avoid
interactions with them. They reflect the opposite of a can-do viewpoint and
therefore can be deadly in dealing with customers as well as subordinates.
This type of behavior, of course, takes its toll on a project staff and inevitably
leads to loss of interest, productivity, and performance. Subordinates want to
transfer to a different project as soon as possible.
   Indecisive bosses are invariably frustrating because they cannot bring them-
selves to a point of closure. By trying to keep all options open all the time,
they fail to commit themselves and therefore fail to make progress. Such
bosses are often fearful of making mistakes, which paralyzes them as well as
the overall project. Projects run by such bosses tend to bog down and overrun
schedule. They often also want to ‘‘study a problem to death,’’ leading to
serious diminishing returns and missing key milestones. Subordinates soon
learn that they should make decisions themselves and ask for forgiveness
rather than permission, if they have the wherewithall to do so.
   If you have a boss that scores very low with respect to the attribute eval-
uation of Table 5.1, or fits one of the seven types just discussed, you have a
serious problem. If you are a PM, the success of your project is in some
jeopardy. If you are a worker on a project, you are likely to be frustrated and
be engaged in a project that almost certainly will fail. The question that
presents itself then becomes: What can you do to more effectively ‘‘manage
your boss’’ so as to minimize your frustration and anger and maximize the
chances of your own personal success and the success of your project?

5.4.2   Managing Your Boss
Effective management of your boss requires an awareness of both how you
tend to behave and an understanding of the patterns of your boss’s behavior.
Further, rather than insisting that your boss change behavior, you should
change your behavior, which will have the effect of forcing your boss to deal
with something new. This is likely to change the dynamic of what might be
going on between both people. As an example, if you have been passive as
a response to the wilting onslaught of a hostile-aggressive boss, you might
try a more aggressive response. This change of behavior is likely to create a
new dynamic that may lead to some changes in how your boss deals with
you. Remember, the only way to deal with a bully is to fight back.
   A well-considered and rational analysis of the situation is a good first step
in trying to manage your boss by changes in your own behavior. An exam-
ple of how one might do that is shown in Table 5.3 in relation to the
action–people–process–action paradigm previously discussed. This table
142       THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


TABLE 5.3      Predicting Boss–Subordinate Trouble Spots
                                                         List two complaints from:
Boss*                     Subordinates*             Boss                 Subordinate
A, PE                        PR, I                  1.                   1.
                                                    2.                   2.
PR, I                        A, PE                  1.                   1.
                                                    2.                   2.
PR, PE                       A, I                   1.                   1.
                                                    2.                   2.
A, PR                        PE, I                  1.                   1.
                                                    2.                   2.
A, I                         PR, PE                 1.                   1.
                                                    2.                   2.
PE, I                        PR, A                  1.                   1.
                                                    2.                   2.
*A: action; PE: people; PR: process; and I: idea.



shows various combinations of boss and subordinate types and calls for in-
formation about how both types might complain about each other. Try filling
in the blanks. This will help in trying to understand how you might view the
situation both as a boss and as a subordinate.
   Another perspective regarding the management of a boss can be found by
a careful reading of Bramson’s book [5.7], particularly in relation to what to
do about the seven bad bosses that he describes. His prescriptions for these
extreme cases provide some valuable insight into new ways of behaving. They
also implicitly reinforce the point that changes in your own behavior are the
most effective ways of coping with a bad boss.
   Finally, we list some more moderate actions that might be taken with a
not very good but less than pathologic boss:

       1. Keep all interactions on a formal basis.
       2. Provide short but regular status reports on your activities.
       3. Develop lists of items you think are important to accomplish and pre-
          sent these to your boss for agreement.
       4. Demonstrate your capabilities with respect to
          • Your judgment
          • Your creativity and competence
          • Your responsiveness and responsibility
       5. Look for opportunities to build trust.
       6. Do not confront in public situations.
       7. Do not allow yourself to be victimized.
       8. Speak to a trusted colleague who knows your boss to try to get another
          point of view.
                                               5.5   CUSTOMER INTERACTION   143

   9. Take your boss to lunch to explore better ways of interacting.
  10. If these do not work, speak to your boss’s supervisor or the human
      resources people in your organization.

In all cases, try not to resign yourself to living with a seriously bad boss.
Life is too short to not try to fix the problem.


5.5   CUSTOMER INTERACTION

In recent years, it has finally been recognized that the ‘‘customer is king.’’
That is, the customer may not always be right, but he or she is paying the
bills and desires to have the results of a project provide appropriate value for
the money that is being spent.
   In broad terms, from the perspective of a PM or CSE, there are several
types of customers, namely:

  1. The outside direct customer
  2. The outside surrogate customer
  3. The internal customer

   The outside direct customer is the entity outside the organization for which
the project is being executed, with such a customer directly using the results
of the project. As an example, if the project involves the building by a systems
contractor of an on-line transaction-processing (OLTP) system for a bank, the
bank would be the outside direct customer. The user needs and requirements
are defined directly by the bank, and the bank must be satisfied that the system
ultimately meets these needs and requirements.
   In the case of the outside surrogate customer, an agency or group is serving
as a surrogate customer, representing the end user needs and requirements.
This situation is typified by many government agency customers whereby one
group is the acquisition agent and another group is the ultimate user. One
may see this situation, for example, in the U.S. Navy, where one agency or
center serves as the acquisition agent for the end user, which is the Navy’s
fleet. Thus, the needs and requirements of the fleet are represented and trans-
lated by the surrogate customer who is, in some sense, a ‘‘middleman’’ in the
overall acquisition process.
   The internal customer case may be described by a project being carried
out totally within the confines of an organization or company. For example,
some enterprises have a Management Information Systems (MIS) or Infor-
mation Resource Management (IRM) Department that produces information
systems for the rest of the organization. The project is thereby responsible to
a user inside the company. At the same time, the PM is likely to have a
supervisor who reports upward to a group that is parallel (e.g., the corporate
information officer, CIO) to the customer group organization.
144    THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


   The point is that whereas each of the preceding customer situations pre-
sents somewhat different problems to the PM, all must be treated with due
respect to the customer, and due regard for the customer’s needs and require-
ments. To do otherwise is to create problems rather than solve them.
   A summary of a dozen points that the PM and the CSE should keep in
mind in dealing with a customer are listed in Exhibit 5.2.

  Exhibit 5.2: Guidelines for Dealing with Your Customer
   1. Your customer has a MBTI profile; try to figure it out and behave
      accordingly.
   2. Focus on the needs and requirements as stated by your customer.
   3. Imagine yourself in your customer’s position.
   4. Listen intently to what your customer is saying.
   5. ‘‘Sell’’ your approach and end product or service to your customer.
   6. Speak to your customer at least once a week.
   7. Be thoroughly professional in all interactions.
   8. Live up to all commitments.
   9. If your customer is headed in the wrong direction, gently suggest al-
      ternative directions and actions.
  10. Demonstrate your technical and management skills.
  11. Maintain customer contact and interaction in parallel channels above
      the level of the PM (e.g., vice president to vice president).
  12. Treat your customer with honesty and respect.

  Following these ‘‘rules’’ helps to establish a long-term trusting relationship
with your customer. This does not guarantee success, but provides an overall
environment and relationship that helps to foster success. Perhaps the most
important rule is the last one dealing with honesty and respect. This is the
most critical aspect of dealing with a customer.


5.6   LEADERSHIP

The headline of an article in a newspaper on computers suggested that the
purchase by Loral of IBM’s federal operations raised ‘‘leadership questions.’’
This headline echoed what has become a critical issue for many of our or-
ganizations and enterprises—that of leadership. Whereas not too many years
ago, corporate executives were under close scrutiny for their management
skills, or lack thereof, today the key word is leadership. There is little ques-
tion, therefore, that a great deal of attention has been focused on the top
management, in both government and industry, having the requisite leadership
attributes. Some of that focus, indeed, is seeping downward into the domain
                                                            5.6   LEADERSHIP   145

of the Project Manager and the Chief Systems Engineer. Companies are look-
ing for people who are not only outstanding managers, but are leaders as well.
The conventional wisdom is that leaders are a small ‘‘subset’’ of good man-
agers; leaders have extra qualities that transcend the skills of even the best
manager.
   From experience, leaders are not necessarily born to such a capability, but
can be taught and can grow into leaders. For the PM or CSE who has achieved
a high level of competence in this type of position, and who aspires to become
a leader at the project and ultimately at higher levels in an organization, we
add this short perspective on leadership.


5.6.1   Situational Leadership
One of the well-accepted models of leadership is the so-called ‘‘situational’’
leadership paradigm [5.8]. The premise of this model is fundamentally that
leaders choose or select a leadership ‘‘style’’ that depends upon the situation
in which they find themselves. The situations are characterized by two basic
behavior dimensions, namely, (1) task or directive behavior, and (2) relation-
ship or supportive behavior. In both cases, the leader correctly perceives the
situation and modifies behavior to suit the circumstances.
   If we form a scale from low to high for both task and relationship behavior,
we can visualize the following four situations that describe the fundamentals
of the situational leadership model:

  Situation 1 (S1): High task, low relationship
  Situation 2 (S2): High task, high relationship
  Situation 3 (S3): High relationship, low task
  Situation 4 (S4): Low relationship, low task

   For S1, there is a high need to direct the behavior of subordinates, who
generally are characterized by a low level of maturity. At the same time, the
situation does not call necessarily for a close or supportive relationship during
the execution of the work. In this type of situation, the leader is ‘‘telling’’ the
followers what has to be done and is closely supervising the work as it is
being performed. The argument is that the leader is selecting this mode of
behavior because that is what is called for in this type of situation.
   In situation 2 (S2), the task behavior is also high (follower maturity is
low), but there is a high need for relationship and supportive behavior. In
such a case, also recognized by the leader, he or she is ‘‘selling’’ by making
sure that decisions are understood and that all questions are appropriately
answered. The followers need to be ‘‘sold,’’ so to speak, partly because they
are not mature and partly because they require close contact with the leader.
   In the third situation (S3), relationship and supporting behavior remains
high, but the task behavior is low (maturity of follower is high). Here the
146     THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


leader is ‘‘participating’’ with the subordinates by sharing ideas and encour-
aging inputs and ideas to facilitate the decision-making process. The leader
and followers are more in a collaborative type of relationship, with each
making distinct progress through such an interaction.
   Finally, in the last situation (S4), both the relationship (supporting) and
task (directive) behaviors are low and the follower level of maturity is high.
Here the leader is ‘‘delegating’’ a great deal of responsibility to the subordi-
nates, feeling confident that they are capable of carrying out the various re-
quired tasks without much supervision. The leader is more of an observer and
monitor, and the followers have the skills and perspectives for almost inde-
pendent progress.
   This situational model, then, is characterized by a conscious change of
behavior on the part of the leader, adapting a leadership style that is tuned to
the situation at hand. If the followers are not homogeneous in their capabilities
and needs, the leader treats certain of them in one way (e.g., telling) and
others in another way (e.g., delegating). In summary, the leader assumes the
following roles for the four situations:

  • Telling (S1)
  • Selling (S2)
  • Participating (S3)
  • Delegating (S4)

We note that there is little emphasis, in this model, on the specific attributes
of the leader. The qualities or traits of a leader are basically not addressed,
other than that he or she is able to perceive situations and modify behavior
in response to these situations. The following section explores the matter of
the characteristics of a leader.


5.6.2   The Attributes of a Leader
There have been numerous investigations of the attributes of a leader. Indeed,
this has been the main thrust of recent analyses of the leader and how he or
she behaves. In broad terms, these explorations have taken two interrelated
tacks. One has been to examine known leaders and to see how they tend to
behave and what their personal characteristics are or have been. The other
has looked at the demands placed on the leader, functioning in all domains
(i.e., industry, government, academia).
    In a survey of more than two dozen sources [5.9], some of the documented
leadership investigations that have defined requisite leadership attributes have
been summarized. The results are listed in Exhibit 5.3, with the order going
from most to least important.
                                                           5.6   LEADERSHIP   147

  Exhibit 5.3: Results of Survey of Leadership Attributes
  Critical Attributes
   1. Empowering, supporting, motivating, trusting
   2. Having a vision, long-term viewpoint
   3. Cooperating, sharing, team playing, and team building
   4. Renewing, learning, growing, educating
  Extremely Important Attributes
   5. Being communicative
   6. Having culture and values, serving as a role model
   7. Being productive, efficient, determined
  Significant Attributes
   8. Demonstrating time management, prioritization
   9. Being action-oriented
  10. Making a contribution, commitment, legacy
  11. Being innovative, imaginative
  12. Having integrity, morality, humanity
  13. Demonstrating skill, knowledge, substance

   The attributes listed in the top seven all had different scores with a natural
breakpoint between numbers 4 and 5. The most critical attribute, from the
exhibit, was outer-directed and dealt with empowering, supporting, motivat-
ing, and trusting others. The issue of having a vision, so dominant in the
news, scored number 2. The third most critical attribute was cooperating,
sharing, team building, and team playing. This is distinctly opposite to some
of the competitive behavior that we see in enterprises today, much of which
is destructive and leads to burnout. Also, we note that such a leader is not
only able to build a team, but can function easily as part of someone else’s
team (if that someone else is also a leader). Rounding out the critical attributes
is that of renewing, learning, growing, and educating. Such a leader is dedi-
cated to individual as well as corporate growth, believing that without a con-
stant renewal process, the organization will stagnate and ultimately fail.
   In the second category of extremely important attributes, the list is led by
the communicative leader. We stressed the importance of this characteristic
and have more to say about it as well in the next chapter. Inculcating a culture
and value system is next on the list. Many organizations take on the mantle
of the culture supported by a strong leader (e.g., Tom Watson at IBM, Henry
Ford at Ford Motor Company, Bill Gates at Microsoft). The culture is usually
reflected in the personal behavior of the leader serving as a role model. Fi-
nally, and completing this category, the leader is productive, efficient, and
determined. Many leaders, through their constant doggedness and determi-
nation, are able to achieve their desired results for themselves as well as their
148     THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


organizations. They do not allow themselves to be stopped by obstacles and
initial setbacks.
   There are six attributes in the significant category. Having the ability to
prioritize and manage their time heads this list. Next, the leader is action-
oriented, preferring to move ahead even when it may be an errant direction.
Such a leader is able to make mistakes, learn from them, and retrace steps,
if necessary. Next, the leader has a sense of the contribution that all are
making to the overall well-being of the organization. Such a leader is com-
mitted to the enterprise and wishes to leave a legacy and mark on the orga-
nization. The leader is also innovative and imaginative and is able to try new
modes of behavior, even if he or she is not the originator of the new idea.
Number 12 on the list is having a definitive and positive sense of integrity,
morality, and humanity. Many despotic ‘‘leaders,’’ especially those who have
led their countries down destructive paths for themselves and others, would
fail this test of leadership. Finally, and curiously last on the list of thirteen,
the leader has the skills, knowledge, and substance in the domain of the
enterprise, whether it be business, engineering, politics, or some other arena.
   Another more recent exploration by this author [5.10] of the attributes of
leaders examined the writings of twenty-four investigators of this topic. The
overall conclusion was the set of five attributes listed below as the most
significant.


  Exhibit 5.4 Additional Selected Attributes of Leaders [5.10]
  • Practical visionary
  • Inclusive communicator
  • Positive doer
  • Renewing facilitator
  • Principled integrator


The practical visionary is able to focus upon distant goals, but does not have
his or her head in the clouds. The inclusive communicator has the critical
skill of being able to communicate, and makes sure that everyone is and feels
part of the team. The positive doer maintains a positive attitude in the face
of all kinds of obstacles, and keeps moving forward, accomplishing real things
in the real world. The renewing facilitator helps other members of the team
reach their goals, crossing bridges as necessary from the old to the new.
Finally, the principled integrator is able to synthesize important pieces to
contruct the whole, maintaining an ethical perspective from beginning to end.
   The reader with a further interest in the attributes of a leader can refer
especially to the two sources cited in this section [5.9, 5.10] as well as to
other significant sources [5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 5.14, 5.15].
                                                   QUESTIONS / EXERCISES   149

5.6.3   The Project Manager as Leader
One might argue that requiring the PM and the CSE to be leaders, in the
previous context, is somewhat of a stretch. However, the PM and the CSE
are de facto leaders of their respective project teams. They may function well
or they may function poorly in these capacities. The objective is to try to
grow so that they can become leaders in the full sense of the word. This
requires an understanding of what leadership means and a clear and deter-
mined receptivity to leadership ways of being and behaving. An abstraction
of leadership attributes in terms of the Project Manager and Chief Systems
Engineer perspectives is cited Exhibit 5.5, using the notion and mnemonic of
remaining receptive to what it might take in terms of changes in behavior
and ways of interacting that require close examination.

  Exhibit 5.5: A Leadership Mnemonic for the PM and CSE
  R: Results and process-oriented
  E: Encourages positive change
  C: Communicates
  E: Empathizes and trusts
  P: People developer
  T: Team builder
   I: Integrates and synthesizes
  V: Visionary
  E: Exhibits a can-do attitude

   Keeping the attributes of a true leader in focus at all times gives the PM
and the CSE opportunities to grow from simply being a manager into becom-
ing a leader. This goal is within the grasp of the receptive person who can
embrace and deal with internal and external change and growth processes.



QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

5.1 Develop a score for a Project Manager you have worked for using the
    format of Table 5.1.
5.2 Develop a score for yourself as a Project Manager using the format of
    Table 5.1.
5.3 Make an educated guess at the Myers–Briggs profile for your boss. Do
    the same for yourself. What might this suggest in terms of your rela-
    tionship with your boss?
150     THE PROJECT MANAGER AND LEADERSHIP


5.4 Repeat the preceding exercise for the action–people–process–idea
    assessment.
5.5 Fill in the blanks in Table 5.3. Discuss the results.
5.6 Evaluate your boss in terms of the cited critical leadership attributes in
    Exhibit 5.3. Do the same for yourself. Then evaluate your boss in terms
    of the five leadership attributes listed in Exhibit 5.4. Do the same for
    yourself.
5.7 Construct your own ‘‘top five’’ list of leadership attributes that you be-
    lieve are the most important for success as a Project Manager. Explain
    your choices for this list.
5.8 Examine the three aspects of psychological decision theory shown in
    the text of this chapter and for each of them cite an example of how it
    might apply to managing a project.




REFERENCES

5.1  Zimmerer, T., and M. Yasin (1998). ‘‘A Leadership Profile of American Project
     Managers,’’ IEEE Engineering Management Review (Winter).
5.2 Myers, I. Briggs, with P. B. Myers (1980). Gifts Differing. Palo Alto, CA: Con-
     sulting Psychologists Press.
5.3 Keirsey, D., and M. Bates (1978). Please Understand Me. Del Mar, CA: Pro-
     metheus Nemesis Books.
5.4 Frame, J. D. (1987). Managing Projects in Organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-
     Bass.
5.5 Casse, P. (1981). Communication: A Self-Assessment Exercise. Washington, DC:
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Economic Devel-
     opment Institute, and the World Bank.
5.6 Kahneman, D., P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds. (1982). Judgment Under Uncer-
     atinty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
5.7 Bramson, R. M. (1981). Coping with Difficult People. New York: Ballantine
     Books.
5.8 Hersey, P., and K. Blanchard (1977). Management of Organizational Behavior
     Utilizing Group Resources, 3rd edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
5.9 Eisner, H. (1993). Leadership Imperatives: Do They Support Creativity and In-
     novation? Paper read at the American Society for Engineering Management
     (ASEM) 1993 Annual Conference, Dallas, October 22–25.
5.10 Eisner, H. (2000). Reengineering Yourself and Your Company: From Engineer to
     Manager to Leader. Norwood, MA: Artech House.
5.11 Maccoby, M. (1981). The Leader. New York: Simon and Schuster.
                                                             REFERENCES     151

5.12 Bennis, W., and B. Nanus (1985). Leaders. New York: Harper & Row.
5.13 Leavitt, H. J. (1986). Corporate Pathfinders. New York: Viking.
5.14 Zaleznik, A. (1989). The Managerial Mystique: Restoring Leadership in Busi-
     ness. New York: Harper & Row.
5.15 Gardner, J. (1990). On Leadership. New York: The Free Press.
                6
TEAM BUILDING AND
TEAM INTERACTIONS




6.1   INTRODUCTION

This chapter deals principally with issues surrounding team building and in-
teractions between team members. The most natural area of focus is the pro-
ject team as a whole and the Project Manager (PM) as the head of that team.
In point of fact, however, there are actually several teams within the context
of a project team. The Chief Systems Engineer (CSE) has the engineering
group as his or her team. That group is usually broken down into subgroups
(see Figure 1.2), so that there may also be a hardware engineering team and
a software engineering team, and so on. If the project is large enough, the
Project Controller (PC) is likely to have a team of people working on project
measurement and control matters.
   A variety of other activities that are often carried out within a team context
are considered in this chapter, as depicted in Figure 6.1. Included are the
activities of holding meetings and making presentations. These are forums
for both internal and external communications and doing them correctly en-
hances overall project operation. In addition, and possibly inevitably, team
members will come into conflict with either one another or the team leader.
Thus, we also deal with the matter of conflict resolution and management in
this chapter. In today’s world, writing proposals to potential customers is a
critical part of an enterprise and is almost always carried out by teams. Some
ground rules for this important activity are presented and explored. Finally,
the chapter is completed with a brief discussion of some practical ways to
motivate and create incentives for members of a project team.


                                                                             153
154      TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS



                                                           Building the
             Communications
                                                           project team




                                   Team building
           Conflict                                                Motivation
                                        and
         management                                              and incentives
                                    interactions


                Meetings                                      Proposals



                                    Presentations

                   Figure 6.1. Team building and areas of interaction.



6.2    COMMUNICATIONS

We have stressed the importance of strong and effective communication both
within and external to a project. We have also seen that communication skills
are essential to the success of a manager and a leader. Poor communicators
are likely to fail at the challenging job of running a project or a systems
engineering team. It is an axiom of management that there can never be too
much effective communication. It is almost always true that there is too little
positive and honest communication.
   Strong and well-considered communication is at the heart of building a
productive team. Thus, we pause at this point to highlight some of the critical
aspects of being an effective communicator. These are listed in Exhibit 6.1
and briefly discussed in what follows.

  Exhibit 6.1: Essentials of an Effective Communicator
      1. Listen.
      2. Adopt a management by walking around (MBWA) way of being.
      3. Assure participation by all team members.
      4. Synthesize and integrate.
      5. Meet with all key project personnel every week.
      6. Insist on information ‘‘flow-down.’’
      7. Hold short ‘‘information’’ meetings.
      8. Communicate with boss and other project support people.
      9. Talk to customer at least once a week.
                                                    6.2   COMMUNICATIONS    155

  10. Maintain a positive and supportive attitude.
  11. Offer training for poor communicators.
  12. Assure that communications is part of personnel evaluation.


   As indicated in the previous chapter, listening is a crucial part of com-
municating. It gives respect to the person who is talking to you and conveys
the message that he or she has something to say that is of value. Regarding
management by walking around (MBWA), this is an informal way for the
PM and CSE to obtain and convey information in an easy and nonintrusive
manner. Coming to the workplace of a subordinate also suggests that the
manager is comfortable with and wishes to be in contact with the ‘‘innards’’
of the project. The PM should also make sure that the more reticent of the
project team are invited to participate. Otherwise, the dominant members of
the team may monopolize the discussion, both formally and informally, and
the more laid-back people will not put forth their ideas. Many people want
to be asked what they think. A smart and sensitive PM understands that and
does the asking. True communication also involves listening, absorbing what
was said, integrating it with other information, and providing the results to
those one is communicating with.
   As another ground rule, the PM and CSE should be in touch with all key
project people, not necessarily all personnel, at least once a week. MBWA is
but one way to accomplish that. A short telephone call, or a short meeting,
also assures that contact is continuous and productive. The flow-down of
information is sometimes assumed, but often not carried out. Many PMs are
surprised to find that what they convey to lead engineers stops there. Infor-
mation flow-down must be assured to avoid isolation (‘‘No one tells me any-
thing around here’’) and let people know what they need to know to be part
of the team. As suggested before, not all meetings are ‘‘decision’’ meetings.
A short ‘‘information’’ meeting lets team members know that you are specif-
ically interested in keeping them informed.
   Open channels of communication are also crucial with your boss and with
support department personnel that have a role to play on the project. As
suggested in the last chapter, it is a good idea to contact your customer every
week, if only to assure that everything is on track. Communication that is
negative and nonsupportive is worse than no communication at all. The PM
must adopt a positive and supportive position, except under the most radical
of situations. Here again, we see that type of position, for example, for sports
coaches that are successful. For those with lead positions on the team that
have difficulty in communicating, the PM should establish some type of train-
ing program to build skills in this most imprtant area. Finally, make sure,
especially with these same lead people, that communications is part of your
(at least annual) evaluation of them. This brings the point home in ways that
most people understand and value.
156    TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


6.3   BUILDING THE PROJECT TEAM

Team building and being part of a team are critical issues in project and
systems engineering management. Teams, however, do not spontaneously ap-
pear; they must be built. As suggested before, a prerequisite to team building
is to follow the communication ‘‘rules’’ identified in Exhibit 6.1. These are
necessary but not sufficient conditions for building an effective team.
    We see, in various parts of our lives, numerous real-world examples of
team building and lack thereof. Perhaps three examples stand out and are
visible, at least in part, to the population at large. One has to do with the
President of this country. We can track, through impressions obtained in the
newspapers, how the President has built a team and the extent to which
bridges have, or have not, been built to the Congress. This is a massive team-
building undertaking and context, and the more successful Presidents have
been broad and inclusive in their interpretation of the team that must be built.
Another example is that of a coach of a football team. Some coaches appear,
year after year, to get the best out of the talents present in the members of
the team. Indeed, one measure of the success of a team is precisely whether
all team members are doing the best they can do. When this is achieved, even
if the team does not win every game, there is a strong and positive sense of
team effort and achievement along with strong ties and camaraderie between
team members as well as the coach. Thus, team building and coaching are
very similar. The effective team builder must be a good coach. Finally, most
of us are part of some type of team in our work environments. We thus can
observe team interactions in that context, whether we are teachers, engineers,
administrators, middle managers, or members of the board of directors of a
corporation.
    We now identify ten specific suggestions for building a project team, as
listed in Exhibit 6.2 and discussed in what follows. Following these sugges-
tions, together with those provided in the previous chapter, will likely lead to
a strong and effective team operation.

  Exhibit 6.2: Suggestions for Building a Project Team
   1. Develop and maintain a personal plan for team building and operation.
   2. Hold both periodic and special team meetings.
   3. Clarify missions, goals, and roles.
   4. Run the team in a participative, possibly consensual, manner.
   5. Involve the team in situation analysis and problem solving.
   6. Give credit to active, positive team members and contributions.
   7. Assure team efficiency and productivity.
   8. Obtain feedback from team members.
   9. Integrate, coordinate, facilitate, and assure information flow.
  10. Maintain effective communication.
                                           6.3   BUILDING THE PROJECT TEAM   157

6.3.1   Personal Plan
The team leader (PM, CSE, PC, and others) must always maintain an explicit
level of consciousness about the team and how it is performing. This can take
the form of an informal plan that reflects a continuous assessment of team
behavior and operation as well as what might be done to bring about im-
provements. After each meeting of the team, the leader should evaluate what
happened and determine whether some type of fine-tuning is necessary. Run-
ning a team should not be taken for granted. It requires constant adjustment
to assure that the team, and the leader, have not fallen into bad habits and
ineffective operation. The team has to be continuously stimulated to do its
best.

6.3.2   Periodic and Special Team Meetings
The usual forum for team operation is a meeting of one type or another.
Ground rules for running a meeting are considered in more detail later in this
chapter. Here we simply note the requirement for both periodic as well as
special meetings. Periodic meetings are necessary to maintain continuity and,
depending on the project, can be held weekly, biweekly or monthly. They
should be on the calendars of all participants so that other work pressures do
not interfere. They should start on time and respect the fact that team members
cannot spend all their time at meetings. Special team meetings are called in
response to unique situations that may arise. Usually, they are necessary when
an unusual and time-critical problem has unexpectedly surfaced, calling for
a problem-solving response by the team.

6.3.3   Missions, Goals, and Roles
The team leader has the responsibility to clarify the overall mission of the
team, the specific goals that are to be achieved, and the roles of the various
team members. In a project context, these are often well known because, as
a minimum, they are articulated implicitly in the project plan. The team may
also be a ‘‘task force’’ within the project team, whose job it is to solve a
particular problem. For example, such a team may be given the charter to
maximize the effectiveness of interactions between the project team and the
external interfaces with other entities or departments in the corporate enter-
prise (accounting, finance, contracts, human resouves, graphics, etc.). Failure
to be clear about missions, goals, and roles usually leads to confusion, thrash-
ing, and less than a positive attitude from team members.

6.3.4   Participation and Consensual Operation
As a minimum, the team leader should adopt a style of participative man-
agement of a team. This implies full involvement of all team members in the
158     TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


process as well as in the products of the team. Those members who are laid-
back should be encouraged to participate and bring their thoughts and ideas
to the forefront. Lack of participation can be a signal of some type of dys-
function in the team; the leader should be particularly sensitive to the non-
participating team member, following up with one-on-one conversations to
see if there is some type of problem lurking in the background. The full-
participation team is very likely to be a high achiever with solid relationships
between team members and the leader.
    In just about all participative team operations, it should be recognized that
although there is strong participation in all processes, the team leader usually
takes responsibility for all key decisions. This means that participation does
not imply majority rule. In a project situation, the PM does not normally take
a literal ‘‘vote’’ and then automatically go with the majority. Indeed, the PM
may disagree with the majority and therefore may make a decision that is a
minority decision. Such are the vagaries of managing a project. In addition,
all team members must be aware of and accept the prerogative of management
in terms of the final decision, and once it is made, must use their best efforts
to implement that decision. There is no room for the team member who
undermines the team leader’s decision, whether or not he or she agrees with
it. If the team member cannot ultimately support a PM’s decision, the next
step is to leave the project team.
    Participative operation, however, is not the same as consensual operation.
More precisely, the latter can be interpreted as team agreement on a course
of action, but without an explicit vote of the team members [6.1]. Consensual
operation of a team is very desirable but not always possible. Most decisions,
for a good team, turn out to be consensual. However, the leader should reserve
the right, for a particularly contentious situation, to both take a vote (show
of hands) and to make a decision that is contrary to the majority viewpoint.

6.3.5   Situation Analysis and Problem Solving
In Chapter 4, we introduced the notion and specific steps of situation analysis.
Its purpose is to examine difficult situations that inevitably arise during the
course of a project and, through a team dynamic, develop a solution. The
team, in many ways, is the centerpiece of both situation analysis and problem
solving. The PM or the CSE may have well-developed ideas as to the nature
of a problem as well as its solution, but it is critical to obtain the ideas and
inputs from other key team members who may be able to suggest answers
that may not have been considered. In short, many people working construc-
tively on a problem usually leads to better problem solving both immediately
and over the long run.

6.3.6   Give Credit
Give credit to team members that make a contribution; this is a very important
part of team building. This can be achieved in many ways—from a pat on
                                            6.3   BUILDING THE PROJECT TEAM   159

shoulder to a formal acknowledgment at a team meeting. This works wonders
because everyone has a basic need to feel appreciated. If this can be done in
public, so much the better.


6.3.7    Assure Efficiency and Productivity
A PM with excellent team-building skills will nonetheless fail unless the team
is being productive. This means making progress in accordance with the pro-
ject plan as well as being efficient in the use of everyone’s time at all team
meetings. It also means that the PM must know when it is time to stop beating
a problem to death and move on to a solution or to the next issue or, indeed,
to call a meeting to a close. Experience suggests that many team members
become frustrated with long meetings that drone on and on and would prefer
crisp, effective interactions that support a sense of accomplishment for all that
are present.


6.3.8    Obtain Feedback
Feedback about the team and its operation should be sought from all team
members, preferably through one-on-one sessions. Team members with prob-
lems with the team may be wary about expressing their views to all. By means
of a supportive private discussion, team members can provide feedback and
will understand that their inputs are being valued and serve as a contribution
to the team. Some may have an issue with another team member that may be
addressed through such private feedback sessions. It is yet another way for
the PM to convey the message that this person is valued as an individual and
as part of the team.


6.3.9    Integrate, Coordinate, and Facilitate
The PM and CSE do not have all the answers, nor do they possess all of the
wisdom on a project. Adopting a position as integrator, coordinator, and fa-
cilitator normally pays great dividends in terms of overall team effectiveness.
This may appear to be a passive role, but actually it can be exercised in a
rather active manner. It also goes along with the notion of empowerment. The
job of the team leader is not to do all the work, but rather to assure that the
best efforts of all team members are brought out.


6.3.10    Communicate
The previous section and Exhibit 6.1 summarize a dozen key points with
respect to communication. Remember, even if the PM is well-skilled at all
the nuts and bolts of project management, the project is likely to fail, and a
team not likely to be built, without effective communications. This is perhaps
the most important single message in all of the fine art of management.
160      TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


6.3.11    Additional Points on Team Building
Teams are formed in contexts other than that of a formal project as described
here. There are other types of teams, such as quality circle teams, integrated
product teams, concurrent engineering teams, task force teams, and others.
The key point is that the earlier discussion applies to all these various types
of teams, and that the required skills are more or less the same. Learning the
basics of team building, therefore, is worthwhile whether or not you now
serve as a PM or CSE. Sooner or later you will be part of a team and perhaps
sooner than you think you will be asked to build and run a team effort.
   We also note that in the presentation of the subject of leadership in the
previous chapter, the third most important attribute of a leader was cooper-
ating, sharing, team building, and team playing. To be a leader, then, is to
know how to build a team. Conversely, and categorically, to not know how
to build a team is to not be a leader.
   There is an endless supply of literature on the critical subject of team
building, including entire books, courses, viodetapes, and magazine articles.
For the reader interested in pursuing this matter beyond the suggested essen-
tial steps cited in Exhibit 6.2, reference is made here to the Harvard Business
Review and several additional sources [6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5]. Effort put into
building a strong, effective, and productive team will pay large dividends for
both the Project Manager and the Chief Systems Engineer.



6.4   TEAM BUSTERS

It is important to pause for a moment on the subject of team building and
acknowledge the existence of a potential counterforce to team building,
namely, the ‘‘team buster.’’ This is a person, nominally a member of the
project team, who works hard, either consciously or otherwise, in destroying
the team that the PM and CSE are trying to build. We address here some
ways to deal with such a person.
   One can spot a team buster by the following types of behavior patterns,
which may be manifest singly or in various combinations:

  • Questions the authority of the PM and CSE at every turn.
  • Challenges the management and technical approach of the PM and CSE.
  • Does not follow the agreed-on decisions.
  • Consistently ‘‘goes over the head’’ of his or her boss.
  • Tries to monopolize meeting agendas.
  • Attempts to embarrass or challenge the boss in front of others.
  • If a manager, and you are not part of his or her team, by definition you
      are doing a poor and misguided job.
                                                         6.4   TEAM BUSTERS    161

  • Forces his or her people to clear all actions, and even conversations,
    strictly through the ‘‘chain of command.’’
  • Tries to create a ‘‘we’’ and ‘‘they’’ mentality, whereby everyone who
    reports to the team buster is a ‘‘we’’ and everyone else is in the ‘‘they’’
    group.


    In point of fact, when severe enough, the team buster can only really play
on one team, his or her own. The team buster undermines all attempts at team
building by his or her supervisor, and is a detriment to the team. Often, this
type of person can have significant talents. Otherwise, he or she would not
have survived to the current level of responsibility. The team buster can also
be viewed as a ‘‘bully,’’ a person who is predisposed to bullying other people
to get what he or she wants. In effect, aggressive nonteam playing is a man-
ifestation of bullying behavior.
    There is only one real way to deal with a team buster. Loosely speaking,
it is the ‘‘three strikes and you’re out’’ solution. The first time the team buster
exhibits the type of behavior cited before, the PM or CSE must have a private
conversation with the team buster that makes it clear that the behavior has to
change. This point must be made forcefully and emphatically. All attempts at
cajoling and persuading are likely to fail, as they are ultimately viewed as
signs of weakness and indecision. At the second infraction, another private
discussion is called for, now making the point that if the behavior continues,
the person will be removed from the job. This, of course, has to be supported
in advance by the next in the chain of command, and might imply an exit
from the company. When the next infraction occurs, and it usually does, all
the pieces have to be in place in order to take the action of removal of the
team buster from the project, and possibly from the organization at large.
Again, it should be done in private, but with the appropriate member of the
human resources department present. This is also an option after the second
infraction.
    In some cases, assistance in dealing with a team buster may be provided
by human resources. This can take the form of counseling and other methods
for creating awareness of the severity of the situation at hand. Again, if one
is truly dealing with a team buster, the chances are that this attempt at chang-
ing behavior will not work.
    The final point, with respect to a true team buster, is that the PM or CSE
must act decisively and clearly, and show no signs of wavering. The behavior
of the team buster poisons the team and creates all manner of havoc. There
are times when reconciliation is impossible, as it usually is with the true team
buster. The best solution is separation, as difficult as that may appear to be.
The PM and CSE should resist blaming themselves for being unable to reform
the team buster and move on to the more productive activities of team
building.
162      TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


6.5     CONFLICT MANAGEMENT

Conflict can be considered an inevitable part of running a project, especially
a large one. It is not necessarily and always negative. It often can be turned
into a positive, growing, and learning experience. In this section, we explore
how conflict may be approached and managed, and also some of the styles
that people adopt in attempting to deal with conflict. As with the other inter-
personal relationship issues in this book, we acknowledge that there is great
deal that cannot be covered here and attempt to focus on the key elements
and essentials that must be known to both the Project Manager (PM) and the
Chief Systems Engineer (CSE).


6.5.1    Areas of Conflict
Studies have shown the areas in which conflict tends to arise most frequently.
Apparently, these areas have also changed with time. As an example, the
following list shows conflict areas and their rank in studies in 1986 and in
1976 [6.5]:

Conflict Area                        Rank in 1976               Rank in 1986

Schedules                                  1                           1
Costs                                      6                           2
Priorities                                 2                           3
Staffing                                   3                           4
Technical opinions                         4                           5
Personality                                7                           6
Procedures                                 5                           7

   It is interesting to note the persistence of schedules over the decade shown
as the number 1 area in which there is conflict. Costs jumped into the number
2 position, with overall priorities staying within the top three. Thus, we see
schedule and cost as critical items over which conflict occurs. Technical opin-
ions is about midrange in both lists, and personality conflicts are present but
toward the bottom of the list.
   Conflicts regarding impersonal issues (schedules, costs, etc.) can be easier
to deal with than personal issues. In principle, the former deal with different
perceptions of objective facts. Personal issues are less than objective, and
people will be at odds with one another simply because they do not like or
approve of one another. From the point of view of the PM or the CSE,
conflicts and conflict management should be considered part of the job. The
question is how to deal with it when it does occur and what are one’s indi-
vidual propensities toward coping with conflict situations. These are referred
to in the literature as conflict resolution styles, and are examined in what
follows.
                                                  6.5   CONFLICT MANAGEMENT     163

6.5.2   Styles
People approach conflict in different ways and these can be identified and
measured. As an example, conflict styles may be articulated as [6.5]:

  • Competing (forcing)
  • Compromising (sharing)
  • Avoiding (withdrawal)
  • Accommodating (smoothing)
  • Collaborating (problem solving)

In addition, there exists a measurement instrument known as the Thomas–
Kilmann Conflict Mode Instrument [6.6] whereby one can measure an indi-
vidual’s tendency toward adopting one or another mode of conflict manage-
ment. The reader with a interest in knowing more about his or her own
tendency is urged to contact Thomas and Kilmann and take their conflict
mode measurement ‘‘test.’’
   Competing (forcing) is an approach whereby power is used to resolve a
conflict. This may be done in a variety of ways. The most obvious is to utilize
the dominant position as a supervisor in order to force resolution. In effect,
‘‘We will do it this way because I am the boss.’’ This may temporarily resolve
the conflict, but it may not persuade or convince anyone to change positions.
The power may be applied directly or even subtly, but competing or forcing
is not a long-term and reliable way to resolve conflicts. In certain situations,
it may exacerbate the conflict and cause people to respond in kind when they
have greater power leverage.
   The compromising or sharing style involves trying to find a position that
is acceptable to all parties. It is a classical ‘‘negotiation’’ stance and can often
lead to an effective resolution. Unfortunately, the results may be acceptable
in terms of human relations but may be wrong for the project. As an example,
if a conflict occurs with respect to estimation of the time it might take to
perform a given set of activities, a compromise solution might be to accept
the mean value between the estimated values. This argues for ‘‘beauty’’ in-
stead of ‘‘truth,’’ and may hurt the project by failing to get to underlying facts
that might be important. Some researchers in the area of conflict resolution
have also called this approach the ‘‘lose–lose’’ solution because the combat-
ants each lose a little in order to come to a resolution. This approach might
work well in international negotiations, but has its shortcomings in a project
context.
   The avoiding or withdrawal approach simply refuses to come to terms with
the conflict and face it squarely. Under these conditions, of course, the conflict
remains and festers like a bad sore. No resolution occurs, and a poor model
of behavior is established. The conflict may go underground for a while, but
because its essence is not dealt with, it does not really go away. Many novice
164     TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


managers adopt this mode of behavior because they are unsure as to their
position, power, and skill in contentious situations. Some do not see alter-
native modes of behavior that lie between the extremes of ‘‘fight’’ or ‘‘fly’’
and therefore prefer to fly. It is not a recommended way of resolving conflicts
because it really ‘‘pretends’’ that the conflict does not exist or, if it does, is
not in need of action.
    The accommodating or smoothing solution acknowledges the conflict but
plays down its severity or possible impact. This approach is sometimes re-
ferred to as suppression because its ultimate purpose is to dampen the conflict
and reduce its potential effects. It can be a good approach when the conflict
cannot be dealt with at the moment it occurs. For example, if two members
of the team flare up in conflict at a meeting, it may be entirely reasonable to
suppress such a conflict, thus preventing progress on the meeting’s agenda.
In short, accommodating may be a good temporary solution but it does not
really resolve the conflict. It is recommended only when the situation at hand
does not provide sufficient time to tackle the conflict in a more fundamental
manner.
    A collaborating or problem-solving style recognizes that the combatants
have a right to state their different views and that all views are accepted as
valid. In this mode, there is encouragement to bring all views and perspectives
to the forefront so that they can be explored in detail. Reasons ‘‘why’’ are
elicited so that there is a clarification as to the issues and positions. If handled
correctly, this will usually lead to a better understanding between combatants
and a willingness to go beyond the surface conflict to its deeper roots and
rationale. Listening is encouraged so that the participants can learn how to
accept other positions with grace and equanimity. The objective of this ap-
proach is not only to collaborate, but also to truly solve the immediate prob-
lem. It may indeed have the ultimate effect of teaching people how to resolve
conflicts in a productive manner. This, of course, is the recommended conflict
resolution mode and, when skillfully applied, can support the long-term ef-
fectiveness of the project team.
    We do not expect, in this short discussion, to delve deeply into a subject
as complex as the human behavior aspects of conflict and its resolution. The
basic point is that all of us have natural tendencies to handle conflict in
different ways. If you can identify your own tendencies in relation to the
preceding alternative modes, you may have a new way of looking at and
approaching the difficult problem of handling conflict. Many people are good
in conflict situations as long as they are not one of the combatants. In general,
it is a good idea to try to see alternatives when you are a part of the conflict
and can take a step back in an attempt to move into a less personal problem-
solving mode. Backing down from a previously held position is not the end
of the world. Indeed, it may actually represent the dawning of a new accep-
tance of the wisdom you have gained. Giving up old styles of combatting
and competing may help you avoid ulcers and burnout.
                                                             6.6   MEETINGS   165

6.6   MEETINGS

In Exhibit 6.2, meetings were suggested as one of the primary mechanisms
for team building. Meetings, of course, create the opportunity for the team to
‘‘do its thing’’ in terms of real information exchange and problem solving.
They are the operating crucibles in which the dynamics of team interaction
are played out. For a healthy team, they are a thing of beauty. For an un-
healthy team, they may bring out and encourage further dysfunctional behav-
ior. The next time you go to a meeting, observe the team dynamics with a
critical eye to see if your team is operating on all cylinders.
   We cite here a number of ideas for establishing and carrying out meetings,
as shown in Exhibit 6.3.

  Exhibit 6.3: Ideas for Managing Meetings
   1. Make clear the purpose of the meeting.
   2. Decide if the meeting is periodic or special.
   3. Establish an agenda.
   4. Determine who should attend.
   5. Fix the length of time for the meeting.
   6. Make notes on expectations:
      • Problem discussion
      • Problem solving
      • Information exchange and sharing
      • Other
   7. Elicit ideas and alternatives.
   8. Define action items.
   9. Have someone take minutes.
  10. Determine, if necessary, when the next meeting is to occur.

   The PM or CSE should have a clear idea as to the purpose of the meeting
and be able to convey that purpose to the team, either in written form prior
to the meeting, and certainly as the first item of the meeting. This provides
focus for the meeting and avoids straying to a variety of possibly irrelevant
subjects. Suggestions for extending the meeting’s purpose are acceptable but
are at the discretion of the leader.
   All parties should know if the meeting is part of the stream of periodic
meetings or is a special meeting to handle a more critical issue. In this context,
when unforeseen problems arise, the leader should feel free to call a special
meeting to use the team for situation analysis (see Chapter 4) and problem
solving.
166    TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


   If possible, the team leader should establish and distribute a written agenda.
This may not always be possible, as with emergencies, but it is helpful to
know the scope of what the leader plans to deal with in advance. This allows
team members to think about the meeting beforehand and also to bring ap-
propriate materials to the meeting. It helps in the overall flow of the meeting
and avoids a scene in which everyone is waiting for one person to retrieve
important data for distribution to everyone.
   The leader should give prior thought as to who should attend the meeting;
they might include people who do not normally attend project meetings, such
as folks from human resources, contracts, and so forth. The leader should be
careful not to inadvertently exclude people who should be at the meeting or
who are normally part of such deliberations. Excluding key players from
meetings by not thinking may well damage the relationship with such people.
No one likes to be excluded from important project considerations and prob-
lem-solving sessions.
   When the meeting is announced, both a start and end time should be es-
tablished. Team members are busy people who have other commitments and
need to know when they can fit all these obligations into their time-pressured
days. The team leader should be thoughtful about this item and not set up a
pattern whereby all meetings tend to overrun by significant amounts. If you
need four hours, take them, and let everyone know that the meeting will be
a long one. But it should be over at the end of four hours, or earlier. Dem-
onstrating time discipline and respect for the time of others is part of the job
of the team leader.
   Prior to and as preparation for the meeting, the leader should make notes
on expectations for the meeting. This includes such items as discussion of
the main points of a problem (schedule, cost, performance, etc.), approaches
to solving the problem (e.g., alternatives), what information has to be brought
to and out in the meeting (e.g., cost reports and master schedule), and any-
thing else that appears to be relevant. These notes are not part of the agenda
but are private scribblings that the leader can refer to during the meeting.
   The team leader should make sure to elicit ideas from all participants. This
helps not only to build the strength of the team, but also assures the broadest
range of inputs from the participants. Even the quietest member of the team
may have the right solution for the problem at hand. All inputs should be
respected and listened to very carefully. Special attention should be paid to
bringing new alternatives to the table in an attempt to define all the available
options for team consideration and eventual decision and action.
   The meeting should not be concluded without a clear recapitulation of all
action items that flowed from the meeting. This includes actions decided on
early in the meeting that may have been forgotten or overlooked. Everyone
should take notes on the action items for which they are responsible. This
can also be recorded on a blackboard or a whiteboard that provides immediate
hard copy.
                                                      6.7   PRESENTATIONS   167

   Minutes should be taken of the meeting, but these should be brief and also
recap, as a minimum, all action items. Action items should carry information
not only on what is to be done, but also by whom and when. This type of
permanent but short record of meetings adds discipline to the process and
also serves as a way of resolving potential conflicts about what was done and
what conclusions were reached. This should be viewed as a way of facilitating
information exchange rather than ‘‘papering the file.’’ The leader should also
consider sending selected minutes to his or her boss for particularly important
situations and subjects.
   Finally, and before the meeting adjourns, the time for follow-up meetings,
if necessary, should be determined. This allows all members to check their
calendars immediately, and the best times for the next meetings can be chosen
in real time.
   Running effective and efficient meetings is an integral and critical part of
managing a project. They should not be approached without a consciousness
of their importance and what one expects to accomplish. They serve many
purposes, not the least of which is to establish a productive team dynamic.
As one might expect, therefore, they have been the subject of considerable
attention in the literature over the years. As an example, a book on making
meetings work [6.7] suggests an approach called the New Interaction Method.
This method, simply put, focuses on roles and responsibilities of four key
players at any meeting, namely:

  • The manager/chairperson
  • The facilitator
  • The recorder
  • The group member


Basically, the book supports the notion that the preceding roles will create a
dynamic that keeps the meeting on course and that they are crucial functions
in any meeting. In addition, a variety of helpful hints are provided, including
such subjects as finding win/win solutions, establishing a good agenda, work-
ing the issue of room size, and several others. The reader with a special
interest in meetings is urged to consider the referenced book as well as others
on this important topic.



6.7   PRESENTATIONS

The matter of preparing and giving presentations arises in at least two team
contexts:
168     TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


  • Presentations made by team members within the team
  • Presentations made by team members to persons (e.g., customers) outside
      the team

In the latter case, the team often meets to develop the presentation and also
to ‘‘dry run’’ its presentation to others.
   A set of eight essentials in terms of preparing and giving presentations is
provided in Exhibit 6.4. The assumption here is that most presentations are
made by utilizing slides or viewgraphs of some type.

  Exhibit 6.4: Eight Ground Rules for Presentations
  1. Know your audience.
  2. Tell them:
     • What they’re going to see
     • What they’re seeing
     • What they saw (summary)
  3. Maintain eye contact with key people in the audience.
  4. Do not read each viewgraph/slide; paraphrase the main ideas.
  5. Avoid slides that:
     • Are too cluttered
     • Talk down to the audience
     • Are too ostentatious
     • Cannot be read by everyone in the room
  6. Leave enough time for each slide’s message to sink in.
  7. Be careful about interruptions.
  8. Generally, hand out hard copy at the end, not at the beginning.

   A critical part of constructing any presentation is to know your audience
in advance. If you are able to do this, you will also be on track in terms of
targeting key areas of interest. Try not to make assumptions about the audi-
ence when a phone call will give you some data to work with in this regard.
Many presentations go astray from the beginning when it is realized that the
primary focus is off center and the audience forces a change up front or is
clearly impatient with material they already know.
   A well-known and accepted ground rule is that the audience needs constant
reminding of where you are, where you’re going, and where you’ve been.
This may sound like overkill, but keep in mind that the audience is often
completely cold on the material being presented. These reminders give a sense
of unity to the presentation and help the listener to integrate what is being
said. The summary is especially important in pulling together the main
thoughts, themes, and points that have been made.
                                                      6.7   PRESENTATIONS   169

   Eye contact with particular people in the audience is extremely important.
As a minimum, one should target the key players in the audience and make
sure that eye contact is established. In general, the presenter should scan the
audience and talk to everyone in it. One should try to avoid talking in the
direction of the slides, looking at the ceiling, presenting to members of your
own team if they are intermixed with a customer group and talking to only
one person in the audience. The basic idea is to get your message across to
every single person that has not previously heard the presentation.
   A definite ‘‘no-no’’ is to read every word on every slide. Leave time for
the audience to read the slides for themselves. Point to the key phrases (with
a pointer, if possible) to direct the eye of the observer. Then paraphrase an
important point or focus on only a few key words on which you can elaborate.
Do not go through the slides at lightning speed because you will frustrate
and lose your audience. Each slide has several messages and these need to
be conveyed in an easy and flowing manner.
   In terms of the slides themselves, there are lots of options. You can have
a lot of information on each, but then need to go through the slides rather
slowly. Slides should be readable, in general, unless you are trying to create
a general impression without all the details in the slides. Avoid too much
clutter that cannot be understood. Each slide should be ‘‘designed’’ so that
the messages jump out rather than having to be dug out. Slides should not
be too showy because that is likely to turn off at least some members of the
audience. They also should be of a size that they can be read by everyone in
the room. This means that you need to anticipate the size of the room and
the number of people in the audience. Under no circumstances should you
talk down to the audience as if they are dummies if they do not instantly
understand everything you are conveying.
   The presenter has to leave enough time for the audience to read the slide
as it is directed to do so. More time is better than not enough. Even short
periods of silence are acceptable because people often cannot process what
they are reading and what they are hearing at the same time. Depending on
the slide design and the method of presentation, a target might be two to three
minutes per slide, assuming no interruptions. At three minutes per slide, a
ten-slide presentation takes about half an hour. The idea is to have the mes-
sages sink in, not to meet a deadline. Dry runs with members of your team
will help you to fine-tune a presentation. The PM should not have a novice
presenter give an important briefing to a customer, for example, without a
serious dry run.
   Allowing interruptions is a matter that is somewhat controversial. In gen-
eral, it is best to establish better audience contact by allowing interruptions
in the form of questions from the audience. However, these should not be
allowed to turn the presentation into a free-for-all. Losing control over the
briefing is extremely undesirable and will likely damage the credibility of the
presenter. By extension, this will damage the project team. A good presenter
170     TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


normally allows a modest number of questions but is able to draw people
back to the presentation without losing control. This comes with practice and
assistance from those who have this type of know-how. The PM and CSE
must have mastered these types of skills. It is definitely all right to terminate
further questioning and bring the audience back to the main thrust of the
presentation.
   The matter of handing out hard copy also has advocates on both sides.
This author favors delivery of hard copy of your slides at the end of the
presentation. People might be given three-by-five index cards to make notes
on questions they might have during the presentation. The problem with the
audience having hard copy in advance is that some people will leave you and
go on the slide journey themselves. They can be ahead of you or backtrack
to earlier slides. In either case, they’re not likely to be listening to you. Under
group pressure from the audience, however, it is difficult not to hand out the
slide package when requested to do so.
   Giving presentations represents a special skill that has to be mastered by
the PM, CSE, and other key members fo the project team. It is worth the
time to take this activity very seriously, especially if the presentation is made
to a customer or a large audience. The PM and CSE have the responsibility
to maximize the positive impact of all presentations. Usually, this involves
dry runs and supportive coaching. Paying a lot of attention to these matters
will pay worthwhile dividends.


6.8   PROPOSALS

Proposals to prospective customers can take many forms, depending on the
type of enterprise making the proposal. At one extreme is the oral presentation
during which various points are made regarding the services and products to
be provided. For this mode of proposal delivery, essentially all the suggestions
made previously apply directly. At the other extreme is the full-blown written
proposal that documents all the features of the products and services as well
as the organization that is making the proposal. Such a proposal is often in
response to a formal request for proposal (RFP) provided by the customer.
RFPs usually specify what the customer needs and also the evaluation criteria
to be used in order to make judgments about the proposal. Proposals are
considered by many to be a vital part of the lifeblood of an organization.
They are also viewed at times as a fine art that can be mastered by some but
not by others.
   Many people believe that new business is won or lost by the amount of
effort that goes into preproposal activities. Put another way, the formal written
proposal is viewed as a necessary but insufficient condition for success with
respect to winning a new contract. These views are widely supported. For
this reason, we examine the matter of proposals in two parts. The first deals
                                                             6.8   PROPOSALS     171

with suggestions as to what to do during the preproposal stage, and the second
addresses the formal written proposal itself.


6.8.1   The Preproposal Phase
As indicated before, many proposals are won or lost as a function of the
preproposal activity or lack thereof. For large contracts, this activity is literally
a well-developed campaign with its own rather sophisticated plan. Because
there is so much at stake, the preproposal work is dealt with as if it were a
separate project that culminated in the customer’s formal release of an RFP.
   A summary of key points relative to the preproposal phase is provided in
Exhibit 6.5. This is a minimal set of activities that should be undertaken in
order to be successful with a proposal.

   Exhibit 6.5: Recommended Preproposal Activities
   1. Visit with the prospective customer to understand his or her needs and
      requirements.
   2. Write think pieces and ‘‘white papers.’’
   3. Present your company’s capabilities.
   4. Investigate alliances and teaming possibilities.
   5. Identify and activate the proposal writing team.
   6. Obtain internal corporate support.

   There is no substitute for truly understanding what it is that the customer
really wants. The best way to do this is to visit with the customer and talk
through his or her various needs and desires. Find out what the customer is
looking for—what the key issues are from the perspective of the customer.
This notion applies as well when there are several customers, which is usually
the case. In other words, the customer often consists of several people, all of
whom are looking for one or more pieces of the puzzle known as customer
requirements. If you have not spent the time necessary to visit across the table
with your potential customer, you may have a ‘‘no-bid’’ staring you in the
face.
   In response to what you find out in your face-to-face meetings with your
customer, seriously consider writing one or more think pieces or white papers.
These are short (five- to ten-page) descriptions of your approach to the prob-
lem, as expressed by the customer. They are very specific as to what the key
issues are, how you would develop a solution, and what the final product or
service might look like. You are also requesting feedback from the customer
as to whether or not you are on the right track. Therefore, after the customer
has read these inputs, follow-up meetings are suggested in order to fine-tune
your approach. You are also demonstrating your interest and responsiveness
172     TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


and, to the extent possible, preselling your approach to the customer. This
spade work will not be lost on the customer when it comes time to evaluate
your formal proposal. You will also be in a better position than your com-
petitors because you will have had the benefit of this interaction with the
customer.
   As part of your meetings with the customer, you should also present the
broad as well as specific capabilities of your company. This can take the form
of a stand-up slide presentation in front of several people in your customer’s
organization. Such presentations involve corporate strengths such as person-
nel, facilities (e.g., special laboratories or test chambers), history of work with
other clients on similar requirements, software already written, and so forth.
In addition to ‘‘telling’’ your customer what you have to offer, try to ‘‘dem-
onstrate’’ special capabilities. These can be expressed by software packages
that you have developed that apply directly to the problem at hand. Instead
of talking about the software, bring in a computer and illustrate the use of
the software, in real time, on the screen. ‘‘Showing’’ is always better than
simply ‘‘telling.’’
   As you gain an understanding of the customer needs and requirements,
you may find that your company does not possess all the required skills,
capabilities, and experience with the knowledge domain of the customer. Both
strategic and tactical alliances and teaming should be considered to make your
team a winner. Many large-scale contracts cannot be won without teaming,
thus requiring filling in all the gaps in capability and understanding by mem-
bers of the team. You may be the prime contractor in such an arrangement
or you may ultimately decide that a subcontractor position is the better part
of valor. In the latter case, you must then try to determine who has the best
chance of winning, and then do all of the preceding in attempting to sell your
company to the prime.
   Early identification and activation of at least part of the proposal team is
mandatory. A proposal manager should be designated, along with at least a
few key players of the proposal team. They need to be part of the preproposal
campaign and play a role in preparing all written materials. In this manner,
the learning curve is minimized when it comes time to actually respond to
an RFP. All players are up-to-speed and understand what has transpired prior
to the formal proposal preparation. Failure to make this investment will often
lead to a disconnect between the preproposal and proposal phases, resulting
in a poor written proposal.
   Last, but by no means least, support has to be obtained from various people
and departments in your organization. This includes marketing, contracts, hu-
man resources, matrixed managers, and your own line management. Although
you may not have made a firm ‘‘bid decision,’’ you have to give an early alert
to all these other players so that they understand the program you are seeking
and its unique requirements. For example, you may have to find certain key
personnel to handle special technical areas. The human resources department
and various matrixed managers may be able to help you in this regard. The
                                                         6.8   PROPOSALS   173

contracts department needs an early alert so that it can review the terms and
conditions of work done previously with this customer as well as get ready
for the preparation of extensive cost estimates. Finally, you need support from
your boss and other levels of line management in terms of concurrence with
the bid as well as putting forth the resources necessary to prepare a winning
proposal. This includes funding, but it also means making the right people
available at the right time to contribute to a winning proposal.

6.8.2   The Proposal Phase
The proposal phase is entered when the RFP is formally issued and your
company has made a decision to bid the contract in response to that RFP.
How to write a winning proposal is a subject that itself represents a niche
market for companies, so that what is recommended here is but an overview
of key points in this regard. However, ten such points that are distilled from
many years of experience are listed in Exhibit 6.6.

  Exhibit 6.6: Ten Key Points in Writing a Winning Proposal
   1. Develop a winning strategy.
   2. Document winning themes.
   3. Outline the proposal in detail, to the one-half page level.
   4. Develop a detailed proposal schedule.
   5. Discuss and confirm the preceding with your proposal team as well as
      management.
   6. Interact efficiently with all support departments.
   7. Use the best writers.
   8. Confirm that all risk areas have been minimized.
   9. Review and make changes in the ‘‘Red Team’’ context. (‘‘Red Teams’’
      are explained later in this section.)
  10. Assure proposal readibility and appearance.

   Developing a winning strategy is more easily said than done. The issue
here is complex, dealing with each and every key area in the RFP and how
your approach can be distinguished from the competition. This is known as
finding ‘‘discriminators’’ that place your proposal ahead of those of your
competitors. Discriminators have to be found with respect to your technical
proposal, management proposal, and cost proposal, with emphasis on the first
and last. If you are operating in the domain of ‘‘best-value’’ contracting, you
do not necessarily need to be the lowest bidder, but the overall value of your
proposal must be as high as possible. Discriminators should be determined
through a team approach, eliciting ideas from all members of the proposal
team. Clear discriminators often can be found in cases for which your com-
pany has actually performed work sufficiently similar, so that the effort re-
174    TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


quired is substantially less than that of your competitors. This can be
embodied in software, for example, that is reusable and transferrable from a
previous project to the one at hand. The bottom line is that if you cannot be
positively distinguished from your competitors, you are not likely to win the
contract in question.
    Given that the team is able to find the necessary discriminators, they then
should be converted into written themes that basically and convincingly an-
swer the question: Why we should win this contract? These need to be
mapped against the evaluation criteria of the RFP so that scoring is maxi-
mized. In other words, for each and every element of the evaluation criteria,
it is desirable to document a theme that will score high. Scoring high involves
bringing forth your discriminators in these areas and convincing yourself (and
ultimately, your customer) that you have the best approach possible.
    Next, the proposal has to be outlined, in detail, following precisely the
ground rules provided in the RFP. Often, the RFP defines the proposal pieces
(i.e., technical, management, and cost proposals) and their sections. These
must be meticulously followed. At times, a dilemma is presented whereby
the evaluation criteria are not easily mapped against the prescribed proposal
outlines. In general, both should be accommodated. It must be evident to the
evaluator as to where to find the material that is responsive to the evaluation
criteria. If the evaluator has to struggle to find such material, a low score is
inevitable. The mapping of the mandatory outline and the evaluation factors
takes imagination and can be the most important determinant of a winning
or losing proposal. After this is done, the outline should be divided into
sections and subsections, with a page count for the smallest subsection. Page
counts should be designated to the one-half page. Then the entire proposal
should be reviewed for balance of coverage in relation to the evaluation
criteria.
    The proposal schedule should define all milestones and should be viewed
as inviolate. Times have to be set aside for detailed reviews and rewrites.
Many firms have three designated periods for rewrites, operating under the
proposition that it is basically impossible to write a complex proposal without
extensive rewriting. Times, of course, have to be allocated to the physical
production of the proposal and delivery to the customer. In most government
contracting, being even one minute late in terms of customer delivery will
mean that your proposal will not be accepted. (This author has had this type
of unpleasant experience twice in a period of thirty years.)
    Given all of this, the next step is to brief the proposal team as well as
management on the basic strategy for winning. All key players have to un-
derstand that strategy and concur with it. Alternative suggestions are accept-
able and indeed accepted if they represent improvements. This is a basic
sign-off on the approach and a commitment to implementing it in the best
possible manner. All questions should be answered so that there is no mis-
understanding of the approach.
    Effective and efficient interactions with all supporting departments and
people are mandatory to have a winning proposal. Contracts must handle the
                                                           6.8   PROPOSALS    175

representations and certifications (reps and certs) smoothly and in consonance
with the technical and management proposals. They must also provide cost
spreadsheets that can be reviewed and concurred with by the proposal man-
ager. Costing is often iterated numerous times, so that automating this process
is essential. Matrixed managers must confirm the availability of key personnel.
Human resource people must stoke up the machinery for hiring or establishing
a hiring plan. The production department (including text and graphics) should
be aware of and be able to handle the peak load represented by a major
proposal. The proposal manager must assure that all these pieces fall into
place smoothly and with a lot of lead time.
    The best writers should be assigned to the proposal. Many technically
talented people are not able to write coherent proposals. Many imaginative
people decide to apply their imagination by not following the rules established
for the proposal. At the same time, there are usually some people who are
very talented from a technical point of view and who are also wonderful
writers. These folks should be assigned to writing the proposal. The basic
rule is to use your best technical and writing talents to write all proposals,
wherever possible. In addition, use many charts, figures, exhibits, and dia-
grams to explain your approach to your customer.
    Most projects involve some type of risk (schedule, cost, performance) and
all potential risks have to be examined in detail as part of the proposal process.
Some companies, of course, decide to ‘‘no-bid’’ when unacceptable risk levels
are present. However, risk still needs to be double-checked and mitigated in
the proposal itself. How you propose to minimize risk should be addressed
in the proposal, so that you and the customer both know what the basic plan
is. Two examples are worth noting. One involves the case in which the cus-
tomer can review and reject documentation and reports indefinitely. Accep-
tance criteria have to be as explicit as possible so that this risk is mitigated.
Another risk involves the warranty of software from ‘‘latent and patent’’ de-
fects. Boundaries and criteria need to be established so that software improve-
ments do not go on forever. In general, risk mitigation involves checking each
and every documented requirement and setting forth a ‘‘buy-off’’ plan that is
acceptable to your company as well as the customer.
    Most large proposal writing efforts employ ‘‘Red Teams,’’ which are groups
of senior people who review and evaluate proposals. These teams engage in
a formal review, simulating the process of review that is expected by the
customer. Such reviews not only score the proposal, section by section, they
suggest specific ways and means of making necessary improvements. These
reviews are often brutal in their candor, and the proposal manager must know
how to assure that they are constructively expressed. Invariably, Red Team
inputs lead to extensive rewrites that must be built into the proposal schedule.
Dispensing with Red Team reviews should be done with caution and is likely
to be a serious mistake for large proposals.
    Finally, the schedule should allow for a more than cursory review of the
final product. This review usually involves overall appearance and readibility.
The objective is zero defects, meaning that there should be no typos or pieces
176    TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


in the wrong place. The proposal should not only be good, it should look
good. However, it should not be ostentatious so that boundaries of good taste
are crossed. Some customers react very negatively to showy and expensive
proposals. Here again, know your customer.
   With respect to the last point made and how the proposal looks, this author
experienced what might be called a four-sigma case in proposal preparation.
A proposal was sent out to a customer years ago but the xeroxing of the
proposal was defective and resulted in the lack of fixing of the toner on
various pages. A sweep of the hand on a page resulted in the immediate
disappearance of all text—a type of invisible ink if you will. Fortunately, this
was discovered very early, and the customer allowed us to substitute good
copies in place of the defective ones. This is a once-in-a-lifetime experience,
but it underscores the possible intrusion of Murphy’s Law. Take the time
necessary for a final review that assures your proposal looks the way you
want it to look in terms of overall presentation to your customer. A poor-
looking proposal with lots of typos, in spite of the excellence of its technical
content, is not likely to be a winner.


6.9   A NOTE ON MOTIVATION AND INCENTIVES

Many Project Managers are eventually faced with the problem of keeping the
members of their team motivated. They struggle with finding ways to throw
money at the team as an incentive to sustain motivation. Basically, money is
important but it is not the essence of motivation, at least from the experience
of this author. Equitable treatment in terms of monetary rewards is necessary,
but it is far from a sufficient condition for motivating members of your team.
   There is a large amount of information in the literature regarding motiva-
tion and how it may be achieved. As an example, one text on the subject of
management [6.8] examines, in a rather well-designed manner, such research
results and theories as:

  • Theory X and Theory Y
  • Theory Z
  • Argyris’ maturity theory
  • Self-fulfilling prophecy
  • Various needs theories (including Maslow’s)
  • Equity theory
  • Reinforcement theory
  • Expectancy theory
  • Various reward systems

The reader with a special interest in these matters can review the referenced
text [6.8] and others on the overall subjects of motivation and incentives.
                                  6.9   A NOTE ON MOTIVATION AND INCENTIVES   177

  Experience in the worlds of project management and systems engineering
has led to the following key elements in motivating members of a team:

  1. Having interesting and challenging work
  2. Treating people fairly and equitably
  3. Establishing team affiliation with a highly functional team
  4. Showing appreciation and recognition
  5. Celebrating team successes

   Experience shows that interesting and challenging work is the most critical
factor in keeping team members excited and enthusiastic about what they are
doing, day after day. The PM and CSE, therefore, must understand all mem-
bers of the team and pay attention to how to maintain a flow of good work
to them. This requires a deep sense of what is challenging to each person,
which in turn means sufficient contact to obtain feedback about work assign-
ments. Indeed, if challenging work is not a strong motivator, you may have
to think about replacing such a person or moving him or her to an environ-
ment that is not as vital as a systems engineering project.
   Beyond interesting and challenging work assignments, people on the team
have to feel that they are being treated fairly. This means that the PM and
CSE must be sensitive to these needs and be careful not to show favoritism
that is unrelated to performance. All team members have equal standing in
terms of being treated with respect and listening to what they may have to
contribute, even though some will naturally contribute more than others. Mon-
etary rewards must be perceived to be equitable, even though they may not
be extremely high. Most people will respond well to a situation that is fair
and equitable, and will be upset when this is not the case.
   Given that your company provides adequate incentives in the form of sal-
ary, benefits, and bonuses, the addition of the previously cited actions nor-
mally keeps members of the team highly motivated. If your company policy
is to keep the monetary incentives below average, you will very likely lose
your people, especially the good ones. The point is that monetary rewards are
not as important as some would think, assuming however that they are not
substandard. Throwing money at people as a substitute for the preceding
actions is basically the wrong approach. The right approach is to assure ad-
equate but not outrageous levels of salary, benefits, and bonuses, with special
attention to the five items listed before. Productive and exciting connections
between people are ultimately more satisfying than a few more dollars in the
monthly check.
   A third suggestion is to assure that everyone is an accepted member of the
team and that the team is highly functional. This type of team affiliation can
be like having a second family, but in a work situation. The PM and CSE
must keep a watchful eye to assure that some team members do not gang up
on or ostracize other team members, and intercede where necessary. Having
‘‘we’s and they’s’’ within the team itself should be avoided whenever it dam-
178    TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


ages the team’s performance. A healthy team with full participation by all
will go a long way toward creating an exciting and productive work
environment.
   Team leaders must always show appreciation and recognition for a job well
done. As suggested earlier, this can take many forms, from a pat on the back
to a cash bonus. People who are doing some special work on behalf of the
team need to have positive feedback and the knowledge that the boss appre-
ciates what they are doing. The PM and CSE must respond to this need on
a continual basis, not just at raise time. Conversely, witholding positive feed-
back is likely to be a demotivator for most people.
   Finally, and somewhat related to the preceding, the team should always
celebrate its successes. When something good happens, it’s time to have a
celebration, which can take the modest form of a small party or after-hours
pizza and beer. When something extraordinary happens, like a technical
breakthrough or winning an important new contract, these celebrations should
be augmented by a bonus in addition to the monthly paycheck. The bonus
should be awarded as close in time to the exciting event as possible. Public
recognition is almost always a preferred way to celebrate success and show
appreciation for achievement beyond the call of duty. Very modest but public
rewards, such as a certificate for a dinner for two at a good restaurant, go a
long way to demonstrating that the boss recognizes both effort and
achievement.
   The bottom line is that a relatively small number of nonmonetary incentives
and actions can be extremely effective in supporting team motivation. On the
other hand, failure to pay attention to these nonmonetary actions will be a
demotivator that cannot be made up by cash awards and raises. People who
are not appreciated ultimately will seek an environment where they are able
to get the psychic rewards they feel they deserve. Finally, and inevitably, the
best performers will normally be the first ones to leave.


6.10   ANOTHER TEAM-RELATED PERSPECTIVE

Some further insights into teams and team building may be gained by ex-
amining related areas in the U. S. Department of Defense (DoD). When teams
are discussed, it is virtually always in the context of Integrated Product Teams
(IPTs), which are defined as [6.9]:

  A multidisciplinary group of people who are collectively responsible for deliv-
  ering a defined product or process. The IPT is composed of people who plan,
  execute and implement life-cycle decisions for the system being acquired. It
  includes empowered representatives (stakeholders) from all of the functional
  areas involved with the product—all who have a stake in the success of the
  program, such as design, manufacturing, test and evaluation (T&E), and logistics
  personnel, and, especially, the customer.’’
                                  6.10   ANOTHER TEAM-RELATED PERSPECTIVE   179

Further, the Secretary of Defense ‘‘directed that the Department perform as
many acquisition functions as possible, including oversight and review, using
IPTs.’’ Broad principles under which the IPTs are supposed to operate include:

  1. Assurance of open discussions with no information withheld
  2. Team members that are qualified and empowered
  3. Participation that is proactive, consistent, and success-oriented
  4. Continuous ‘‘up-the-line’’ communications
  5. Reasoned disagreement when there is a difference of views
  6. Important issues raised and resolved as early as possible

These are basically self-explanatory and strongly suggest a key item in the
operation of these teams, namely, that much power is vested in the team
members so that they can accomplish their goals. They also must be strong
individuals who have learned very well how to be part of a team.
   Aspects that are considered important are revealed by a brief glance at the
key topics that make up the Teaming Guidebook [6.10]. These topics are:

  • Team charters
  • Team member selection
  • Kick-off meeting
  • Facilitator
  • Communication
  • Team decision making
  • Conflict resolution
  • Team evaluations and ratings
  • Team awards
  • Team training
  • Team management
  • Leadership
  • Team problems

Important questions to consider when establishing a team include [6.10]:

  1. Does the team purpose set the stage for subsequent actions by the team?
  2. Is there a cogent and viable reason for the existence of the team?
  3. How long is the team expected to be in existence?
  4. Who are the customers of the team?
  5. What are the team’s products expected to be?
  6. To whom does the team report?
  7. Are all of the above items dealt with appropriately in the team’s charter?
180    TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


   Within the DoD, IPTs and Integrated Process and Product Development
(IPPD) are more-or-less inseparable. IPTs facilitate IPPD; IPPD cannot be
completely executed without the contributions of IPTs. Both are considered
to be long poles in the tent that houses the overall system acquisition process.
The relevant quotes are that IPPD ‘‘is a widely defined management technique
normally implemented by Integrated Product Teams (IPTs)’’ and also that the
‘‘concepts of IPPD and IPTs shall be applied throughout the acquisition pro-
cess to the maximum extent practicable’’ [6.9].
   Integrated Process and Product Development (IPPD) is defined as [6.9]:

  A management technique that simultaneously integrates all essential acquisition
  activities through the use of multidisciplinary teams to optimize the design,
  manufacturing and supportability processes. The IPPD facilitates meeting cost
  and performance objectives from product concept through production, including
  field support.

In explaining the functions of IPPD, business processes are also included
along with design, manufacturing, and support. Further, modeling and simu-
lation, as well as best commercial practices, are employed in order to arrive
at the best processes and products. Additional principles of IPPD may be
gleaned from the following list:

  • Customer focus
  • Concurrent development of products and processes
  • Early and continuous life-cycle planning
  • Proactive identification and management of risk
  • Maximum flexibility for optimization and use of contractor approaches.

Part of the way that customer focus is maintained is by including the customer
in the IPT, or a subset thereof, and listening carefully to the continuous feed-
back that the customer is providing. The focus on products and processes
transcends the process reengineering concept by also assuring that the product
is acceptable. Careful attention to planning for the entire life cycle means that
fewer critical downstream milestones and activities will be missed. Risk man-
agement is critical to any and all serious engineering projects, and will be
one of the important elements of systems engineering. Finally, flexibility is
maintained by allowing for alternative contractor approaches, ones that fit the
problem at hand and give the contractor some leeway to employ its experience
and creativity to arrive at a cost-effective solution for the customer.
   So we see in the DoD considerable attention to teams, especially IPTs, and
we also note the use of these IPTs to accomplish Integrated Process and
Product Development (IPPD). The highest levels within the DoD have com-
mitted themselves to this approach, and they believe that in doing so they
                                                           REFERENCES     181

will achieve a fundamental positive change in the way they are acquiring
goods and services.



QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

6.1 Evaluate your boss against the list of essentials in Exhibit 6.1. Use a
    college scoring system (i.e., A ⫽ 4, B ⫽ 3, C ⫽ 2, D ⫽ 1, F ⫽ 0).
    Calculate a composite numeric score. Repeat this same exercise with
    respect to yourself.
6.2 Identify and discuss three additional suggestions for building a project
    team, beyond those listed in Exhibit 6.2.
6.3 Recall a ‘‘team buster’’ you have encountered. How did this person
    behave? What was done, or might have been done, to deal with such a
    person?
6.4 What conflict resolution style might be attributed to your boss? What
    do you think your style is? What does this suggest with respect to your
    relationship with your boss?
6.5 Cite and discuss three ways in that you have been frustrated by the
    manner in which your boss runs meetings.
6.6 Identify three motivation/incentive approaches used in your organiza-
    tion. Have they been effective? Why?
6.7 Find a definition of an Integrated Product Team (IPT) in the literature
    and compare it with the definition provided in the text, as set forth by
    the U.S. Department of Defense.
6.8 Find a defintion of Integrated Process and Product Development (IPPD)
    in the literature and compare it with the definition provided in the text,
    as set forth by the U.S. Department of Defense.



REFERENCES

6.1 Peck, M. Scott (1993). A World Waiting to Be Born. New York: Bantam Books.
6.2 Meredith, T. R., and S. J. Mantel (1985). Project Management—A Managerial
    Approach. New York: John Wiley.
6.3 Archibald, R. D. (1976). Managing High Technology Programs and Projects.
    New York: John Wiley.
6.4 Kerzner, H. (2000). Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning,
    Scheduling and Controlling, 7th edition. New York: John Wiley.
182     TEAM BUILDING AND TEAM INTERACTIONS


6.5  Kezsbom, D. S., D. L. Schilling, and K. A. Edward (1989). Dynamic Project
     Management. New York: John Wiley.
6.6 Thomas, K. W., and R. H. Kilmann (1974). Thomas–Kilmann Conflict Mode
     Instrument. Tuxedo, NY: XICOM, Inc.
6.7 Doyle, M., and D. Straus (1982). How To Make Meetings Work. New York: Jove
     Books.
6.8 Mondy, R. W., and S. R. Premeaux (1980). Management—Concepts, Practices
     and Skills, 6th edition. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
6.9 DoD Integrated Product and Process Development Handbook (1998). Washing-
     ton, DC: Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition and Technology),
     August. See also http: / / web2.deskbook.osd.mil
6.10 The Art of Teaming Guidebook (1999). Published by the U.S. Army Materiel
     Command, Integrated Product and Process Management Working Group, June.
     See also http: / / web2.deskbook.osd.mil
PART III
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
AND MANAGEMENT
                7
THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING




7.1 OVERVIEW OF THE SYSTEMS APPROACH AND
ENGINEERING PROCESS

The first two chapters of this book provided an overview of some of the
systems engineering notions that are dealt with in more depth in this chapter
as well as the following four chapters. In particular, Figure 1.1 and the sup-
porting text provided an overview of the systems approach. To reiterate the
key features of this important perspective, the systems approach:

  1. Establishes a systematic and repeatable process
  2. Emphasizes interoperability and harmonious system operation
  3. Provides a cost-effective solution to the customer’s problem
  4. Assures the full consideration of alternatives
  5. Utilizes iterations as a means of refinement and convergence
  6. Leads to satisfaction of all user and customer requirements
  7. Creates a robust system

The three main aspects of this approach, in the context of developing a real-
world system, involve:

  1. Architecture design
  2. Subsystem design
  3. System construction

                                                                          185
186      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


Architecture design deals with the top-level considerations and the funda-
mental design choices that have to be made in constructing a system. After
this is completed, one then addresses the more detailed design of each sub-
system. After these two steps are complete, it is then possible to actually
construct the subsystems, composed of hardware, software, and human
components.
   In Figure 2.2, an overview of the systems engineering process and its
management was illustrated. This expanded the preceding three aspects of the
systems approach by adding two additional elements:

  1. Other system and subsystem considerations
  2. Project control

This gave more substance to the systems approach, and also introduced many
more detailed elements of systems engineering and its management. In this
chapter, we describe the fundamental elements of systems engineering and its
management in the form of thirty specific tasks to be accomplished by the
systems engineering team. Before addressing the thirty key elements, we
briefly examine two other approaches in order to place these elements in other
contexts.


7.2     TWO SYSTEMS ENGINEERING PERSPECTIVES

Over the years, there have been many descriptions of systems engineering,
its internal processes, and its management [7.1]. These have ranged from the
first book on systems engineering [7.2], to the first systems engineering stan-
dard [7.3], to systems engineering management guides [7.4], to a variety of
more current texts on systems engineering [7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11].
In most cases, the systems engineering process has been described in some
type of flow or activity chart that has embodied the elements of systems
engineering, similar to the chart shown in Figure 2.2. Here we provide a brief
overview of two such representations, one drawn from Military Standard
499B and the other from a series of processes defined by a government
agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).

7.2.1    Mil-Std-499B Revisited
This draft standard, discussed in Chapter 2, is rather specific about what it is
that constitutes the systems engineering process. Referring to Figure 7.1, we
see the four main features of this process, as represented in the standard:

  1. Requirements analysis
  2. Functional analysis/allocation
                                                                                                      System analysis
                                                                                                         & control
                                                   Requirements Analysis                                 (balance)
                                                • Analyze missions & environments
                                                • Identify functional requirements                                     • Trade-off studies
      Process Input                             • Define/refine performance &                                          • Effectiveness analyses
      • Customer needs/objectives/                                                                                     • Risk management
                                                  design constraint requirements
        requirements                                                                                                   • Configuration management
        •• Missions                                        Requirements loop                                           • Interface management
        •• Measures of effectiveness                                                                                   • Data management
        •• Environments                                        Functional Analysis/Allocation                          • Performance based
        •• Constraints                                • Decompose to lower-level functions                               progress measurement
      • Technology base                               • Allocate performance & other limiting                            •• SEMS
      • Outputs from prior phase                        requirements to all functional levels                            •• TPM
      • Program decision                              • Define/refine functional interfaces (internal/external)          •• Technical reviews
        requirements                                  • Define/refine/integrate functional architecture
      • Requirements applied through
        specifications and standards                                                 Design loop
                                                                                      Synthesis
                                                                   • Transform architectures (functional to physical)
                                                                   • Define alternative system concepts,
                                                    Verification     configuration items & system elements
                                                                   • Define/refine physical interfaces (internal/external)
                                                                   • Select preferred product & process solutions




                                                                                                                     Process Output
                                                                                                                     • Phase dependent
                                                                                                                       •• Decision support data
                                                                                                                       •• System architecture
                                                                                                                       •• Specifications & baselines




187
                                       Figure 7.1. Military Standard 499B view of systems engineering process.
188     THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


  3. Synthesis
  4. System analysis and control

This process requires a variety of inputs, delineated in the figure as ‘‘process
input.’’ The outputs are also shown under the heading of ‘‘process output.’’
The view of systems engineering and its management in this text, however,
is considerably broader. As indicated before, it goes beyond architectural de-
sign of the system and into detailed subsystem design as well as the physical
construction, operation, and maintenance of the system. This broader view
can be expressed as a set of some thirty interrelated elements and is the central
focus of this chapter. In addition, this view also includes the management of
the systems engineering process that is normally the purview of the Chief
Systems Engineer (CSE).


7.2.2   The NASA Mission Design Process
NASA’s Engineering Management Council has produced an engineering guide
to conceptual design, mission analysis, and definition phases of a system
[7.12]. NASA tends to build systems by going through a series of formal
phases, from Prephase A to Phases C and D. The previously cited engineering
guide defines the first three phases as:

  1. The conceptual design process: Prephase A
  2. The mission analysis process: Phase A
  3. The definition process: Phase B

These are well-known by the industry that supports these phases that define
the ‘‘front-end’’ portion of the system’s life cycle. Table 7.1 provides a sum-
mary of the mission design activities, reviews, and products for each phase;
Table 7.2 shows examples of the required study resources for the phases
[7.12].
   Two points are especially significant with respect to NASA’s approach.
The first is that NASA has defined the flow of activities associated with each
phase. As examples, Figures 7.2 and 7.3 show these processes for Phase A
and Phase B, respectively. These are the systems engineering processes for
these early life-cycle phases. The second point is that NASA has implicitly
given significant attention to the notion of mission analysis, which has often
been overlooked as an integral part of, and indeed key element of, systems
engineering. The latter is viewed as an important contribution to a more ef-
fective way of ultimately dealing with the significant subject of missions as
well as requirements analysis and engineering.
      TABLE 7.1    Summary of Mission Design Activities, Reviews, and Products
                                          Prephase A                             Phase A                     Phase B
      Input to Each Phase        Mission Needs and Objectives       Preliminary Mission Require-   Phase A Study Report
                                                                      ments Document               Mission Requirements
                                                                                                     Document
                                                                    Prephase A Study Report        Operations Concept
                                                                                                     Document
                                                                    Evaluation Criteria            Project Initiation Agreement
                                                                                                   Evaluation Criteria
                                                                                                   Mission Requirements Re-
                                                                                                     quest (Preliminary)
      Activities                 Prephase A Study                   System and Subsystem Trade     Revalidation of Mission Re-
                                                                      Studies                        quirements and System Op-
                                                                                                     erations Concept
                                 Preliminary Mission Require-       Analysis of Performance        System Decomposition, Re-
                                   ments Definition                   Requirements                   quirements Flow-Down,
                                                                                                     and Verification
                                 Top-Level Trade Studies            Identification of Advanced     Risk Analysis
                                                                      Technology / Long Lead
                                                                      Items
                                 ROM Costs and Schedule             Risk Analysis                  System and Subsystem Stud-
                                                                                                     ies and Trades
                                 Feasibility Assessment             End-to-End System Life-        Development of the Work
                                                                      Cycle Cost as a Trade          Breakdown Structure and
                                                                      Parameter                      Dictionary
                                                                    Cost and Schedule              Updating Cost, Schedule, and
                                                                      Development                    Life-Cycle Cost
                                                                    Top–Down Selection of Study    System and Subsystem Con-
                                                                      Concepts                       cept Selection and
                                                                                                     Validation




189
                                                                    Operational Concepts
190
      TABLE 7.1   (Continued )
                                          Prephase A                      Phase A                        Phase B
      Reviews                    Peer Reviews                   Peer Reviews                   Peer Reviews
                                 Mission Concept Review         Mission Design Review          System Requirements Review
                                                                                               System Design Review
                                                                                               Nonadvocate Review
      Products                   Prephase A Study Report        Phase A Study Report           Nonadvocate Review Package
                                 Preliminary Mission Require-   Mission Requirements Docu-     Phase C / D Request for Pro-
                                   ments Document                 ment (preliminary)             posal Package(s)
                                 Evaluation Criteria            Operations Concept             Baseline Systems Description
                                                                  Document
                                 Science Definition Team        Project Initiation Agreement   Technology Development /
                                   Report                                                        Risk Mitigation
                                 ROM Cost Estimate              Phase B Study Plan             Design and Technical
                                                                                                 Documents
                                                                Technology Development         Management and Control
                                                                  Plan                           Plans
                                                                Top-Level System and Mis-      Externally Required Docu-
                                                                  sion Architecture              ments and Agreements
                                                                Preliminary Cost and Man-      Mission Cost and Manpower
                                                                  power Estimates                Estimates
                                                                                               Operations Plan
                             7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   191

TABLE 7.2    Examples of Required Study Resources
                   Duration                  Funding                 Staffing
Prephase A    2 to 4 months              $0 to ⬍            Study Manager / Systems
                                           $100,000           Engineer
                                                            Project Scientist
                                                            Part-time help from
                                                              others
Phase A       6 months to 1 year         1 to 2% of total   Study Manager
                                            system cost     Systems Engineer
                                                            Project Scientist
                                                            Resource Specialists
                                                            Discipline Engineers and
                                                              Specialists
Phase B       1 to 2 years               4 to 8% of total   Project Manager
                                            system cost     Systems Engineer
                                                            Project Scientist
                                                            Resource Specialists
                                                            Discipline Engineers and
                                                              Specialists



7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING

We come now to a variety of tasks that form the central core of systems
engineering and its management. In this book, these tasks are called the thirty
elements of systems engineering, and are listed in Exhibit 7.1.

  Exhibit 7.1: The Thirty Elements of Systems Engineering
   1. Needs/goals/objectives
   2. Mission engineering
   3. Requirements analysis/allocation
   4. Functional analysis/decomposition
   5. Architecture design/synthesis
   6. Alternatives analysis/evaluation
   7. Technical performance measurement (TPM)
   8. Life-cycle costing (LCC)
   9. Risk analysis
  10. Concurrent engineering
  11. Specification development
  12. Hardware/software/human engineering
  13. Interface control
  14. Computer tool evaluation and utilization
         Form study                   Initial version of the shaded items are obtained form the pre-Phase A study and its final report




192
          team and
        develop study                                                                            Other options 6'
             plan     1                                                                                                  Other options 7'


                                                         Identify and prioritize              Develop                 Perform
                                  Top-level
                                                            key design and                strawman end-            preliminary
        Mission needs              mission
                                                          technology drivers;             to-end mission              system
        and objectives          requirements
                                                           develop concept                   functional           requirements
                                  definition
                         2                      4          evaluation criteria   5            concept    6          flow-down 7


         Constraints                             Iterate requirements and concepts
            and
                                             System cost/
        assumptions 3
                                           performance/risk/                                     Detailed        Decomposition                  Refine the
                                                                       Recomposition           subsystem            to the                      strawman          Alternative
                                              margins vs.                  to the                                                                                 reference
                                             requirements                                      trades and         subsystem                      system
                                                                        system level           evaluation            level                       concept           concepts
                                              evaluations 12                         11                   10                       9                         8              8'
                              No

                                Cost/risk/
                               performance
                                                        Parallel
                               margins/etc.                                                          Parallel studies and trades
                                                      evaluations
                               acceptable?
                                                                 12'                                                                   9'-11'
                                      13
                                Yes
                                                                                                               Refine selected system
                                                                        Peer              Down-select            design; subsystem                   Mission design review;
                                                                       review             options to a          definition; costs and                 prepare final report
                                                                                           baseline                   schedule
                                                                        14                               15                           16                                   17
      NOTE: Pre-Phase A and Phase A processes are similar except
           during Phase A, the analysis and trade studies are more
           detailed and are carried to a lower hierarchical level.

                                           Figure 7.2. Representative top-level flow for a mission analysis study—Phase A [7.12].
         Initiate
        Phase B
                                Initial version of the shaded items are obtained from the Phase A study and its final report

      Select project
      manager and
        systems
        engineer     1


        Update
        Phase B
          plan      2                                                                                                             Alternative
                                                                                                                                   concepts
                          Refine                                                    Decompose             Subsystem              and/or more
                           and                 System            Reevaluate                                 trades,
                                                                                     baseline                                    detail, trades
        Form study                          requirements                                                  evaluations,
                         update                                   alternate           to the                                          and
           team    3                           review                                                       and risk
                         mission                                  concepts          subsystem                                       parallel
                         concept 4               5                            6        level  7           assessment 8            evaluations
                                                                                                       Not                 Not              6, 7, 8
                                                                                                       OK                  OK
                                                                                                                  OK
                            Finalize                                                                                                 OK
                                                                   Conduct             Technical         Recompose
                             project             Finalize
                                                                   detailed              peer             and refine
                           control and            system
                                                                     cost               review             baseline
                          management             baseline
                                                                   analysis                                concept
                              plans    13                   12                11          10                           9



                              System
                                                Prepare
                              design                                               To
                                                  NAR               NAR
                              review                                               Phase C/D
                                                package
                                14                     15




193
                              Figure 7.3. Representative top-level flow for a definition study—Phase B [7.12].
194    THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


  15. Technical data management and documentation
  16. Integrated logistics support (ILS)
  17. Reliability, maintainability, availability (RMA)
  18. Integration
  19. Verification and validation
  20. Test and evaluation
  21. Quality assurance and management
  22. Configuration management
  23. Specialty engineering
  24. Preplanned product improvement (P3I)
  25. Training
  26. Production and deployment
  27. Operations and maintenance (O&M)
  28. Operations evaluation/reengineering
  29. System disposal
  30. Systems engineering management (planning, organizing, directing, and
      monitoring)

   These thirty elements span the overall systems engineering process over
the full life cycle of a system. It is an inclusive rather than exclusive inter-
pretation of systems engineering and its management. It is the ‘‘union’’ of the
set of tasks and activities that have previously been defined as necessary over
a system’s life cycle. It is not confined only to the systems architecting or
synthesis phase and extends to the reengineering of a system, or portions
thereof, after it has been in its operations and maintenance phase, possibly
for many years. Reengineering has emerged as a critical activity because we
cannot, as a general philosophy, afford to scrap many old systems and engage
in completely new starts. As we have ‘‘legacy’’ software, we also have legacy
systems. As we add functionality to older systems, we are not able to com-
pletely throw away these older core systems.
   With respect to these thirty elements, not only must the CSE master each
and every one of them, he or she must also understand the interrelationship
between these elements. This is an enormously challenging assignment that
requires both a broad and deep commitment to this discipline as well as its
supporting knowledge base. Although there are numerous persons involved
in some element of the process of systems engineering, a considerably fewer
number achieve the level of Chief Systems Engineer (CSE). Such a position
is often, but by no means always, a prerequisite to the position of Project
Manager (PM), especially for a large program or project.
   We now briefly examine each of the thirty elements of systems engineering
and its management. The following four chapters provide additional depth for
the more important elements. In effect, the following discussion provides a
                           7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   195

broad overview of all core elements of systems engineering and its
management.


7.3.1   Needs, Goals, and Objectives
This element is the same as that cited as the first element of a project plan,
as described in Chapter 3. Therefore, all that should be done under this ele-
ment is to confirm that the statements of needs, goals, and objectives are
correct. Because these are provided by the system user or acquisition agent,
the system developer should go back to these sources for the purpose of
assuring that the needs, goals, and objectives are still current and appropri-
ately stated. Examples of such statements are given in Chapter 3.


7.3.2   Mission Engineering
Mission engineering has often been overlooked as a central element of sys-
tems engineering. In general terms, it involves the detailed articulation and
analysis of the intended mission of the system that is being engineered. The
main purposes of mission engineering are

  • To verify that the system has legitimate missions to be executed that are
    not being carried out by other systems
  • To provide a technical basis for the full definition of requirements for
    the system

   With respect to the first point, mission analysis confirms that there is a real
need for the system. It forces the very early consideration of the possibility
that, for example, minor upgrades of existing systems will not suffice. Many
system developments have ultimately failed because this important step was
not fully explored. With the complexity and expense associated with our
large-scale systems, we must be sure that a real need exists for the new
system.
   However, mission engineering also serves another critical function by pro-
viding a technical framework for defining the requirements for the system.
Requirements, in general, flow from the need for the system and the mission
that it is designed to accomplish. Thus, the definition of the system require-
ments is closely related to the mission engineering element. In the systems
engineering world, poor requirements almost always lead to major schedule,
cost, and performance problems downstream. Flexibility is needed in the han-
dling of and possible updating of requirements as we go through other ele-
ments of the systems engineering process. The reason is simple—the systems
engineering process is itself a learning process and we find that certain re-
quirements have to be changed as we achieve a more complete understanding
of the system.
196     THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


7.3.3   Requirements Analysis and Allocation
Requirements analysis and allocation is a set of activities that review an ex-
isting set of requirements, derive new requirements, and then allocate these
requirements to the functional elements of the system. In the latter sense, the
allocation process cannot occur without the next element in the systems en-
gineering process, namely, the full definition of functions and subfunctions.
    Although this element of systems engineering is covered in detail in the
next chapter, we cite here some of the important aspects of requirements
analysis and allocation, which are:

  • Checking requirements for
    — Completeness
    — Accuracy
    — Compatibility
    — Consistency
    — Traceability
    — Appropriateness
    — Level (e.g., mandatory vs. optional)
  • Developing a set of derived requirements
  • Placing the requirements in an automated context
  • Allocating requirements to the functionally decomposed representation
    of the system
  • Recommending changes in requirements where and when the preceding
    aspects suggest that such changes are desirable or essential

Because requirements analysis and allocation is such an important aspect of
systems engineering and the ultimate success or failure of a system devel-
opment, we deal with it in considerably more detail in the next chapter.


7.3.4   Functional Analysis and Decomposition
At the top level, systems are normally described by the functions they are to
perform in distinction to specific subsystems and components. For example,
the functions of a command, control, and communications system may be
described by the following selected functions:

  • Command
  • Communications
  • Computation
  • Control
  • Detection
  • Guidance
                           7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   197

  • Identification
  • Surveillance
  • Tracking

   By maintaining a focus on function, rather than the manner in which the
function is to be executed in hardware, software, and human components, we
allow the systems engineer to consider a host of alternative ways of imple-
menting a given function. We explicitly separate the ‘‘what’’ is to be done
from the ‘‘how’’ it should be done. We consciously want to avoid leaping to
a premature conclusion regarding a specific way to implement a given func-
tion. Selecting such specific ways is represented by the tasks of detailed
design.
   The basic steps under this element of systems engineering involve the
following:

  • Definition of the top-level functions of the system
  • Decomposition of the preceding into lower-level functions and
    subfunctions
  • Allocation of generic information and data flows among and between
    functions and subfunctions
  • From the requirements analysis and allocation element, assuring that all
    requirements are allocated to the functions and subfunctions

The preceding steps are specifically related to the system architecting process
and also set the stage for subsystem design once the architecture is developed.
As such, they are considered further in Chapter 9.

7.3.5   Architecture Design and Synthesis
Developing a basic architecture is the centerpiece of the total systems engi-
neering process. It is fundamentally a synthesis procedure that normally
requires

  • The formulation of alternative system architectures
  • The analysis of the postulated architectures to verify that they satisfy
    system requirements

Architecting is performed at the top level, dealing with functional descriptions
rather than detailed subsystem design features. Various methods are available
to facilitate architecting, and these are discussed later in Chapter 9, with case
examples in the Appendix.
   A good example related to the issue of architecting has emerged rather
clearly in the computer information system world. Years ago, computer sys-
tems largely involved a dominant mainframe computer and thus the infor-
mation system had a highly centralized architecture. As minicomputers,
198     THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


workstations, and microcomputers came into use, architectures evolved into
more decentralized configurations. In today’s world, we see networks of
client–server configurations as a preferred architecture for many types of
computer information systems. In broad terms, matters of the degree of cen-
tralization or decentralization represent architectural alternatives.
   Architectures can also involve fundamental technology considerations and
choices. An example is the basic selection of a time-division multiplexed
system versus a frequency-division multiplexed system. These are very basic
choices that ‘‘drive’’ the remainder of the system design. Once a selection is
made, further architecting must be compatible with this basic approach.
   The world of architecture and engineering (A&E) firms demonstrates,
through analogy, another way of understanding notions of architecting. In
designing an airport, for example, the architect portion of the firm does the
basic top-level design and architecture for the airport. Once this is complete,
the engineers take over (civil, structural, mechanical, electrical, etc.) to con-
vert the basic architecture into a physical system. However, modern concepts
of concurrent engineering would suggest that the engineering team should be
represented in the ‘‘front-end’’ architecting processes. Concurrent engineering
is viewed as one of the key thirty elements of systems engineering.
   Finally, we note that this element of systems engineering, as herein defined,
is devoted to the formulation of alternative architectures, all of which are
deemed to satisfy, in differing degrees, the system requirements. This element
does not include the selection of a preferred architecture. Such a selection is
subsumed in the following element, alternatives analysis and evaluation.

7.3.6   Alternatives Analysis and Evaluation
This element accepts the results of the previously cited element as an input,
namely, the definition of alternative architectures for the overall system. The
essence of this element is to carry out a comprehensive analysis and evalu-
ation of the alternatives, resulting in a preferred system architecture. However,
this cannot be performed without several other elements, as shown in Figure
7.4. Key inputs are required from the following other elements:

  • Technical performance measurement (TPM)
  • Life-cycle costing (LCC)
  • Risk analysis
  • Concurrent engineering
  • Systems engineering management

Secondary inputs are necessary as well from

  • Integrated logistics support (ILS)
  • Reliability, maintainability, availability (RMA)
                             7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING         199


                                   Evaluation       Evaluation
                                    criteria        framework


                      Input:
                   Architecture           Alternatives              Output:
                     design                 analysis               Preferred
                       and                    and                   system
                    synthesis             evaluation              architecture



           • TPM                         • ILS
           • Life cycle costing          • RMA
           • Risk analysis               • Test and evaluation
           • Concurrent                  • QA&M
             engineering                 • Specialty engineering
           • Systems                     • P3I
             engineering
             management

        Figure 7.4. Inputs to and output from alternatives analysis and evaluation.



  • Test and evaluation (T&E)
  • Quality assurance and management (QA&M)
  • Specialty engineering
  • Preplanned product improvement (P3I)

Also shown in Figure 7.4 are two additional aspects of this element—the
definition of evaluation criteria and an evaluation framework within which to
carry out the assessment of alternatives.
   At the completion of this element, the systems engineering team has pro-
duced a preferred system architecture together with the analysis that supports
the selection. In short, it is not enough to simply select a preferred architec-
ture; it is also necessary to explain why and how that architecture was se-
lected, both to oneself as well as to the customer. Many system development
efforts have gone astray as the preferred architecture was arrived at through
some type of leap of faith without a clear demonstration of its superiority in
relation to other alternatives. This has been particularly true when the con-
tractor has chosen a proprietary or ‘‘closed’’ system architecture.

7.3.7   Technical Performance Measurement
Technical performance measurement (TPM) is a crucial element in the overall
process of systems engineering. It is the underlying basis for evaluating the
performance of the architecture alternatives. It also serves as a key ingredient
200    THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


in selecting more detailed design parameters in the form of hardware, software
and human components (element 12 in Exhibit 7.1).
   Examples of technical performance measures (TPMs) that might be used
for different types of systems include the following:

  • For a radar system:
    — Range to target
    — Probability of detection
    — False alarm probability
  • For a transportation system:
    — Trip time
    — Capacity (for passenger and cargo transfer)
    — Quality of service
  • For a communications system:
    — Bit error rate (BER)
    — Message error rate
    — Quality of service
    — Speed of service
    — Capacity (number of channels for various classes of communication
       such as data, voice, video, etc.)

These TPMs represent only a small number of possible measures that must
be considered. Some additional measures are represented by the parameters
upon which these TPMs are dependent. Such parameters, called technical
performance parameters (TPPs), can be illustrated by the following:

  • Power required
  • Size of target
  • Frequency of operation
  • Size of antenna
  • Bandwidth
  • Signal-to-noise ratio
  • Size of vehicle
  • Load (external demand) on the system

The last is especially important because system performance generally de-
grades as the load on a system increases. Understanding this relationship, in
quantitative terms, is a critical aspect of technical performance measurement.
   In today’s world, technical performance measurement is usually supported
by one or more computer-based models and simulations. Thus, this capability
                           7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   201

is directly related to element 14 of Exhibit 7.1, namely, computer tool eval-
uation and utilization. The successful systems engineering team has a variety
of such tools in place so that system performance can be evaluated as quickly
and completely as possible.

7.3.8   Life-Cycle Costing
Clearly, a critical part of selecting among alternative architectures is the cost
of each architecture and the systems that they imply. We adopt the perspective
that costs must be considered on a life-cycle basis. Thus, the three main
categories of cost are:

  1. Research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E)
  2. Acquisition or procurement
  3. Operations and maintenance (O&M)

The above three cost categories may be further broken down into subordinate
cost elements, as shown in Exhibit 7.2.

  Exhibit 7.2: Breakdown of Major Cost Categories into Cost
  Elements
   1. Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation
      1.1. Research and development
           Preliminary studies
           Design engineering
           Hardware
           Software
           Other personnel costs
      1.2. Test and evaluation
           Test planning
           Test hardware
           Test software
           Test operations
           Test evaluation
           Other personnel costs
   2. Procurement
      2.1. Installations
           New construction
           Modification and renovation
      2.2. Equipment (hardware and software)
           Primary mission
           Mission support
           Other specialized
202      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


         2.3. Stocks
              Initial stock—primary mission
              Initial stock—support mission
              Spares—primary and support
         2.4. Initial training
              Training and support personnel
              Training materials and equipment
              Training facilities
         2.5. Other procurement (e.g., transportation) costs
      3. Operations and Maintenance (O&M)
         3.1. Equipment replacement (hardware and software)
              Primary mission
              Mission support
              Other specialized
         3.2. Maintenance
              Primary mission
              Mission support
              Other specialized
         3.3. Training
              Training and support personnel
              Training materials and equipment
              Training facilities
         3.4. Salaries (operators)
              System operators
              Other operational support
         3.5. Material
              Expendables
              Other support material
         3.6. Other operations and maintenance (e.g., transportation)
         3.7. Disposal of system
              Dismanteling of system
              Disposal of parts

   Using the above information, we may then construct the three dimensions
of a Life-Cycle Cost Model (LCCM). The first dimension is the list of all the
cost elements, as delineated in Exhibit 7.2. These may be visualized as the
rows of a spreadsheet. Since the model applies to a system’s life cycle, the
next dimension is time, measured in years from the beginning of work on the
system. This dimension is constructed as the columns of the spreadsheet. With
these two dimensions, we can readily appreciate how data intensive the
LCCM will be. For example, with about three dozen cost elements and per-
haps a twenty-year life for the system, we have a total of (36)(20) ⫽ 720
cells that make up the spreadsheet. Each one needs to be estimated with as
much fidelity as possible. If we then sum across any row, we are able to see
the overall life-cycle cost of one of the elements, for example, the total
                          7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   203

RDT&E costs. If we sum down one of the columns, we can easily calculate
the cost in any particular year. This is a necessary step in most budgeting
processes. Finally, we recognize that systems are ultimately broken down into
major subsystems. Thus, we may expand the two dimensions of the LCCM
into a third dimension, namely, the subsystems of the overall system. Various
‘‘sheets’’ of the LCCM spreadsheet represent the subsystem costs, and then
these are added into a summary ‘‘sheet’’ that represents the final LCCM for
the system. To summarize, the three dimensions of an LCCM, constructed in
the manner herein described, become:

  1. The cost elements of the system
  2. The years of useful life for the system
  3. The subsystems of the overall system

During the early days of design, the subsystems may be thought of as the
functions that are to be implemented in the system.
   During architecture assessment, we usually only have a first-order estimate
of these costs. However, they generally suffice to discriminate between the
defined alternatives. As we move on to subsystem design, we develop costs
more precisely, leading to more complete and, we hope, accurate cost esti-
mates. Often, we also utilize various cost-estimating relationships (CERs) to
develop the necessary cost estimates. An example is the COnstructive COst
MOdel (COCOMO) [7.13], which is used in its various forms as a way of
estimating costs and time to completion for software projects.
   Cost estimating relationships (CERs) provide for the systems engineering
team a way of estimating and calculating system costs in a generally top-
down fashion. Instead of a process by which all the subordinate costs are
estimated for, as an example, a radar system (bottom-up approach), we are
able to estimate the costs as a function of only a few key variables for the
system in question. This concept is further illustrated in Exhibit 7.3.

  Exhibit 7.3: Illustrative Cost Estimating Relationships (CERs) [7.1]
  The Cost of a....                   Can Be Considered a Function of....
  Radar system                            Output power
                                          Frequency of operation
                                          Bandwidth or pulse width
                                          Weight
  Missile booster                         Weight
                                          Type of propellent
  Satellite terminal                      Output power
                                          Antenna size
                                          Frequency of operation
                                          Receiver sensitivity
204     THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


  The Cost of a....                       Can Be Considered a Function of....
  Aircraft engine                         Thrust
                                          Bypass ratio
  Software effort                         Delivered source instructions
                                          Type of development effort
                                          Experience of team
  Radio equipment                         Number of channels
                                          Frequency
                                          Power
  Dish antenna                            Size of antenna
                                          Frequency of operation

The essential reason for using the above types of CERs, therefore, is that it
is the best we are able to do at an early stage of design (e.g., the conceptual
or architecting stages). If the estimating is being done for a new, clean-sheet-
of-paper system, and by the users, it is especially important to have CER data
so that budgets can be prepared for the system. Later on, it is useful to have
these estimates to compare what the user believes the system should cost to
what the system developer might believe it will cost. These concepts are
traceable to the Department of Defense in the McNamara days, when he set
up a group of ‘‘Whiz Kids’’ whose job, in part, was to be able to indepen-
dently (from the contractor community) estimate the costs of new systems.
   In general, we seek a cost-effective architecture and system, as illustrated
in Figure 7.5. This figure shows three alternatives: a low-cost, low-
effectiveness system; a high-cost, high-effectiveness system, and a system in
between in terms of cost and effectiveness. The latter, hopefully defined at
the ‘‘knee-of-the-curve,’’ may turn out to be our preferred system. However,
the low-cost, low-effectiveness system might be our preferred choice as long
as it satisfies all the system requirements. This first-order representation, how-
ever, must be examined in greater detail in order to select a preferred system.
This important topic is covered in Chapter 9 and again in the Appendix.


7.3.9   Risk Analysis
With the many problems that we have experienced in developing large-scale
systems, we have included the subject of risk analysis as a formal element of
systems engineering. In broad terms, risk may be explored in four key areas
from the perspective of the CSE: (1) schedule risk, (2) cost risk, (3) perform-
ance risk, and (4) societal risk.
   Schedule risk is prevalent, of course, under tight deadlines that must be
met and that may have penalties associated with not meeting critical mile-
stones. In such a situation, the critical path and all near-critical paths must
be examined in detail to assure that schedule risk is minimized. Cost risk
may be dominant when new development efforts are required along with the
                              7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   205

          Effectiveness
                                                   High-cost
                                               high-effectiveness
                                                    system



                                         "Knee-of-the curve"
                                               sytem



                                       Low-cost low-effectiveness system

                                    Minimum effectiveness requirement




                                                                        Cost
                          Figure 7.5. Cost-effectiveness notions.




introduction of new technologies. Pushing the state of the art often results in
considerable cost risk and the CSE and his or her team must examine all cost
uncertainty areas extremely closely. Another factor is the type of contract
under which the system is being procured. The discussion in Chapter 4 pro-
vides some further insight into this latter issue.
   The most difficult area is performance risk, and it generally leads to both
schedule and cost problems. Performance risk can be minimized by assigning
your best systems engineering team and incorporating as many commercial-
off-the-shelf (COTS) and nondevelopmental item (NDI) components as
possible.
   Finally, there is the matter of societal risk. This is the risk to the public
that could result from the deployment of the system in question. Examples
might include nuclear power plants, chemical processing plants, systems that
might release toxic materials into our air and water, and the like. It is a clear
responsibility of the systems engineering team to acknowledge such risks and
build a system that minimizes potential hazards to the public. Issues of public
safety are now squarely a feature of building large-scale systems and therefore
fall upon the systems engineering team to consider in detail. Other adminis-
trative risks, as cited in Chapter 3, remain generally within the purview of
the Project Manager.
   In essentially all aspects of risk assessment, there are two key factors that
play a central role. These are:
206    THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


  1. The likelihood that a high-risk event or set of events will occur
  2. The consequences, given the occurrence of the foregoing event(s)

The most serious risks, of course, are represented when both factors are high.
Therefore, a careful analysis has to ferret out such possible situations and
then try to reduce both factors. If the consequence factor cannot be signifi-
cantly changed (e.g., the catastrophic failure of a manned space mission),
then system modifications should be made that reduce the probability factor.
   The above notions of high-risk likelihood and consequence can be incor-
porated into a two-way table or matrix that has been the basis for a variety
of risk analyses. These analyses partition the likelihood into high, medium,
and low, and do the same for the consequences. These are then explored by
reference to Table 7.3.
   If we construct such a risk table, we can readily conclude that the situations
represented by the High–High cell are the ones to which we should pay most
attention in terms of what can be done to mitigate the risk. The next two
troublesome cells are, of course, shown as the High–Medium and the
Medium–High cases. Finally, if the previous cases have been satisfactorily
dealt with, it may be possible to move to the Medium–Medium case. There
is normally considerable discretion with respect to the assignment of numer-
ical values to probabilities as well as the consequences. As an example, for
the former, one might consider the ranges listed below:

  • High Probability: From 0.7 to 1.0 (as close to unity as measurable)
  • Medium Probability: From 0.4 to 0.7
  • Low Probability: From 0.01 to 0.4

Consequences are often converted into dollar figures, unless other loss mea-
sures are more appropriate. This, however, is an area that can be quite con-
troversial, especially when human lives are at stake with respect to negative
consequences.
   The manner in which the overall subject of risk analysis is approached can
be quite varied. This may be illustrated by briefly looking at two agencies,
the Department of Defense (DoD) and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA). The former, for example, defines risk management
as [7.14]:


TABLE 7.3   Risk Table or Matrix
                        Low Probability    Medium Probability    High Probability
High Consequence         High–Low          High–Medium            High–High
Medium Consequence       Medium–Low        Medium–Medium          Medium–High
Low Consequence          Low–Low           Low–Medium             Low–High
                            7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING       207

  Risk management is a program management responsibility and is the act or
  practice of controlling the risk drivers that adversely affect the program. It in-
  cludes the process of identifying, analyzing, and tracking risk drivers, assessing
  the likelihood of their occurrence and their consequences, defining risk-handling
  plans, and performing continuous assessments to determine how risks change
  during the life of the program.

A sample format for a Risk Management Plan includes the following sections:

  1. Introduction
  2. Program summary
  3. Definitions
  4. Risk management strategy and approach
  5. Organization
  6. Risk management process and procedures

Special attention is paid to technical risk management, since it is often the
case that technical risk ‘‘is a significant driver of all other program risks’’
[7.14]. The three primary approaches to technical risk management involve a
detailed analysis of:

  1. Critical processes
  2. Deliverable products (usually identifiable from the work breakdown
     structure), and
  3. Integrated processes and products

A brief look at some of NASA’s documentation with respect to risk manage-
ment reveals a serious attempt to define the life-cycle risk management ele-
ments [7.15], namely:

  1. ISO 9001 compliance
  2. Industry best practices: design and engineering
  3. Key characteristic and critical process management
  4. Industry best practices: manufacturing
  5. Test/verification/validation
  6. Supply chain integration and management
  7. Implementation assurance
  8. Independent assessment

We note the elements of best practices in industry and a topic known as
verification and validation. This latter area was listed as one of the thirty
elements of systems engineering and is discussed in a later section of this
chapter.
208      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


7.3.10    Concurrent Engineering
Concurrent engineering is defined as ‘‘a systematic approach to the integrated,
concurrent design of products and their related processes, including manu-
facturing and support. This approach is intended to cause the developers, from
the outset, to consider all elements of the product life cycle from concept
through disposal, including quality, cost, schedule, and user requirements’’
[7.8, 7.16]. From this definition, concurrent engineering seems to be similar
to systems engineering. However, we view concurrent engineering as a subset
(element of) systems engineering for two basic reasons:

  1. It lacks the formal definition and historical discipline of systems
     engineering.
  2. Its main thrust and significance flow from the notion of engineering
     concurrency, and therefore it is a contribution to, rather than a replace-
     ment for, systems engineering.

The essential perspective of concurrent engineering is that all parties that have
a role to play in a given system design should be involved with that system
throughout its life cycle. The sequential or serial process of moving from
development to test to production to operations, and so forth, is augmented
by adding all significant life-cycle disciplines and personnel to all life-cycle
phases. Therefore, for example, even though a system may be in its early
conceptual, mission analysis, or definition phases (see Section 7.2.2 for NASA
phase descriptions), personnel from manufacturing should be involved in the
process to assure that the system is designed for optimum manufacturability.
This basic idea holds for all personnel who have a clear stake in the product
or system. It also allows for parallel developments whenever possible that
have the general positive effect of compressing schedules.
    The implications of these notions of concurrent engineering have been that
systems engineering teams must also contain integrated product teams (IPTs)
that focus on integrating all life-cycle considerations. The systems engineering
process, with its element of concurrent engineering, must explicitly take ac-
count of downstream integration, test, production, manufacturing, quality, op-
erations, maintenance, logistics, and all other relevant aspects of a system’s
life cycle. Concurrent engineering forces this discipline as a vital part of
systems engineering. Thus, it is herein defined as an essential element of
systems engineering.

7.3.11    Specification Development
In principle, after the preferred system architecture has been selected, we
require a detailed specification to continue on with the process of subsystem
design. This is done by developing a set of detailed specifications for these
subsystems, usually considered in three categories: hardware, software, and
                          7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   209

human. In many system developments, there are actually levels of specifica-
tions so that a top-level spec has to be developed to define system architec-
tures. This element of systems engineering covers the rather important task
of writing a series of specifications at whatever levels are needed. Indeed, a
military standard exists to help define the numerous specification requirements
for military systems [7.17].


7.3.12   Hardware, Software, and Human Engineering
As suggested earlier, this element of systems engineering deals with detailed
subsystem design in the three dimensions of hardware, software, and human.
In general, deciding what should be implemented in hardware versus software
is not an easy choice. Software often provides additional flexibility, but can
be more difficult to manage and implement. Human engineering functions are
normally relegated to those of operator and maintainer of the system, and the
system requirements often specify these functions.
   In general, this element refers to the design and construction of subsystems
as well as the components that make up these subsystems. As with the ar-
chitecting process, design choices involve the postulation of alternatives and
the selection of the best alternative to satisfy the stated or derived require-
ments. As we move more toward the use of COTS and NDI for hardware, and
reuse for software, we are able to define and choose subsystems and com-
ponents more easily. This, however, is a nontrivial task and depends on the
experience and design expertise of hardware, software, and human engineer-
ing personnel. A short list of some typical subsystem design areas includes:

  • Power supplies
  • Multiplexers
  • Modulators–demodulators
  • Transmitters
  • Receivers
  • Servomechanisms
  • Graphical user interfaces (GUIs)
  • Large-scale displays


7.3.13   Interface Control
Experience indicates that many of the difficulties in building large systems
show themselves in the interfaces between the subsystems and between the
system and external systems with which it must interoperate. For this essential
reason, we include interface control as a key element of systems engineering.
In the hardware arena, we have come a long way in specifying such interfaces
and assuring interface compatibility. In the case of software, we are further
210      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


behind and have to develop new methods of specification for software mod-
ules that are candidates for reuse. The basic tasks that have to be accom-
plished under this element include:

  • Definition of all interfaces
  • Identification of the nature of all interfaces (physical, data, electrical,
    mechanical, etc.)
  • Assurance of interface compatibility at all defined interfaces
  • Strict control of the interface processes (design, construction, etc.)

This is a difficult bookkeeping and control problem that may involve tracking
thousands of critical interfaces with the possibility that many interfaces may
creep in that are not found until testing (such as cross-coupling of mechanical
or electrical forces and fields). Also, many systems engineers simply do not
give enough attention to this issue, and find that they pay an unexpected price
downstream.

7.3.14    Computer Tool Evaluation and Utilization
Commercially available computer tools that support systems engineering have
evolved so quickly, and can be obtained at such low prices, that it has become
essential that all systems engineering teams have a set of such tools imme-
diately at hand to carry out the thirty elements of systems engineering. This
includes the set of tools known as CASE (computer-aided software engineer-
ing) tools that are used for software engineering, a subset of systems engi-
neering. Under this element of systems engineering, the team evaluates and
then uses the set of computer aids appropriate to the system being developed.
   A listing of some thirty categories of systems engineering support tools is
provided in an early systems engineering text [7.1]. As a practical matter,
because there are so many tools to choose from, a formal evaluation is nec-
essary in relation to the system requirements and the domain knowledge at-
tendant to that system.
   The maturity of computer tools and their widespread use have also
spawned the notion of system and software engineering environments (SEEs).
Such environments incorporate integrated sets of tools that support both sys-
tems and software engineering [7.18, 7.19]. The systems engineering team
that has itself reached a significant level of maturity will establish a systems
engineering environment that will allow it to execute the thirty elements of
systems engineering quickly [7.20] and efficiently. It will also put such a team
in an excellent position relative to its competitors.

7.3.15    Technical Data Management and Documentation
A complex systems engineering effort generates a large amount of technical
information. For large systems, these data can be overwhelming, and come
                          7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   211

in many forms such as text, graphics, large-scale drawings, correspondence,
requirements and specifications, and others. If these data are not organized
and managed, the systems engineering team will soon be lost in mounds of
paper that are not readily retrievable. Here again, with the power afforded by
microcomputers and workstations, it is easier to manage large amounts of
technical data on behalf of the entire project and the systems engineering
team. A commercially available database management system (DBMS) be-
comes the most likely candidate as the centerpiece of technical data manage-
ment, with other specialized software playing a supporting role. The reader
with a special interest in this area may examine in detail the wide variety of
other tools that might be used to assist in the task of technical data
management.
   The second part of this element is effective and efficient production of all
required system documentation. Of course, this must be well-organized so
that all files are retrievable by the project team. Word processors as well as
other software (e.g., graphics) support this subelement, as do report generators
of other types of software. Of special significance are ways and means of
handling large-size drawings (e.g., blueprints) so that they can be stored and
retrieved in an automated environment. All documentation should be available
on magnetic disks to facilitate reproduction and usage.

7.3.16   Integrated Logistics Support (ILS)
Integrated logistics support (ILS) is defined as ‘‘a disciplined, unified and
iterative approach to the management and technical activities necessary to (a)
integrate support considerations into system and equipment design; (b) de-
velop support requirements that are related consistently to readiness objec-
tives, to design, and to each other; (c) acquire the required support; and (d)
provide the required support during the operational phase at minimum cost’’
[7.21]. This definition was derived from a Department of Defense (DoD)
Directive for ILS that was published in 1983 and is relevant and appropriate
today. A more recent DoD Instruction [7.22], also cited in Chapter 2, estab-
lishes ILS policies and procedures for ensuring that (1) support considerations
are effectively integrated into the system design, and (2) required support
structure elements are acquired concurrently with the system so that the sys-
tem will be both supportable and supported when fielded. This latter instruc-
tion emphasizes ILS procedures in the following areas:

   a. Readiness objectives
   b. Integrated logistics support plan (ILSP)
   c. Computer resources support
   d. Planning factors
   e. Logistics support analysis
   f. Manpower, personnel, training, and safety
   g. Accelerated acquisition strategies
212      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


  h. Interim contractor support
   i. Depot maintenance support
   j. Spares acquisition integrated with production
  k. Postproduction support
   l. Logistics resources
  m. Milestone decision reviews

The ten specific elements of ILS are further defined as:

   1. Maintenance planning
   2. Manpower and personnel
   3. Supply support
   4. Support equipment
   5. Technical data
   6. Training and training support
   7. Computer resources support
   8. Facilities
   9. Packaging, handling, storage, and transportation
  10. Design interface

Clearly, given its defined scope, integrated logistics support is a critical ele-
ment of systems engineering.


7.3.17    Reliability, Maintainability, Availability (RMA)
The RMA element focuses specifically on matters of the operating life and
ease of maintenance of a system. In broad terms, reliability and availability
are defined as follows:

  Reliability. The probability that a system successfully operates to time ‘‘t.’’
  Availability. The probability that a system is available to operate when
  called on to do so for a particular mission or application.

Maintainability does not have a generally accepted quantitative definition, but
it is interpreted as the degree to which a system has been constructed so as
to facilitate maintenance at an affordable cost.
    There is clearly an important relationship between RMA and ILS. A system
must be designed to meet specific reliability, availability, and maintainability
requirements, as they are stated in the requirements and specifications docu-
ments. However, all three are supported by ILS considerations. For example,
when a system or subsystem or component fails, a spare is usually required
to put the system back on line. It is the ILS engineer who determines the
                           7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING    213

level of sparing required and assures that there is a system in place to provide
these spares in minimum time.

7.3.18   Integration
Integration refers to the set of activities that bring together smaller units of a
system into larger units. Such units, often called configuration items (CIs)
and components, are generally manifest in hardware and software. As these
units are completed, they are tested to assure that they are operating correctly.
If so, they are then interconnected (integrated) with other tested units to build
larger and larger subsystems. As problems of incompatibility show them-
selves, they are solved, one at a time. Often, this physical integration is the
first time that there is a real opportunity to see if units will ‘‘play together.’’
If the interface control element (element number 13 in Exhibit 7.1) is per-
formed with diligence, many such potential problems can be anticipated and
averted.
    This process of unit integration is a natural part of building any system. It
can go astray when not enough time is allocated in the master schedule to
account for the situations in which unexpected interoperability problems oc-
cur, despite all efforts to avoid them. The process of rapid prototyping has
been introduced into some system development efforts, in part, to deal with
such issues as early as possible.

7.3.19   Verification and Validation
These two parts of systems engineering may be defined as follows [7.1].

  Verification. The confirmation that products and processes of each devel-
  opment phase fulfill the requirements for that phase, and interoperate with
  the results of an earlier phase.
  Validation. The confirmation that requirements are correct and that all
  products and processes, when taken in combination, satisfy all system-level
  mission needs.

It will be recalled, from the beginning of this chapter (i.e., Figure 7.1), that
the four key elements that make up the systems engineering process, accord-
ing to the Military Standard 499B as well as other approaches, are:

  1. Requirements analysis
  2. Functional analysis/allocation
  3. Synthesis
  4. System analysis and control

From the perspective of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers’
(IEEE) systems engineering standard [7.23], a fifth element needs to be added
214    THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


to the above four elements, namely, verification and validation (V&V). This
is an important step, coming as it does from this well-respected and influential
source. The IEEE definitions of verification and validation, which may be
compared with the above definitions, are these:

     Verification. The ‘‘process of determining whether or not the products
  of a given phase of development fulfill the requirements established during
  the previous phase.’’
     Validation. The ‘‘process of evaluating a configuration item, subsystem,
  or system to ensure compliance with system requirements.’’

   Although the concepts of verification and validation (V&V) may well have
been established during the early days of missiles and space technology, they
have become part and parcel of today’s world of systems engineering. They
can be carried out as an integral part of a given contractor’s systems engi-
neering activities, or they may be executed by a third party, in which case
they would likely be called independent verification and validation (IV&V).
   V&V are to be a part of each and every phase of an overall development
effort, focusing on the special needs and requirements of each phase. For
example, within an agency such as NASA, V&V would be scheduled to deal
with each of the key phases [7.24], as below:

  • Phases A/B. Preliminary analysis and definition
  • Phase C. Design
  • Phase D. Development

Further, some of the important methods that could be used to perform V&V
include [7.24]:

  1. Testing
  2. Analysis
  3. Demonstration
  4. Similarity
  5. Inspection
  6. Simulation and modeling
  7. Validation of records

   V&V has also been specialized to the development of software whenever
this aspect of a program has been considered to be of especially high risk,
since the main purpose of V&V is to try to reduce the risk in a program. In
such a case, the life cycle of interest may be narrowed, typically dealing with
the software phases cited below:
                           7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   215

  • Requirements
  • Design
  • Development and coding
  • Integration and test


A more complete set of software phases, including variations that depend
upon the software development model that is selected, is cited in Chapter 10,
which deals with various aspects of software engineering. Further, an excel-
lent discussion of V&V in the context of software development is provided
in John Wiley’s Encyclopedia of Software Engineering [7.25].


7.3.20   Test and Evaluation
Test and evaluation (T&E) normally refers to physical confirmation of the
performance of an overall system. It is carried out in at least two key contexts:
(1) completion of the full-scale development of a system, and (2) placing the
system in an operational environment. The former is called development test
and evaluation (DT&E), and the latter is operational test and evaluation
(OT&E). For many systems, OT&E can be exceedingly difficult because the
operational environment for the system cannot be adequately represented or
simulated. Examples include many military weapon systems for which it
would be prohibitively expensive to truly test the system in terms of stated
operational requirements. In such cases, attempts are made to combine real-
world test data with models in order to verify performance. An example is
the rather large-scale National Test Bed (NTB) established for the strategic
defense initiative (SDI).
   The PM and the CSE must pay a great deal of attention to the systems
engineering element of T&E because these are the arenas in which there is a
‘‘sell-off’’ of the system to the customer. It is the stage at which there is
overall confirmation that the system meets the given user requirements. If
failures occur during T&E, it may be extremely expensive to go back and
make the changes necessary to improve performance. It is also usually very
time-consuming. As described in the quality assurance element of systems
engineering, trying to test quality into a system is basically the wrong ap-
proach. In that sense, a system that moves into DT&E and OT&E with a
large number of defects still remaining in the system is very likely to become
a major disaster.
   As the SEMP (systems engineering management plan) is the key document
that describes what is to be done to execute and manage the systems engi-
neering elements, the TEMP (test and evaluation master plan) documents the
T&E activities. For the reasons cited earlier, the best systems engineers should
be involved in structuring all T&E concepts and plans as well as the inter-
pretation of results.
216      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


7.3.21    Quality Assurance and Management
Quality assurance and management (QA&M) is an element of systems en-
gineering that addresses all matters related to product and service quality. As
a discipline, quality assurance and management has undergone extensive
changes in the last 15 years or so, mainly through the introduction of Total
Quality Management (TQM). Some of the principles of TQM can be articu-
lated as:

  • Strict conformance with specifications
  • Continuous improvement
  • A focus on process
  • Attention to customer needs
  • Empowerment of people to implement
  • Management support of its introduction and use

    As TQM has developed, various tools or methods have evolved that support
it, including statistical process control (SPC) and quality function deployment
(QFD). These and other procedures have served as practical ways to enhance
quality.
    Military Standard 499B does not address matters of QA&M in detail. Spe-
cifically, the comment made in that standard is as follows:

  The government and contractor shall insure the comprehensive application of
  the systems engineering process to integrate quality factors throughout all tech-
  nical elements and activities of the program and to:
  a. capture customer requirements and translate them into detailed design re-
     quirements that can be implemented in a consistent manner
  b. deliver products that meet operational requirements under specified opera-
     tional conditions

   If the system is being developed in a corporate environment that has em-
braced TQM or some variant thereof, the PM and CSE should bring selected
procedures and practices into the systems engineering process as a part of the
QA&M element. If there is no corporate quality initiative or structure, the
PM and CSE should develop a QA&M program for the project. This is a
workable approach, but is clearly inferior to having a corporatewide quality
program into which a given project fits.

7.3.22    Configuration Management
Configuration management (CM) is largely a bookkeeping and control activity
that involves the following subelements [7.1]:

  • Identification
  • Control
                          7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   217

  • Auditing
  • Status accounting
  • Traceability

Although most CM concepts are simple, they are often carried out poorly or
not at all. This is a serious mistake, especially for a large system. Failure to
keep track of and control the status of all system configurations leads to
backtracking to try to understand just exactly what version of the system the
team is dealing with. This problem shows up especially in software devel-
opment in which there is the potential for making changes quickly and easily.
   A key concept in system development that relates to the element of CM
is that of system ‘‘baselining.’’ When a satisfactory version of a part of the
system has been constructed and tested, it may be given a baseline name and
number. From a CM point of view, that version of the system cannot be
changed without going through a formal configuration control board (CCB)
review and action. The CSE is thereby able to maintain control over the
system and assure that it is built logically, incrementally, and under positive
change management.


7.3.23   Specialty Engineering
Specialty engineering refers to a set of engineering topics that have to be
explored on some, but not all, systems engineering efforts. In other words,
some systems involve these special disciplines and some do not. Examples
of specialty engineering areas include:

  • Electromagnetic compatibility and interference
  • Safety
  • Physical security
  • Computer security
  • Communications security
  • Demand forecasting
  • Object-oriented design
  • Value engineering

   A sampling of technical domains that might support engineering specialty
areas on a particular project are

  • Network engineering
  • Aerodynamics
  • Thermal analysis
  • Structural analysis
  • Mechanical design
218      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


  • Hypersonics
  • Nuclear engineering
  • Artificial intelligence

As one can see, the list of potential specialty engineering areas can be rather
long. Also, many of these areas are supported by specific computer tools that
facilitate the analysis and design processes.


7.3.24    Preplanned Product Improvement (P3I)
Preplanned product improvement considers the ways and means to enhance
the system beyond the scope of the current contractual arrangement. Such
improvements generally enhance performance, and more than satisfy the re-
quirements, as currently stated. Examples of such improvements include:

  • Extending the range of a radar system
  • Decreasing the response time of a transaction processing system
  • Increasing the storage capability of a database management system
  • Adding built-in test equipment (BITE)
  • Increasing the speed of a network

Improvements under P3I consideration represent candidates for follow-on ef-
forts that the customer might consider in future versions of the system. By
dealing with them during the current effort, migration paths to improved sys-
tems are identified early. With the rapid speed of technology advances, it is
necessary to provide a clear and low-cost path to downstream system
improvements.
   P3I is normally a part of all commercial products, although it may not be
called by this name. Whether your firm is making razor blades or software,
plans for product improvement must be on the drawing board at all times in
order to be competitive in a changing world.


7.3.25    Training
Training in the context of the thirty systems engineering elements generally
refers to the training of system operators and maintainers. Training for these
personnel must be designed and delivered in formal well-developed programs.
Such programs also have to be scheduled during the operations and mainte-
nance (O&M) phase of the system, often extending fifteen to twenty years
downstream. Training, from the DoD perspective, has to be considered as part
of the ILS discipline (see Section 7.3.16). Training specialists should be part
of the systems engineering team.
                           7.3   THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   219

7.3.26   Production and Deployment
Production refers to the phase of a project during which one or more install-
able systems are being produced for the customer. In many procurements, the
user or acquisition agent, as a matter of policy, recompetes the production
phase for a given system. Many contractors specialize in this production
phase, with developed expertise in the ‘‘build-to-print’’ arena. Organizing and
implementing a production or manufacturing capability is itself an area in
which systems engineering procedures and practices can be brought to bear.
It also can be an exceedingly complex set of activities because it deals with
the fundamental capability of an enterprise to replicate a system that has
already been built and accepted by the customer. For additional information
regarding this subject, the reader should refer to the large available literature
on production and manufacturing. The final points to be made in this respect
are that (a) producibility issues have to be dealt with as part of systems
engineering (note that manufacturing analysis is a subject cited in Mil-Std-
499B), and (b) systems engineering processes need to be applied to the actual
production and manufacturing of the system.
    As the system is being produced, some units of the system may be moving
into the installation/deployment phase. This is a rather straightforward sub-
element, requiring excellent documentation on how to install the system in
its operational environment. Such environments range from rather benign sit-
uations, such as an office building, to more stressful ones such as aboard a
ship or a submarine. In some cases, special analysis has to be carried out so
as to assure field operability. This applies, for example, to siting a radar in a
particular ground-based location. At times, unanticipated problems arise dur-
ing installation for a system that was operating without difficulties in a more
controlled environment. Most companies have specialized installation teams
that are familiar with the types of problems that surface during system
deployment.

7.3.27   Operations and Maintenance (O&M)
This part of the systems engineering process refers to the rather long period
of time during which the system is operational in the field. From a systems
engineering perspective, emphasis should be placed on the continuous mea-
surement of the system’s performance. Measurement procedures range from
simple manual data sheets to automated sensors that record operational status
more or less continuously. In the commercial world, companies try to main-
tain contact with consumers through hot lines and reports of satisfaction (or
not) from customers. It is important for the systems engineering team to
explicitly consider how to install and sustain a performance measurement
program during the O&M phase.

7.3.28   Operations Evaluation and Reengineering
If the preceding element is carried out correctly, a database is built as to how
well the system is performing over a long period of time. This places in
220      THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


evidence ways and means of evaluating system performance and points to-
ward specific improvement areas for reengineering of the system. Because
our installed base of systems is extremely large, operations evaluation and re-
engineering is a rather serious issue. The latter has also been receiving a great
deal of attention under the topic of business process reengineering (BPR).

7.3.29    System Disposal
It is clear that once a system has come to the end of its usefulness, as agreed
upon by the users and sponsors, it is necessary to dispose of it. For systems
that are 100% software, this is a relatively simple matter. Of course, the
software must reside upon host machines, so there is a question as to whether
or not the hardware remains or is to be retired. Whenever there is hardware
that is no longer useful as part of the system, specific plans and procedures
must be developed for disposal, followed by careful implementation.
    Beyond the more-or-less standard methods of reusing, reselling, salvaging,
or junking various hardware that is no longer needed, is the fact that many
systems that need to be disposed of fall in the broad category of hazardous
waste materials. In such cases, they must be disposed of in accordance with
applicable standards so as not to present a human or environmental risk, either
current or future. In the same vein, disposal should be consistent with the
principles and practices of sustainable development, a topic that is discussed
in somewhat greater detail in Chapter 12.
    Matters of system disposal can be quite varied as well as unique. For
example, in March of 2001, the Russians had to decide what to do about
disposing of the 143-ton Mir, their fifteen-year-old (launched in February
1986) spacecraft, which had apparently become too decrepit and expensive
to operate. With the spacecraft traveling at about 132 miles above the earth,
Mir’s engines had to be fired by mission controllers on the ground in order
to slow the vehicle and change its orbit from circular to elliptical. The plan
called for most of Mir to burn up as it entered the earth’s atmosphere. How-
ever, up to 27.5 tons of ‘‘debris’’ was expected to hit the earth south of Tahiti,
east of New Zealand, and southeast of Chile’s Easter Island. According to
reports, the plunge through the atmosphere was fiery and spectacular, and also
successful. Despite the great care taken by the Russians, the government of
Chile was not happy about this space ‘‘dumping’’ so close to their country.
Although it did not cause an international incident, one can see that disposing
of 143 tons of what had become space junk turned out to be a nontrivial
adventure.

7.3.30    Systems Engineering Management
This last element covers all the management activities that must be considered
by the CSE and lead systems engineering managers. As such, it includes the
four basic functions of the project manager, namely, planning, organizing,
          7.4   THE IMPORTANCE OF DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE IN SYSTEMS ENGINEERING   221

directing, and monitoring. These are applied to the previous twenty-nine el-
ements of systems engineering. In this sense, it is explicitly recognized that
the CSE has management responsibilities that are to be executed in the context
of all the elements of systems engineering. Thus, in addition to being the
chief technical person on a project, the CSE must have excellent skills in the
fine art of management. Several specific areas of interest have been estab-
lished and presented in some detail in Part II (Chapters 3 through 6). A further
listing of problem areas with respect to systems engineering management is
provided below in Exhibit 7.4.

  Exhibit 7.4: Selected Problem Areas Within the Element of Systems
  Engineering Management
   1. Requirements unclear, incorrect, and/or creeping
   2. Unrealistic schedule/cost constraints
   3. Risks and their mitigation not seriously considered
   4. Newly formed design/development team
   5. Little project status monitoring
   6. No well-defined design/development process
   7. Poor system decomposition and work assignments
   8. Alternative architectures not considered
   9. Ineffective performance measurement
  10. Inadequate communications skills
  11. Late staffing and insufficient skill levels
  12. Inadequate reserves and incentives

The reader is encouraged to compare the above issues with experiences that
he or she may have had in developing systems.


7.4 THE IMPORTANCE OF DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE IN
SYSTEMS ENGINEERING

We complete this chapter with a brief note on the matter of domain knowledge
and its relationship to systems engineering. Domain knowledge involves an
understanding of the technical domain of the system that is being developed,
examples of which include:

  • An on-line transaction processing (OLTP) information system
  • A rapid-transit system
  • An air defense radar system
  • A missile system
  • An aircraft
222    THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


  • A supercomputer
  • An automobile
  • A chemical processing plant
  • A nuclear power plant

Effective design and construction of any system involves both an effective
systems engineering process and a deep understanding of the domain knowl-
edge implicit in the system. Transit system engineers are not likely to have
the domain knowledge associated with building a new aircraft, and vice versa.
Nuclear engineers may not understand the intricacies of developing infor-
mation systems and their software elements. The best systems engineers have
both the systems engineering and the domain-knowledge expertise. It is not
really possible to function with excellence as a systems engineer on a given
program without having the appropriate domain-knowledge understanding.
This does not mean that such a person cannot make an important contribution.
However, he or she may lack a depth of understanding of the domain and its
related science and technology. Accordingly, it is a good idea for a person
with a basic understanding of systems engineering, who is to move on to the
field of radar systems, for example, to be immersed in the rather complex
world of radars and their underlying technologies. This notion applies as well
to all technical disciplines and their related domain-knowledge bases.


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

7.1 Identify and discuss three systems engineering activities that you believe
    should be added to the list of the thirty elements of systems engineering.
7.2 Contrast the NASA life-cycle phases in this chapter with the system
    acquisition phases in Exhibit 2.1.
7.3 Functionally decompose a personal computer system. Write two require-
    ments statements for each of the decomposed elements.
7.4 Define three technical performance measures (TPMs) for
    a. a personal computer system
    b. an automobile
    c. an air defense system
7.5 Find and describe two examples of cost-estimating relationships (CERs)
    from the literature.
7.6 Identify and describe three specialty engineering areas other than those
    cited in this chapter.
7.7 Find a risk analysis approach in the literature and discuss its major
    features.
                                                                  REFERENCES       223

7.8 Define and discuss two systems engineering management issues, other
    than those cited in this chapter, that are likely to have a significant
    impact upon the success of a systems engineering program.


REFERENCES

7.1  Eisner, H. (1988). Computer-Aided Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
     Prentice Hall.
7.2 Goode, H. H., and R. E. Machol (1957). System Engineering. New York: Mc-
     Graw-Hill.
7.3 Engineering Management, Military Standard 499A (1974). Washington, DC: U.S.
     Department of Defense.
7.4 Systems Engineering Management Guide (1983, 1990). Fort Belvior, VA: De-
     fense Systems Management College.
7.5 Beam, W. R. (1990). Systems Engineering—Architecture and Design. New York:
     McGraw-Hill.
7.6 Sage, A. P. (1992). Systems Engineering. New York: John Wiley.
7.7 Blanchard, B. S., and W. J. Fabrycky (1990). Systems Engineering and Analysis.
     Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
7.8 Chapman, W. L., A. T. Bahill, and A. W. Wymore (1992). Engineering Modeling
     and Design. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
7.9 Wymore, A. W. (1993). Model-Based Systems Engineering. Boca Raton, FL:
     CRC Press.
7.10 Sage, A. P., and W. B. Rouse, eds. (1999). Handbook of Systems Engineering
     and Management. New York: John Wiley.
7.11 Sage, A. P., and J. E. Armstrong, Jr. (2000). Introduction to Systems Engineering.
     New York: John Wiley.
7.12 The NASA Mission Design Process (1992). Washington, DC: National Aeronau-
     tics and Space Administration, Engineering Management Council.
7.13 Boehm, B. W. (1981). Software Engineering Economics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
     Prentice Hall; see also Boehm, B. W. (2000). Software Cost Estimation with
     COCOMO II. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR.
7.14 Department of Defense (DoD) Website: web2.deskbook.osd.mil
7.15 Life Cycle Risk Management Elements for NASA Programs (1997). Washington
     DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration Headquarters, June.
7.16 Carter, D. E., and B. S. Baker (1992). Concurrent Engineering—The Product
     Development Environment for the 1990s. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
7.17 Specification Practices, Military Standard 490 (1972). Washington, DC: U.S.
     Department of Defense.
7.18 Comer, E. R. (1972). Catalyst: Automating Systems Engineering in the 21st Cen-
     tury. Paper from the Proceedings of the 2nd Annual International Symposium of
     the National Council on Systems Engineering (NCOSE), Seattle, July 20–22.
7.19 Charette, R. N. (1986). Software Engineering Environments—Concepts and Tech-
     nology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
224     THE THIRTY ELEMENTS OF SYSTEMS ENGINEERING


7.20 Eisner, H., J. Marciniak, R. McMillan, and W. Pragluski (1993). RCASSE: Rapid
     Computer-Aided System of Systems (S2) Engineering. Paper from the Proceedings
     of the 3rd Annual International Symposium of the National Council on Systems
     Engineering (NCOSE), Arlington, VA, July 26–28.
7.21 Blanchard, B. S. (1986). Logistics Engineering and Management. Englewood
     Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
7.22 Defense Acquisition Management Policies and Procedures, DoD Instruction
     5000.2. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
7.23 Standard for Systems Engineering, IEEE P1220 (1994). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE
     Standards Department.
7.24 Shishko, R. (1995). NASA Systems Engineering Handbook, SP-6105. Washing-
     ton, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Headquarters,
     June.
7.25 Marciniak, J., editor-in-chief (1994). Encyclopedia of Software Engineering. New
     York: John Wiley.
                8
REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS
AND ALLOCATION




8.1   INTRODUCTION

Requirements analysis and allocation (RAA) has become a critically impor-
tant element of systems engineering. All of the later elements of systems
engineering are carried out with one dominant question in mind: Are we in
fact satisfying the system requirements in the best possible (most cost-
effective) manner? Thus, as we architect, build, and test the system, we con-
tinuously return to the requirements to be sure that we are completely
satisfying them. All systems engineering activities thus can be said to revolve
around the stated requirements, as defined by the user or acquisition agent
for the system.
   Requirements are defined during the very early stages of the system life
cycle. However, they are often incomplete and inappropriately stated. This
leads to difficulties in architecting and designing a system as well as contro-
versies between the system developer and the user. This can be exacerbated
because requirements are not easily changed, even when found to be inade-
quate. This flows from the contract mechanisms and rules of competition that
often surround the system acquisition process. Attempts to improve or rec-
oncile requirements take time and cost money, thus putting additional pressure
on the systems engineering team in terms of meeting stringent time and cost
constraints. Poor requirements are perhaps the most mentioned issue when
examining reasons why systems engineering and development efforts ulti-
mately result in lack of performance as well as cost and schedule overruns.
   Requirements may represent problem areas even when dealing with up-
grades to an existing system. In such a case, the context is often that it has

                                                                           225
226     REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


not been adequately proven that there is a set of validated operational re-
quirements. As an example, a report from the General Accounting Office
(GAO) to the Acting Secretary of the Air Force claimed that certain planned
upgrades were not based on validated requirements [8.1], with the following
statement:

  Upgrade of System 8 ground station software and hardware is premature because
  the Air Force has not yet validated operational requirements. Validated require-
  ments are needed to verify the need for planned DSP ground station upgrades.
  DOD Instruction 5000.2 and Air Force Regulation 57-1 require that an opera-
  tional requirements document, identifying minimum acceptable performance
  characteristics, be prepared for all major weapon systems such as DSP. An op-
  erational requirements document identifies the minimum acceptable performance
  required to satisfy mission needs and is used to establish test criteria for oper-
  ational test and evaluation.

   From this, it follows that the prudent user, acquisition agent, Project Man-
ager (PM), and Chief Systems Engineer (CSE) will pay a great deal of atten-
tion to the matter of requirements. Therefore, RAA becomes a central focus
for the systems engineering effort.



8.2   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (DOD) PERSPECTIVES

Looking at Military Standard 499B [8.2], we find requirements analysis to be
one of the four key elements of the systems engineering process (see Figure
7.1), represented in a short form by the key words:

  • Define/derive/refine performance requirements (what item must do and
      how well)
  • The (systems engineering) process shall define and analyze performance
      and functional requirements, define and design system elements to satisfy
      those requirements, and establish the final configuration.

The full description of the element of requirements analysis is reproduced in
Exhibit 8.1.

  Exhibit 8.1: Requirements Analysis as Stated in Mil-Std-499B
      User requirements / objectives shall be defined / refined and integrated in terms
      of quantifiable characteristics and tasks that item solutions must satisfy.
      Technical requirements shall be developed concurrently for all functions
      and subfunctions based on the system life cycle, and iteratively to provide
      progressively more detailed performance requirements definition. For each
      requirement, the absoluteness, relative priority and relationship to other
      derived requirements shall be identified. Impacts of identified user
                                                        8.2   DOD PERSPECTIVES     227

     requirements / objectives and derived requirements in terms of mission (tasks),
     environments, constraints and measures of effectiveness shall be analyzed as
     the basis for defining and deriving performance requirements. These impacts
     shall be continually examined for validity, consistency, desirability, and at-
     tainability with respect to technology availability, physical and human re-
     sources, human performance capabilities, life cycle costs, schedule and other
     identified constraints. The output of this analysis will define technical per-
     formance requirements and either verify existing requirements or develop new
     requirements that are more appropriate for each item.


   We note especially that the systems engineering team is to ‘‘either verify
existing requirements or develop new requirements that are more appropriate
for each item.’’ Although this clearly makes good sense, the insertion of new
requirements, as alluded to before, can be an extremely controversial issue.
Strictly new requirements developed by the systems engineering team cannot
be accepted until they are confirmed as acceptable by the user and system
acquisition agent. Again, this can be a difficult process that is impeded by
the general reluctance to change requirements, often necessitating an ap-
proved change in a formal contractual document and relationship.
   In our definition of RAA, we include the matter of requirements allocation.
This inclusive definition means that requirements, in addition to being ana-
lyzed, are allocated to system functions and subfunctions. Thus, the definition
in this book leads to the explicit interaction between RAA and functional
analysis/allocation (see the list of thirty systems engineering elements in Ex-
hibit 7.1).
   Another DoD perspective related to RAA can be found in the so-called
DoD 5000 series. In DoD Directive 5000.1 [8.3], reference is made to evo-
lutionary requirements definition. A key statement in this regard is:

  Once approved as a new start acquisition program, operational performance re-
  quirements for the concept(s) selected shall be progressively evolved from broad
  operational capability needs to system-specific performance requirements (e.g.,
  for range, speed, weight, payload, reliability, maintainability, availability,
  interoperability).


In addition, the same directive identifies the three major decision-making
support systems that affect the acquisition processes, namely, the

  • Requirements Generation System (RGS)
  • Acquisition Management System (AMS)
  • Planning, Programming, and Budgeting System (PPBS)


Thus, the DoD sees the matter of generating requirements as a major factor
in its overall acquisition approach. The front end of the RGS is developing a
228     REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


mission needs statement that defines projected needs in broad operational
terms. Examples cited are
  • The need to impede the advance of large armored formations 200 kilo-
      meters beyond the front lines
  • The need to neutralize advances in submarine quieting made by potential
      adversaries
The Mission Need Statement flow is depicted in Figure 8.1. As shown, when
the Mission Need Statement is approved, the system enters Milestone 0, al-
lowing for the initiation of concept studies. Again, all of this is defined as
part of the Requirements Generation System within the DoD.
   In DoD Instruction 5000.2 [8.3], there is a section on Evolutionary Re-
quirements Definition. The stated purpose of that section is to ‘‘establish the
basis for the determination, evolution, documentation, and validation of mis-
sion needs and system performance requirements.’’ The focus is on establish-
ing system performance objectives and minimum acceptable requirements,
and the need for documentation in an Operational Requirements Document
(ORD). Another point of emphasis is the progressive refinement of the initial
broad objectives and the minimum acceptable requirements. Thus, there is a
carry-forward of the notion of defining and then evolving a set of minimum
acceptable requirements for the system.

8.3 A NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
(NASA) PERSPECTIVE

A NASA perspective with respect to handling requirements is well repre-
sented in its engineering guide to the mission design process [8.4]. NASA’s


 Unified &
  specified                          MILESTONE 0 – concept studies approval
 commands


                                      Joint              Under
                     Mission                          Secretary of        Acquisition
  Military                        Requirements
                       need                             Defense            decision
departments                         Oversight
                    statement                         (acquisition)      memorandum
                                     Council
                                 • Validate need       • Decision        • Alternatives
                                 • Assign priority                       • Lead(s)
   Others                                               Defense          • Funding
                                                       Acquisition       • Exit criteria
                                                         Board
                                                     • Assessment
                                                     • Recommended
                                                       concept studies
      Figure 8.1. Mission Need Statement flow (major defense acquisition programs).
                                                            8.3   A NASA PERSPECTIVE       229

view is that ‘‘the definition and tracking of requirements are among the most
important aspects of the mission definition and system design process,’’ which
itself is defined in terms of Prephase A, Phase A, and Phase B activities, as
alluded to in the previous chapter. Requirements are defined and tracked to
produce functional, performance, operational, and interface requirements that
are to be implemented and verified during the next system phase, which
NASA defines as Phase C/D. The flow-down of requirements is shown in
Figure 8.2. NASA encourages a ‘‘proactive iteration with the customer’’ as
the only way that all parties can come to a true understanding of what should
be done and what it takes to do the job. This is an enlightened view that is
wholly supported by this author. Only by the developer and customer working
together is it truly possible to successfully engineer a complex system. How-
ever, this flexible and joint relationship can be interfered with by an inflexible
contracting officer and acquisition agent.

                                     Mission
                                    objectives


                                     Level I
                                     mission            Programmatics:
                                  requirements           • Cost
           Headquarters                                  • Schedule
                                                         • Constraints
                                                         • Mission classification


                                      System
       Implementing center          functional
           Environmental          requirements
         and other design                               Institutional
           requirements                                  constraints
          and guidelines
                                                        Assumptions

                                     System
                                  performance
                                  requirements




         Subsystem A         Subsystem      Subsystem       Subsystem X
        functional and           B              C          functional and
         performance                                        performance
         requirements                                       requirements




                                           Allocated          Reflected            Derived
                                         requirements       requirements        requirements



                         Figure 8.2. The flow-down of requirements.
230      REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


   NASA also cites the need, with respect to requirements, for iteration, trace-
ability, verification, and validation. This acknowledges that requirements must
be analyzed and worked with, usually over long periods of time. They are
not viewed as static, but rather as changeable in the best interest of all parties.


8.4     THE ORGANIZATION OF REQUIREMENTS STATEMENTS

We examine here some specific requirements documents and statements that
have been used by selected government agencies in their procurement of
systems.


8.4.1    Selected NASA Requirements Formats
A very large system that is being procured by the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) is called EOSDIS, the Earth Observing System
Data and Information System. This system is likely, when considering all
related costs, to be in the multibillion dollar range. The preliminary require-
ments for this system were documented in a rather voluminous NASA report
[8.5]. EOSDIS was divided into three major segments, each of which was
further delineated in terms of functions, as shown in Exhibit 8.2. We note the
functional description as a key aspect of defining the system.

  Exhibit 8.2: Functional Description of EOSDIS [8.6]
  1. Flight Operations Segment
     Functions: 1.1 Mission Control
                1.2 Mission Planning and Scheduling
                1.3 Instrument Command Support
                1.4 Mission Operations
  2. Science Data Processing Segment
     Functions: 2.1 Data Processing
                2.2 Data Archive
                2.3 Data Distribution
                2.4 Data Information Management
                2.5 User Support for Data Information
                2.6 User Support for Data Requests
                2.7 User Support for Data Acquisition and Processing
                    Requests
  3. Communications and System Management Segment
     Functions: 3.1 Distribution of EOS Data and Information to EOSDIS
                    Nodes
                3.2 Distribution of Data Among Active Archives
                3.3 Interface with External Networks
                3.4 Network/Communications Management and Services
                         8.4   THE ORGANIZATION OF REQUIREMENTS STATEMENTS   231

                  3.5 System Configuration Management
                  3.6 System/Site/Elements Processing Assignment and
                      Scheduling
                  3.7 System Performance, Fault, and Security Management
                  3.8 Accounting and Billing

   This functional description sets the stage for all further systems engineering
activities and is central to the systems engineering process. NASA, in turn,
establishes a set of requirements for the system for each and every function.
At the top (system) level, however, NASA elected to organize the require-
ments as shown in Exhibit 8.3:

  Exhibit 8.3: Organization of EOSDIS Systemwide
  Requirements [8.5]
  5.0 EOSDIS SYSTEMWIDE REQUIREMENTS
      5.1 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
      5.2 FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
      5.3 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
      5.4 EXTERNAL INTERFACES
          5.4.1 EOS Project
          5.4.2 Space Station Information System (SSIS)
          5.4.3 Networks and NASA Institutional Elements
          5.4.4 Cooperating Institutions
          5.4.5 The EOSDIS User Community
          5.4.6 International Partners
      5.5 SECURITY
          5.5.1 Technical Security
                5.5.1.1 Computer Systems Selection Criteria
                5.5.1.2 EOSDIS Security Procedures
          5.5.2 Physical Security
          5.5.3 Contingency
                5.5.3.1 Restart/Recovery
                5.5.3.2 Software/Data
                5.5.3.3 People
                5.5.3.4 Equipment
      5.6 RELIABILITY, MAINTAINABILITY, AVAILABILITY (RMA)
          5.6.1 Reliability
          5.6.2 Maintainability
          5.6.3 Operational Availability
          5.6.4 EOSDIS System-Level RMA
          5.6.5 Fault Detection Requirements

  From Exhibit 8.3, two important points are
232     REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


  1. The system is described by function, and specific requirements are de-
     fined for each such function.
  2. A set of top-level requirements is also defined, which applies at the
     system level.

An example of the system-level requirement for reliability is as follows:

  The reliability for EOSDIS shall be measured by the Mean Time Between Fail-
  ures (MTBF) for a system or component over the entire life cycle of the equip-
  ment. Failures are those equipment and software malfunctions which result in
  interruptions in service. Interruptions in service resulting from external factors
  beyond the control of EOSDIS . . . shall not be considered failures unless EOS-
  DIS equipment or software contribute to the interruption.

Beyond this systemwide reliability requirement, NASA invokes two military
standards and one handbook:

  • Mil-Std-785B for Reliability
  • Mil-Hdbk-472 for Maintainability Prediction
  • Mil-Std- 470A for Maintainability Status Reporting

   The reader interested in NASA approaches to requirements definition may
refer to the EOSDIS requirements specification [8.5] and similar requirements
documents for other NASA programs [8.6, 8.7].


8.4.2   A DoD Requirements Format (I-CASE)
The DoD has long been interested in building an Integrated Computer-Aided
Software Engineering (I-CASE) system. The statement of work for such a
system, produced by the Air Force, has a specification that contains a state-
ment of requirements for I-CASE [8.8]. The four-digit table of contents for
these requirements is shown in Exhibit 8.4.

  Exhibit 8.4: Requirements Outline for I-CASE
  10.3 REQUIREMENTS
       10.3.1 Overview
       10.3.2 I-CASE Software Engineering Environment
              10.3.2.1 Standards
              10.3.2.2 Information Systems Security
              10.3.2.3 Functional Requirements
              10.3.2.4 Hardware
              10.3.2.5 I-CASE SEE Integration
                          8.4   THE ORGANIZATION OF REQUIREMENTS STATEMENTS         233

        10.3.3 I-CASE Operational Test Environment
               10.3.3.1 Overview
               10.3.3.2 Standards
               10.3.3.3 I-CASE Operational Test Environment Information
               Security
               10.3.3.4 Application Test Management
               10.3.3.5 Application Release Control
        10.3.4 Application Execution Environment
               10.3.4.1 Overview
               10.3.4.2 Standards
               10.3.4.3 I-CASE Application Execution Environment Infor-
                        mation Security
               10.3.4.4 Run-Time Components
               10.3.4.5 End-User Capabilities
               10.3.4.6 Application Release Installation

  From Exhibit 8.4, we note two aspects of this statement:

  • Section 10.3.2.3 identifies the requirements by functional area
  • The emphasis on test and execution environments

With respect to the former, the requirements document deals extensively with
the requirements for each functional area, confirming the general practice that
requirements are keyed to the system as defined by its functions and subfunc-
tions. The lead-in to the functional requirements section states as follows:

  The I-CASE SEE [software engineering environment] will consist of an infor-
  mation repository and COTS [commercial-off-the-shelf] software components
  that support the software development and maintenance process. The I-CASE
  SEE will provide an environment that supports software development and main-
  tenance activities including business case analysis, software engineering, appli-
  cation migration, program / project management, configuration management,
  quality assurance, life cycle documentation, presentation production, require-
  ments traceability, impact analysis, error reporting, security, and external system
  interface support.


8.4.3   A Coast Guard Example of Requirements
As another example of a statement of requirements, the U.S. Coast Guard
(USCG) in the Department of Transportation produced a specification and
statement of work (SOW) for mission-oriented information system engineer-
ing (MOISE) [8.9]. A three-digit definition of their requirements is shown in
Exhibit 8.5. We note that this specification of requirements is largely related
234      REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


to the procurement of services and thus is different, in general, from the
procurement of a system.

  Exhibit 8.5: Example of Coast Guard Requirements Format
  C.3 REQUIREMENTS
      C.3.1 MULTIPLE INFORMATION SYSTEM INTEGRATION
      C.3.2 INITIATION AND CONCEPT PHASES
      C.3.3 DEFINITION PHASE
      C.3.4 DESIGN PHASE
      C.3.5 DEVELOPMENT PHASE
      C.3.6 DEPLOYMENT PHASE
      C.3.7 OPERATIONS PHASE
      C.3.8 METRICS
      C.3.9 MULTIPHASE, CROSS-CUTTING SKILLS AND
              SERVICES
      C.3.10 CONTRACTOR ACQUIRED FEDERAL INFORMATION
              PROCESSING (FIP) RESOURCES
      C.3.11 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CENTER
      C.3.12 CONTRACTOR/USCG MANAGEMENT RELATIONSHIPS
      C.3.13 CONTRACTOR PERSONNEL REQUIREMENTS
      C.3.14 CONTRACTOR SECURITY REQUIREMENTS


8.5     SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS STATEMENTS

This section identifies certain types of requirements statements and also pres-
ents a few examples of specific statements, drawn from government programs.

8.5.1    Types of Requirements
Requirements are sometimes stated in terms of their levels of applicability
that, in effect, establish the importance of these requirements to the system
user or acquisition agent. An example follows with respect to the weighting
or significance of requirements statements [8.10]:

  • The most important requirements are stated as ‘‘shall,’’ to indicate man-
      datory requirements.
  • The next most important requirements are stated as ‘‘shall, where
    practicable.’’
  • The next most important requirements are stated as ‘‘preferred’’ or
    ‘‘should.’’
  • The next most important requirements are stated as ‘‘may.’’

These may be simplified to three- [8.8] and two-level schemes, such as
                                  8.5   SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS STATEMENTS   235

  • Minimum features
  • Desirable features
  • Highly desirable features
  • Minimum or mandatory requirements
  • Optional requirements

The preceding requirements represent various ways to designate the impor-
tance or weight of these requirements. This gives further guidance to the
system developer as to the needs of the customer.


8.5.2   Specific Examples of Requirements Statements
A series of specific requirements statements drawn from various government
programs follows:

  • The contractor shall allocate the Earth Observing System Data and Op-
    erations System (EDOS) Requirements identified in the functional and
    performance specification and shall identify the methods and procedures
    necessary for verifying compliance with these requirements.
  • EDOS shall provide the capability to support a processing rate of at least
    50% above the average aggregate throughput rate for nonreal-time data.
  • The Payload Data Services System (PDSS) shall:
    — Transmit up to eight real-time and eight nonreal-time data streams
       concurrently
    — Have an availability of greater than or equal to 0.95
    — Support a real-time S-band input rate of 192 kbps
  • I-CASE shall have the capability to create or support
    — 100 databases
    — 2000 tables per database
    — Tables with 250 columns and one billion rows
    — Columns with 250 characters
    — At least 100 indexes per table
  • Identify existing systems that have requirements similar to an Automated
    Highway System (AHS) in terms of public interaction, safety, reliability,
    and complexity; analyze these systems to derive ‘‘lessons learned’’ in
    their implementation that could be appropriate to AHS development
  • The system performance boundaries are as follows:
    — Customer Data and Operations System (CDOS) shall protect all data
       to achieve a BER (bit error rate) of 10 E-12
    — The maximum interruption of data delivery services shall be ten sec-
       onds or less
236      REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


    — Reinitialization of data delivery services shall require no more than
       two minutes
    — The processor utilization for CDOS shall not exceed 50%
    — The memory and storage utilization for CDOS shall not exceed 75%
  • The EOSDIS ground system shall have an operational availability of
    0.992 with an MTBF (mean time between failures) of 500 hours and an
    MDT (mean down time) of 4 hours
  • Catalyst shall support the calculation of evaluation measures of merit for
    the alternatives through ranking, weighting, hierarchical weighting, and
    probabilistic weighting
  • Catalyst shall automate generic systems engineering functions that are
    adaptable to the way an organization does business


8.6     ESSENTIAL STEPS OF REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS

The following eight areas represent a minimum set of essential steps with
respect to the analysis of requirements.


8.6.1    Automation of Requirements Analysis and Allocation (RAA)
There has been an increasing recognition of the need to automate the process
of RAA. For a large and complex system, manual handling of RAA is basi-
cally obsolete. Early automated systems for RAA include such tools as:

  • The Input-Output Requirements Language (IORL)
  • The Software Requirements Engineering Methodology (SREM)
  • The Problem Statement Language/Problem Statement Analyzer (PSL/
      PSA)

These tools are attributed to Teledyne Brown, TRW, and Meta Corporation,
respectively.
   More recent software packages have been reviewed and analyzed by the
Air Force’s Software Technology Support Center (STSC) [8.11], describing
over 100 so-called Upper CASE tools for this purpose. These include tools
for requirements specification and analysis, a dozen of which follow:

      1. Teamwork/RT: Cadre Technologies
      2. CARDTools: Cardtool Systems Corporation
      3. Cohesion: DEC
      4. Power Tools: Iconix Software Engineering
      5. Software Through Pictures: IDE
      6. Excelerator: Intersolv
                            8.6   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS   237

   7. IEW: Knowledgeware
   8. Battlemap: McCabe & Associates
   9. System Architect: Popkin Software & Systems
  10. RTrace: Protocol
  11. SES Workbench: Scientific and Engineering Software
  12. IEF: Texas Instruments

Two very popular and capable packages not listed in the STSC’s report are
Marconi’s RTM and Unisys’ REQUIRE.
   Many requirements documents are now calling for a requirements analysis
tool in hand and in operation from the start of a new contract and systems
engineering effort. The state of the art in systems engineering tools strongly
supports the use of software aids to carry out requirements analysis and
allocation.

8.6.2   Relationships and Traceability
A key step under the element of RAA is to explicitly identify relationships
and traceability. Relationships are clearly important because the systems en-
gineering team must always be aware of and track requirements interdepen-
dencies. For example, one section of a requirements document may refer to
the pointing error of an instrument and another section may specify the al-
lowable error for the stabilization and control system for a satellite carrying
that instrument. The latter error is very likely to influence the former. The
systems engineer must establish such relationships and, as a minimum, an-
notate the dependency.
   Traceability has at least two meanings. The first is the explicit connection
between all requirements, through all documentation in which such require-
ments are stated. The second is the traceability of a requirement through all
the life-cycle elements of the systems engineering process. Using the earlier
instrument pointing error as an example, the T&E (test and evaluation) ele-
ment must include traceability back to this requirement. Similarly, the TPM
(technical performance measurement) program should include this type of
traceability. Thus, traceability involves, as a minimum:

  • The interdependence between requirements
  • The longitudinal tracking of requirements through the various elements
    of the systems engineering process as they are applied during the sys-
    tem’s life cycle

8.6.3   Ambiguous Requirements
The systems engineering team also must look for requirements that are un-
clear or ambiguous. Such ambiguities sometimes are revealed when compar-
ing different sections of a requirements document that may have been
238     REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


prepared by different people and the overall review of the integrity of the
requirements has not brought forth these types of problems. As an example,
in a requirements specification for a radar system, one section may refer to
the target size as one square meter and another part of the spec may call out
a target size of up to two square meters. Similarly, the range to target may
be sixty miles, but if the level of detection at that range is not specified (as,
for example, the probability of detection at that range), the requirement re-
mains ambiguous. Essentially, any requirement that leaves doubt as to its
precise meaning must be classified as ambiguous until the ambiguity or lack
of clarity is resolved.


8.6.4   Incorrect Requirements
Certain requirements, when analyzed, can be shown to be clearly incorrect.
As an example, suppose a requirement for the operational availability of a
system is stated as follows:

  • The system shall have an operational availability of 0.995 with an MTBF
      (mean time between failures) of 500 hours and an MDT (mean down
      time) of 6 hours.

  If we use the standard relationship for availability as

                                MTBF       500
             Availability ⫽             ⫽        ⫽ 0.988
                              MTBF ⫹ MDT 500 ⫹ 6

we obtain an availability calculated as 0.988, which is less than the specified
value of 0.995. Thus, there is an error in the requirement as stated. This
requires further discussion and clarification with the customer in order to
resolve the problem. A failure to deal with what appear to be incorrect re-
quirements places the systems engineering effort at risk. This may result in
downstream schedule and cost overruns.


8.6.5   Incompatible Requirements
Incompatible requirements suggest that there is conflict or incompatibility
between two or more stated requirements. This can happen, for example,
when there is a designation of COTS software that may not run on a desig-
nated host computer. Software may be specified that runs on a workstation
computer, but the basic architecture may call for a microcomputer solution.
In such a case, the software and the computer requirements are essentially
incompatible. This also may occur with external interface systems. The sys-
tem in question may have to interoperate with an external system, but with
                             8.6   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS   239

the specified requirements, it may not do so. Many systems that are part of
a larger system run into this type of potential incompatibility issue.


8.6.6   High-Risk Requirements
The systems engineer must go through the full list of requirements and iden-
tify, as early as possible, those requirements that represent high risk to the
development effort. Typically, high-risk requirements push or extend the state
of the art in one or more technology areas. Examples of such areas may
include

  • Integration of commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) software with develop-
    ment software
  • Advanced expert systems
  • Voice-actuated computer systems
  • Extremely high-power or high-frequency devices
  • Multimedia systems
  • Very high-capacity, dense storage systems
  • Real-time command and control systems
  • Forcing the team to adopt a development approach where a COTS ap-
    proach would be sufficient

High-risk requirements also show up as risks in terms of meeting schedule
and cost constraints. As the team experiences difficulties in solving the tech-
nical problems associated with high-risk developments, schedules tend to slip
and costs begin to rise. This ‘‘domino effect’’ in trying to deal with high-risk
requirements can easily result in failure of the project.
   Where there is substantial risk associated with certain requirements, the
systems engineering team has to focus attention on how to meet these re-
quirements, or attempt to relax such requirements through negotiations with
the customer, especially where performance is not significantly affected.


8.6.7   Low-Performance Requirements
Requirements that lead to low performance should also be identified by the
systems engineering team. In today’s world of rapidly changing technology
and long development times, attention has to be paid to situations in which
following the requirements leads to low performance. This may be observed
in systems that contain large amounts of software and where the requirements
emphasize the use of specific commercial software packages. In this situation,
instead of specifying commercial software by name and version, the require-
ments should call for the best software available within the class of software
desired. In this way, the developer can select the most recent version at the
240      REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


latest possible time, thereby obtaining the high-performance version instead
of an obsolete version.

8.6.8    Derived Requirements
A critical part of requirements analysis is the construction of derived require-
ments. These are a set of requirements derived from the original requirements
specification but are not actually a part of the specification itself. In other
words, such requirements flow from the systems engineering analysis and
must be formulated to proceed constructively with the design of the system.
   An example can be seen by correcting the requirement for availability cited
Section 8.5.2. This requirement is restated as:

  • The overall system shall have an operational availability of 0.988 with
      an MTBF of 500 hours and an MDT of 6 hours.

The issue here is that requirements for the subsystems have to be derived
from this overall system requirement in order to design the subsystems. Such
derived requirements are not part of the requirements document; it is up to
the systems engineering team to derive them. Thus, the team has to annotate
all cases for which top-level system requirements must be analyzed in greater
detail to develop a set of derived requirements. Such derived requirements
are then ‘‘allocated’’ to the subsystems to give guidance to the subsystem
design teams. More specific examples of how this might be done are explored
in the next section.


8.7     DERIVED AND ALLOCATED REQUIREMENTS

Three situations that demonstrate the issue of deriving and allocating require-
ments are examined in this section.

8.7.1    The Weight of a Spacecraft and Its Subsystems
The weight of an overall spacecraft (communications, weather, surveillance
satellites) is constrained by the launch vehicle that places such a satellite in
orbit. The requirements specification therefore usually will identify the total
maximum weight for the satellite. The systems engineering team must there-
fore derive from this top-level requirement a series of derived weight require-
ments for each of the subsystems making up the total satellite. Such
subsystems, for example, might include:

  • The satellite structure
  • The stabilization and control subsystem
  • The telemetry and data handling subsystem
                                     8.7    DERIVED AND ALLOCATED REQUIREMENTS      241

  • The thermal control subsystem
  • The power supply subsystem
  • The satellite payload subsystem

In turn, each of these subsystems might be examined to see if new derived
weight requirements have to be determined. As an example, suppose the sat-
ellite payload subsystem consists of five remote measurement instruments, as
in a weather satellite. It would be typical then to derive a weight requirement
(maximum weight permissible) for each of the five instruments. In this general
manner, requirements are derived from the original requirement and then al-
located to the subsystems of a given system.

8.7.2   Deriving and Allocating Reliability Requirements
If we refer again to Section 8.6.8, we see a requirement for a mean time
between failures (MTBF) of 500 hours for the overall system. Let us assume
that the overall system has four major subsystems, as shown in Figure 8.3.
The requirements document specifies only the overall system MTBF require-
ment of 500 hours and not the subordinate MTBF requirements for the sub-
systems. It therefore becomes a task of the systems engineer to derive and
allocate MTBF requirements for the four subsystems. Based on analysis of
the subsystem technical information and requirements, as well as data from
previous programs and experience, the systems engineer might derive a set
of MTBF requirements as illustrated in Figure 8.3. The four subsystem
MTBF-derived requirements are

  • Subsystem 1: MTBF ⫽ 2500 hours
  • Subsystem 2: MTBF ⫽ 2000 hours
  • Subsystem 3: MTBF ⫽ 1667 hours
  • Subsystem 4: MTBF ⫽ 2000 hours



                                        SYSTEM
                                 MTBF = 500 hrs
                                 Failure rate = λ
                                            1
                                   λ=          = .002
                                           500




 SUBSYSTEM 1           SUBSYSTEM 2               SUBSYSTEM 3            SUBSYSTEM 4
MTBF = 2500 hrs       MTBF = 2000 hrs           MTBF = 1667 hrs        MTBF = 2000 hrs
   λ = .0004             λ = .0005                 λ = .0006              λ = .0005

               Figure 8.3. Derived and allocated reliability requirements.
242     REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


Note that all of these MTBFs are larger than the system requirement of 500
hours. In order to develop this set of subsystem-derived requirements, how-
ever, the systems engineer must understand the basic relationship between
MTBF and failure rate for a given system, given the assumption of an ex-
ponential failure law. The relationship is

                                                              1
             Mean time between failures (MTBF) ⫽
                                                         failure rate

Also, the failure rates are additive under these circumstances, so that the
overall system failure rate is the sum of the subsystem failure rates. The
resultant MTBFs and failure rates for the system and its subsystems are shown
in Figure 8.3. We leave it as an exercise at the end of the chapter to verify
the compatibility between the stated MTBFs and failure rates.
   Through this example, we see how requirements may be derived and also
how they are allocated to lower levels of indenture for the system. We also
note that this process cannot be accomplished without an understanding of
the specific relationships between MTBFs and failure rates. This is true for
all situations of derived requirements and allocation of these requirements,
namely, that the algorithms that apply to the situation at hand must be known
to the systems engineer.

8.7.3   Deriving and Allocating Errors in a System
We take now as a third example of deriving and allocating requirements that
of sighting and pointing at a target in a shipboard environment. We assume
that the stated requirement for the system is that the sighting to the target
have a maximum permissible error of one-half of a degree, which is equiv-
alent to 0.00873 radian. We further break down this error into three funda-
mental error sources:

  1. Error in pointing by a human (operator error)
  2. Error in the pointing instrument (instrument error)
  3. Error in mounting the instrument to a platform (platform error)

The issue is then to derive pointing requirements (maximum errors) for these
three error sources and the systems they represent.
   This situation is depicted in Figure 8.4. Under a model that claims inde-
pendent additive errors associated with the random variables that represent
the error sources, the total root-mean-square (rms) error is related to the
subordinate errors by the relationship:

                             ␴ 2T ⫽ ␴ 21 ⫹ ␴ 22 ⫹ ␴ 23

where ␴ is the rms error (standard deviation) and its square is the variance
                                               8.8   OTHER REQUIREMENTS ISSUES   243


                                       SYSTEM
                               Max. error = 0.5 deg
                                   σT = 0.5 deg
                                σT2 = 0.25 (deg)2




      OPERATOR ERROR           INSTRUMENT ERROR             PLATFORM ERROR
         σo = 0.4 deg                σi = 0.2 deg             σp = 0.224 deg
      σo2 = 0.16 (deg)2          σi2 = 0.04 (deg)2           σp2 = 0.05 (deg)2

             Figure 8.4. Derived and allocated pointing-error requirements.



of any error distribution. The derived maximum errors, as determined by the
systems engineer, are

  Maximum human (operator) error ⫽ ␴O ⫽ 0.4 deg
  Maximum instrument error ⫽ ␴I ⫽ 0.2 deg
  Maximum platform error ⫽ ␴P ⫽ 0.224 deg

These then represent a consistent set of derived error requirements that may
be utilized in the design of the various subsystems. Because one of these
‘‘subsystems’’ is the human operator, we have to verify that such a person is
able to point the instrument within the designated error limits. If this is not
possible, then there has to be a further rederivation of errors such that the
overall pointing error requirement is satisfied. This may turn out to be a long
and difficult process, but it is necessary to meet the overall system
requirement.
   We further note that the algorithm used in this error calculation is different
from that used in both the weight example (Section 8.7.1) and the reliability
example (Section 8.7.2). The error calculation called for a summation of the
squares of the rms errors, equivalent to the sum of the variances of the in-
dependent error-source variables. The error, in this example, is also associated
with a ‘‘one-sigma’’ value, another choice that might be made by the systems
engineer. Here again, the nature of error algorithms must be part of the body
of knowledge of the systems engineer in order to carry out this derivation
and allocation in a correct manner.


8.8   OTHER REQUIREMENTS ISSUES

The preceding discussion has emphasized the importance of requirements
analysis and allocation and the problems associated with requirements. Al-
244    REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


though customer or user requirements are the touchstone for the systems
engineering effort, it is also true that problems with requirements suggest that
certain requirements be negotiated and changed. Living with requirements
that are ambiguous or cannot be satisfied, in the long run, decreases the
likelihood of success of the project and its systems engineering activities. For
those requirements in that category, the PM and the CSE must enter a process
of discussion and negotiation to resolve any and all problems. This means
that despite the perspective that requirements are often taken as inviolate,
problems with requirements must be solved.
   To some extent, the matter of changing or updating requirements has been
acknowledged. One such manifestation is in the so-called ‘‘spiral model’’ for
software development. This model explicitly revisits the requirements several
times to deal with problems in this domain. This is a step forward in the
context of the overall subject of software development and engineering.
   Another step that has been taken to deal with requirements issues is that
of having a representative of the user or customer be part of the systems
engineering group. In this way, a direct and immediate link is established
with the customer, who is then able to respond to the issues that might be
raised with respect to interpretations and changes of requirements. Closer
linkages between the project and engineering activities and the customer is
also a major step forward in trying to deal realistically with what has been a
problem area for many years.
   Finally, requirements relative to software have constituted large parts of
our systems as they have leaned more heavily on software solutions. There-
fore, software requirements specification and analysis have received a great
deal of attention in recent years [8.12].
   In summary, the systems engineering team must treat requirements analysis
and allocation as an extremely important part of the systems engineering
process. It must also be prepared to resolve difficulties with requirements and
not necessarily accept poor requirements as fashioned in concrete. A full and
open dialogue with the customer with respect to such issues helps to increase
the chances of success of the project.



QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

8.1 Define two additional steps in the process of requirements analysis, in
    addition to the essential steps cited in this chapter.
8.2 Functionally decompose an automobile system. Define two requirements
    for each of the decomposed elements.
8.3 Identify and briefly describe two automated requirements analysis tools
    that are available from software vendors, other than those mentioned in
    this chapter.
                                                              REFERENCES      245

8.4 Contrast the NASA perspective on handling requirements with the ap-
    proach taken by the Department of Defense.
8.5 Verify the compatibility between the stated MTBFs and the failure rates
    in Figure 8.3. Given a system composed of four independent subsystems
    with MTBFs of 200, 250, 500, and 1000 hours, what is the MTBF of
    the overall system?
8.6 A system with three independent subsystems has a total failure rate of
    0.0108. We also know that the MTBFs of the subsystems are in the ratio
    2:3:4. What are the subsystem MTBFs and failure rates?
8.7 a. The total admissible error variance for a system is 70 and two of the
       three subsystem root-mean-square (rms) errors are 4 (value of x) and
       6 (value of y). What is the largest acceptable integer value of the
       third error source (z) if all error random variables are additive and
       independent?
    b. Recalculate your answer if the error model is based on the relation-
       ship: total error ⫽ 2x ⫹ y ⫹ z
8.8 Systems can be designed such that errors correspond to multiples of
    standard deviation (sigma) values. If the resultant distribution were nor-
    mal (Gaussian), interpret numerically the intended consequences of de-
    signing to the one-sigma, two-sigma, and three-sigma values.



REFERENCES

8.1 United States General Accounting Office (GAO) Report for the Acting Secretary
    of the Air Force, Defense Support Program, GAO / NSIAD-93-148 (1993). Wash-
    ington, DC: USGAO.
8.2 Systems Engineering, Military Standard 499B (Draft) (1991). Washington, DC:
    U.S. Department of Defense.
8.3 Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5000.1 and Instruction 5000.2 (1991).
    Washington, DC, February 23.
8.4 The NASA Mission Design Process (1992). Washington, DC: National Aeronau-
    tics and Space Administration, NASA Engineering Management Council.
8.5 Phase C / D Requirements Specification for the Earth Observing System Data and
    Information System (EOSDIS) (1990). Greenbelt, MD: Goddard Space Flight
    Center.
8.6 EDOS Contract Data Requirements List and Statement of Work (1992). Green-
    belt, MD: Goddard Space Flight Center.
8.7 CDOS Requirements Specification, Level 3 (1990). Greenbelt, MD: Goddard
    Space Flight Center.
8.8 Integrated Computer-Aided Software Engineering (I-CASE) Solicitation (1992).
    Gunter AFB, AL: Department of the Air Force, Standard Systems Center.
246     REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS AND ALLOCATION


8.9  Mission Oriented Information System Engineering (MOISE) Solicitation, Request
     for Comment (1992). Washington, DC: U.S. Coast Guard, Department of
     Transportation.
8.10 Eisner, H. (1988). Computer-Aided Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
     Prentice Hall.
8.11 Requirements Analysis & Design Tool Report (1992). Hill AFB, UT: U.S. Air
     Force, Software Technology Support Center.
8.12 Davis, A. (1990). Software Requirements—Analysis and Specification. Engle-
     wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
                9
SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING:
PRINCIPLES




9.1   INTRODUCTION

Architecting a large-scale complex system is the centerpiece of systems en-
gineering. Without the systems engineering process, such architecting is likely
to be disorganized and unsatisfactory. With the systems engineering process
and perspective, it is more likely that a sound system architecture will ulti-
mately evolve.
   In Chapter 1 (Figure 1.1), an overview of the systems approach was pre-
sented. This approach showed the following as key elements of architectural
design:


  • Requirements
  • Functional design of alternatives
  • Analysis of alternatives
  • Evaluation criteria
  • Formulation of a preferred system architecture


In Chapter 2 (Figure 2.2), the architectural design process was expanded,
showing the following elements:


  • Requirements
  • Mission engineering


                                                                           247
248    SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


  • Requirements analysis/allocation
  • Functional analysis/allocation
  • Architectural design/synthesis
  • System analysis
  • Life-cycle costing
  • Risk analysis
  • Other system/subsystem considerations
  • Formulation of a preferred system architecture

In Chapter 7 (Figure 7.4), inputs to the important step of analyzing and eval-
uating alternatives were defined, with the output representing the preferred
system architecture. In this chapter, we bring all these representations together
into a coherent set of essential steps for developing a preferred system ar-
chitecture. We also show some examples and approaches proferred by other
investigators of this important process and issue.


9.2   A VIEW OF SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING

Any discussion of architecting large and complex systems would not be com-
plete without reference to the extraordinary and landmark treatise by E.
Rechtin on systems architecting [9.1]. Rechtin’s view is that ‘‘the core of
architecting is system conceptualization’’ and that there are four basic ap-
proaches to the process of architecting:

  1. The normative (pronouncement) methodology
  2. The rational (procedural) method
  3. The argumentative approach
  4. The heuristic approach

The approach delineated in this chapter is a combination of the rational and
the heuristic approaches. The rational method is exemplified by the evaluation
framework discussed later in this chapter; the heuristics lie mainly in how
alternative systems are defined and also how a rating scheme is established
in order to assess the strengths and weaknesses of these alternatives. In
seeking the appropriate mix between these approaches, Rechtin suggests that
‘‘the scientist, engineer and architect follow the heuristic: simplify, simplify,
simplify.’’
   Another key observation made by Rechtin is:

  The essence of systems is relationships, interfaces, form, fit and function. The
  essence of architecting is structuring, simplification, compromise and balance.
                                                    9.3   A NASA PERSPECTIVE    249

The balance is achieved by the appropriate compromise between the following
types of factors:

  • System requirements
  • Function
  • Form
  • Simplicity
  • Affordability
  • Complexity
  • Environmental imperatives
  • Human needs

These factors can be said to represent a high-level set of evaluation criteria
for all types of systems.
   In addition, Rechtin provides an interesting citation of notably successful
systems as well as a rather long list of heuristics, chapter by chapter. The
latter list is must reading for any and all Project Managers (PMs) and Chief
Systems Engineers (CSEs).


9.3 A NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
(NASA) PERSPECTIVE

NASA defines an architecture as [9.2]:

  How functions are grouped together and interact with each other. Applies to the
  mission and to both inter- and intra-system, segment, element, and subsystem.

In their mission design activities, NASA emphasizes the following:

  • Requirements
  • Decision making and evaluation criteria
  • Optimization and descope options
  • Robustness and flexibility
  • Cost and schedule as a trade parameter
  • Developing the cost plan and schedule
  • Risk assessment and mitigation
  • Establishing design margins
  • Analyses and trade studies
  • Technical performance measurement
250    SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


We will find some of these themes reiterated as we look at the formal process
of system architecting.
   As indicated in earlier chapters, NASA looks at mission design in terms
of three early phases:

  1. The conceptual design process: Prephase A
  2. The mission analysis process: Phase A
  3. The definition process: Phase B

If we examine closely the specifics for these phases, we see the following
purpose for Phase A:

  The purpose of the Phase A study is to refine the mission and systems(s) re-
  quirements, determine a baseline mission configuration and system architecture,
  identify risks and risk mitigation strategies, identify the ‘‘best’’ candidates, and
  select one.

Thus, it is clear that systems architecting and selection of a preferred archi-
tecture are carried out during Phase A. With respect to the Phase A study
final report, NASA requires that the topics listed in Exhibit 9.1 be covered.

  Exhibit 9.1: NASA Phase A Study Document Topics
  • Technology needs and development plan
  • Refined and validated mission requirements
  • Final feasibility assessment
  • Disposal requirements
  • Functional/operational description
  • Hardware/software distribution
  • Design requirements
  • Definition of top-level interfaces and responsibilities
  • System/subsystem description
  • Mission description
  • Data handling requirements
  • Launch vehicle requirements
  • Mission operations
  • Preliminary work breakdown structure
  • Refined cost estimates and schedules
  • Establishment of accountability for delivery of an end item and its
    performance
  • Apportionment of technical resources, the distribution of margins, and
    allocation error budgets
                                           9.4   ARCHITECTURE DESCRIPTIONS   251

  • System-level block diagram, flight, and ground
  • Maintenance and logistics requirements
  • Top-level system architecture

This documentation must provide answers to the following types of questions:

  1. Does the conceptual design meet the overall mission objectives?
  2. Is the design technically feasible?
  3. Is the level of risk acceptable?
  4. Are the schedule and costs within the specified limits?
  5. Do the study results show this option to be better than all others?

NASA is explicit regarding the use of ‘‘appropriate and predetermined
weighted and prioritized evaluation criteria to select the best of the candidate
designs that were evaluated.’’ Weighted evaluation criteria for this purpose
come up again later in this chapter as part of the recommended system ar-
chitecting process.


9.4     ARCHITECTURE DESCRIPTIONS

9.4.1    NASA Descriptions
We indicated in Chapter 8, ‘‘Requirements Analysis and Allocation,’’ that the
requirements for a system are almost always delineated by system function.
Therefore, more often than not, the system functions, at least at the top level,
are an input to the systems engineering team.
   In many cases, the architectural description of the system consists of the
reiteration of the given system functions, along with the way in which those
functions, and the subsystems representing those functions, are intercon-
nected. As examples, Figures 9.1 and 9.2 show system architectures defined
by NASA for the EOSDIS and the EDOS systems [9.3, 9.4]. Both figures are
from the requirements specifications for the two systems, as defined by
NASA. We note the implicit emphasis on interconnections between functions,
extending as well to the physical locations of the functional capabilities. In
some cases, the architecture description is supplemented by the identification
of functional interfaces between a given system and other systems with which
it must interoperate. This is illustrated by Figure 9.3 for a NASA system
known as the PDSS (Payload Data Services System [9.5]). Types of data and
information flow in terms of functional interfaces are emphasized in this
description.
   Although the previously cited functional architectures provide valuable in-
formation to the systems engineering team, the position taken here is that this
information is only an input to the true architecting of a system. System
                                               Eos
                                           Platform(s)




252
                                                                    SN
                                                                         CDOS             FDF              POIC          ESA            NASDA
                                 Space
                                 Station                 NASCOM
                                Freedom




                                                                                                                   Active
                                           ICCs               EMOC                                    SPSC        archives            IMC

                                                                                  SMC
                                                    FOS                                                                      SDPS

                                                                                          CSMS

                                                                                 EOSDIS science network




                                  EOSDIS Comm
                                   & IST toolkits
                                                     Investigator          Other WANs & LANs
                                                                                                                  SCFs              Users
            Local connections                          facilities
            Shaded areas are responsilility
            of EOSDIS                                                                            Non-Eos                       EOSDIS comm.
                                                                            Remote
                                                                                                   data                        IMC & data access
      Note: Investigator facilities, SCFs and                                users
                                                                                                  center                       toolkits
            users may be located at a single site

                                                     Figure 9.1. Illustrative architecture description—EOSDIS.
                                                                                 9.4   ARCHITECTURE DESCRIPTIONS                         253

                                    LEGEND                                                 EDOS Data Production Facility,
                                                                                              Fairmont, West Virginia
      Real-time return link data                        Rate buffered data
      Production data                                   EDOS functions
      Real-time forward link data                                                                    EDOS DPF functions
                                                        Other MO & DSD systems
      Operations management data                                                                        Communications I/F
                                                        External systems
      DIF-DPF Return link data transfer
                                                                                                          System support
                     White Sands Complex

                                                                                             E              Operations
                                      Data interface facility                                c             management
                                                                                             o
                                    EDOS DIF functions                                       m
                                     Communications I/F
                                                                                                          Production data
                                              System                                                         handling
                                              support

                                       Operations                                                          Data archive
                                      management
   White Sands
     ground
    terminal                         Data capture                    E
                                                                     c
                                                                                                     Goddard Space Flight Center
                                       function
                                                                     o
                                                                     m
  Second TDRSS                          Return link
      ground                            processing
     terminal
                                                                                                             EOS
                                                                                                          operations              DAAC
                                       Forward link                                                         center
                                        processing
   Test sytem
   & prelaunch
    checkout
                                                                                                       System     Ecom             SN network
                                                                                                     management management           control
                                                                                                       center                        center
                                                                                                 E
                                           Ecom                                                  c           Sustaining engineering
                                                                                                 o
                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                     facility
   Test sytem
   & prelaunch
                                                                                  DAACs:                       EDOS SEF functions
    checkout                                    Aster ICC                         ASF
                                                                                                                   Communications I/F
                                                                                  EDC
   Deep space                                                                     JPL
    network                                                                       LaRC
                              International                                                                            System support
                                                                                  MSFC
                                partners                            NOAA
                                                                                  NSIDC

     Ground
     network                                                                                                             Operations
                                                                                                                        management


      Wallops
                                                                                                                   Engineering support
  orbital tracking
      station



                            Figure 9.2. Illustrative architecture description—EDOS.


architecting takes several steps beyond this type of description, the key ele-
ment of which is to define a technical approach for the implementation of
each of the defined functions as well as an overall selection of the best ap-
proach (most cost-effective system) for the combination of functions. Such a
selection defines the preferred system architecture. This position is made more
concrete in the sections that follow in this chapter as well as in the Appendix.

9.4.2      Department of Defense Descriptions
The Department of Defense (DoD) has formulated a framework for Com-
mand, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, and
                                          • GMT data     • Status & control
                              TDS                                              ISMAC




254
                                                                    Simulated:                                                  PTC
                                                                    • Core systems data                                                                CCC
                                                                    • P/L health & status                                                             @ JSC
                                                                    • Ancillary
                                                                                                                                            • Stored
                                                                    • Stored S-band requests                                                  S-band data
                                                                                                                                ESC
                                                                                                 • CCC stored S-band data
                                                                    • Core systems data
                                                                    • P/L health & status
                                                                    • Ancillary
                                                                    • Training data
                                                                                                                               POIC
                                                                                                 • Mission planning data
                                                                    • Bitstream data             • Reconfiguration data
                                                                    • P/L VCDUs/packets
                                                                    • LZP data sets
                        • S-band CADUs             Payload          • Training data
                        • Ku-band CADUs              data           • Ancillary
           WSC                                                      • CCC stored S-band data                                   USOC
                                                   services
                                                                    • P/L H & B
                                                    system
                                                                                                 • LZP data set requests
                                                                    • Bitstream data             • Stored S-band requests
                                                                    • Ancillary data
                                                                    • VCDU/packets
                                                                    • LZP data sets
                                                                                                                                User
                                                                    • Training data                                          operations
                                                                    • CCC stored S-band data                                  facilities
                                                                                                 • LZP data set requests                               CCC
                                                                                                 • Stored S-band requests                             @ JSC
                                                                    • Bitstream data
                                                                    • Ancillary data                                                        • Stored
                                                                    • VCDU/packets                                          International     S-band data
                                                                    • LZP data sets                                           partners
                                                                    • Training data
                      • Reconfiguration data                                                     • LZP data set requests

      Cmd & telemetry • VCID, APID tables              TBD          ESTL
        database

                                                              Figure 9.3. PDSS functional interfaces.
                                            9.4   ARCHITECTURE DESCRIPTIONS     255

Reconnaisance (C4ISR) architecture, development and integration [9.6]. This
C4ISR Architecture Framework is an attempt to:

  • Ensure that architectures developed by different parts of the DoD are
    interrelated
  • Set forth uniform methods for describing various types of information
    systems
  • Provide guidance on describing architectures

The last point is of particular importance. In fact, the Framework is built
largely upon the idea that there are three major perspectives on how to de-
scribe an architecture, namely:

  • The operational view
  • The systems view
  • The technical view

These views can be thought of as giving us different types of information
about the same architecture, rather than being different architectures them-
selves. The most useful architecture description is one that consists of multiple
views, providing an ‘‘integrated’’ notion of the architecture. The more precise
definitions of the above three views of an architecture are [9.6]:

  The operational architecture view is a description of the tasks and activities,
  operational elements, and information flows required to accomplish or support
  a military operation

  The systems architecture view is a description, including graphics, of systems
  and interconnections providing for, or supporting, warfighting functions

  The technical architecture view is the minimal set of rules governing the ar-
  rangement, interaction, and interdependence of system parts or elements, whose
  purpose is to ensure that a conformant system satisfies a specified set of
  requirements

The Framework also provides a detailed explanation of the roles of each of
these architectural views. Of special importance is the notion that an archi-
tecture description must provide explicit linkages between these various
views. This leads to an integrated view as well as supporting the notion of
interoperability, which has been a problem for DoD systems for many years.
The Framework also shows a six-step process for building an architecture as
follows:
256     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


  Step 1: Articulate the intended use of the architecture.
  Step 2: Establish the scope, context, environment (and any other assump-
          tions) of the architecture.
  Step 3: Determine which characteristics the architecture needs to capture.
  Step 4: Establish which architecture views and supporting products should
          be built.
  Step 5: Build the needed products.
  Step 6: Use the architecture for its intended purpose.

Steps 4 and 5 above suggest that each architectural view is supported by
several products. That indeed is the case. In fact, there are a series of ‘‘Es-
sential Framework Products’’ and also a set of ‘‘Supporting Framework Prod-
ucts.’’ These products are intended to convey critical information about the
architecture. The reader is referred to the reference for the C4ISR Architecture
Framework [9.6] in order to gain a fuller understanding of the nature and
structure of this work.

9.4.3   IEEE Descriptions
The discussion of the C4ISR Architecture Framework cites an architecture
definition, attributed to the IEEE [9.6], as:

  A structure of components, their relationships, and the principles and guidelines
  governing their design and evolution over time

This definition is useful, but does not give the prospective architect a blueprint
for how to architect a system. Once an architecture has been formulated, it
is very likely to satisfy the broad definition cited above.
   Yet another view of systems and their architectures is presented in the IEEE
standard for systems engineering [9.7]. In Chapter 7, we noted that the IEEE
expanded from four to five the key elements of the systems engineering pro-
cess, yielding the following:

  1. Requirements analysis
  2. Functional analysis/allocation
  3. Synthesis
  4. System analysis and control
  5. Verification and validation

The process ultimately produces a preferred system architecture, which the
IEEE defines as:

  The composite of the functional, physical and foundation architectures, which
  form the basis for establishing a system design [9.7].
                               9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING   257

In addition, the definition points the reader to requirements traceability and
allocation matrices that presumably connect the overall system design to var-
ious aspects of the above-cited three architectures. Although definitions of
the above three subordinate architectures are provided in the standard, it is
difficult to see how to construct these architectures without seeing an example
or two. Nevertheless, one can accept the notion that ‘‘views’’ of the architec-
ture can be associated with the ideas behind ‘‘functional, physical and foun-
dation.’’ These views, by immediate observation, are not the same as those
developed by the DoD C3I (command, control, communications, and intelli-
gence) world, as discussed above.
   As we move with the IEEE into the software domain, we find a standard
that focuses upon a recommended practice for architectural description [9.8].
This standard explores ‘‘the activities of the creation, analysis, and sustain-
ment of architectures of software-intensive systems.’’ The standard makes the
very significant point that ‘‘concepts of architecture have not been consistently
defined and applied within the life cycle of software-intensive systems.’’ In-
stead, it argues that it is indeed possible to describe architectures. These
descriptions can also be thought of as ‘‘views’’ of an architecture, even though
we may not be completely clear as to how to develop an architecture. Selected
views of an architecture may be illustrated, in the hardware case, by Figures
9.1 through 9.3 which have already been discussed. Thus, we are seeing a
difference between having a ‘‘single accepted framework for codifying ar-
chitectural thinking,’’ and ‘‘views’’ or ‘‘descriptions’’ of an architecture. We
attempt, in this chapter, to narrow this gap by setting forth a prescriptive
method for developing an architecture, whether it be related to hardware,
software, or a combination thereof.


9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING

Two earlier representations, Figures 1.1 and 2.2, have shown the development
of an architecture as the first top-down design or synthesis of the system in
question. It is an attempt to come to terms with the critical design choices
for the system as a whole. Thus, for this author, the essence of architecting
is defining these top-level design choices and placing them in a context that
establishes a set of reasonable alternatives that can then be evaluated. Follow-
ing this notion, consider the structure of Exhibit 9.2 [9.9].

  Exhibit 9.2: System Functions and Design Choices for a
  Communications System
  Top-Level System Functions             Design Choices (Alternatives)
  1. Multiplexing/demultiplexing                          D11, D12
  2. Modulation/demodulation                              D21, D22
  3. Switching and routing                                D31, D32, D33
  4. Encryption/decryption                                D41, D42
258     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


  Top-Level System Functions                      Design Choices (Alternatives)
  5. Formatting/signal conversion                        D51, D52, D53
  6. Control and monitoring                              D61, D62
  7. Recording and playback                              D71, D72
  8. Satellite/terrestrial communications                D81, D82

This table shows a set of eight top-level functions of a communications sys-
tem. For each of these functions, the system architect considers one or more
design approaches that satisfy the requirements, as stated for the function.
Thus, for the first function, the two design approaches are represented as D11
and D12, where D11 is the first design approach for function 1 and D12 is
the second design approach for function 1. To generalize, DIJ is the Jth design
approach for function I. Since we are operating at the top-level functional
breakdown, these approaches are considered fundamental to the overall sys-
tem design and represent true alternatives from which we will eventually
construct a preferred architecture. As an example, for the mux/demux func-
tion number 1, D11 might be frequency division multiplexing whereas D12
could be time division multiplexing.
   From the above discussion, we are able to immmediately see the combi-
natorial nature of the architectural design problem. If all of the design com-
binations were admissable, then in principle there could be as many as
(2)(2)(3)(2)(3)(2)(2)(2) ⫽ 576 combinations, each of which represents a sin-
gle architectural choice for the system. When we introduce the fact that not
all combinations are internally compatible or interoperable, the number of
combinations (admissable alternatives) narrows, and usually in a rather dra-
matic way. On this basis, two critical tasks of the architect are to (a) set forth
the various design approaches, and (b) look for ways to reduce the number
of alternatives (combinations) to be considered. Given that the architect is
able to do part (a) of the above, the approach delineated here reduces the
number of alternatives by placing them in a cost-effectiveness context, spe-
cifically the one shown in Figure 7.6. From that perspective, a practical num-
ber of alternatives is constructed and then evaluated by the systems
engineering team, led by the chief systems engineer (CSE).
   If we return to the thirty elements of systems engineering, as defined in
Chapter 7 (Exhibit 7.1), we can describe the essential steps of system archi-
tecting by means of elements 3 through 10, namely:

  • Requirements analysis/allocation (element 3)
  • Functional analysis/decomposition (element 4)
  • Architecture design/synthesis (element 5)
  • Alternatives analysis/evaluation (element 6)
  • Technical performance measurement (element 7)
  • Life-cycle costing (element 8)
                               9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING   259

  • Risk analysis (element 9)
  • Concurrent engineering (element 10)

This ‘‘short list’’ does not mean that some of the other thirty elements of
systems engineering are completely neglected during the process of archi-
tecting; rather, it suggests that these above eight elements are critical and
must be part of the process. Each of these essential steps is briefly described
in the following sections.


9.5.1   Requirements Analysis/Allocation (RAA)
As discussed in some detail in the previous chapter, requirements analysis
and allocation is an essential element in systems engineering. It is also critical
in terms of architecting a system. The high-priority aspects of RAA have
been delineated in Section 8.6. Here we emphasize, with respect to archi-
tecting, that requirements are allocated to the functionally decomposed blocks
of the system. These allocated requirements come from two sources:

  1. They are provided directly in the requirements document that comes
     from the system user or acquisition agent.
  2. They are derived from the preceding by the system developer, thus
     ‘‘filling in the blanks’’ where necessary.

The result of RAA then establishes at least one functional requirement for
each decomposed functional block.


9.5.2   Functional Analysis/Decomposition
The preceding step cannot be taken until the system has been decomposed
into its functional blocks. This part of the process assures that functional
decomposition has been carried out as a precursor to RAA. Other aspects of
functional analysis and allocation have been described in Chapter 7, Section
7.3.4. We note also the primary position of functional analysis and allocation
in Military Standard 499B (see Section 7.2.1).


9.5.3   Architecture Design/Synthesis
This step involves the synthesis of architectural alternatives. These alternatives
flow from trying to define a set of choices that satisfy the requirements in
each functional area. The conceptual problem that is attendant to this step
can be described as follows. If there are a total of eight functional areas, and
there are three design choices for each such functional area, then in principle
there are a total of 38 or 6,561 (!) possible architectures. This, of course,
260       SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


makes no sense, so we try to narrow the field of possibilities through the
addition of constraints.
   One method for achieving this rather rapidly is depicted in Table 9.1. This
table shows only three alternative architectures, mapped against the functional
areas and the subordinate requirements in these areas. These three alternatives
are:

  1. A low-cost, minimum-effectiveness alternative
  2. A ‘‘baseline’’ alternative
  3. A high-performance, (high-cost) alternative

The entries in Table 9.1 describe how the alternative is designed to satisfy
the key functional requirements. This notion was first presented in Figure 7.5.
The idea is to bracket the reasonable alternatives by the low-cost and high-
performance architectures to set the stage for evolving a cost-effective ‘‘base-
line’’ alternative. All such alternatives satisfy the full set of requirements as
defined by the customer. In this synthesis and top-level design process, there
is a minimum of formal analysis and evaluation, which is the next step in the



TABLE 9.1     Alternative Architectures Versus Functions and Requirements
                                           Alternative Architectures
Functions and         Low-Cost                 Baseline                High-Performance
Requirements           System                  System                       System
Function 1
  Req. 1.1
  Req. 1.2
  Req. 1.3
Function 2
  Req. 2.1
  Req. 2.2


                                       冤                    冥
Function 3                                 How is each
  Req. 3.1                               system designed
  Req. 3.2                                   to satisfy
  Req. 3.3                              the requirements?
  Req. 3.4
      ⯗
Function N
  Req. N.1
  Req. N.2
  Req. N.3
          ⯗
  Req. N.M
                               9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING   261

process. A greater number of alternatives may also be considered and eval-
uated by formal Taguchi and response surface methods that the reader may
wish to explore but that are outside the scope of this presentation.


9.5.4   Alternatives Analysis/Evaluation
Given the alternative architectures as defined in the previous step, these al-
ternatives are then analyzed and evaluated with the objective of deriving a
preferred system architecture. We refer again for this process to Figure 7.4.
This figure shows a series of inputs to the analysis and evaluation of alter-
natives, namely:

  • Architecture design and synthesis
  • The key elements of:
     — Technical performance measurement (TPM)
     — Life-cycle costing
     — Risk analysis
     — Concurrent engineering
     — Systems engineering management
  • The ancillary elements of:
     — Integrated logistics support (ILS)
     — Reliability, Maintainability, availability (RMA)
     — Test and evaluation (T&E)
     — Quality assurance and management (QA&M)
     — Specialty engineering
     — Preplanned product improvement (P3I)
  • Evaluation criteria
  • An evaluation framework

The figure also shows the output as the preferred system architecture.
   The basic evaluation framework brings together the final form of the al-
ternatives evaluation process, as shown in Table 9.2. This table shows three
alternatives as columns and the evaluation criteria as rows. With such a ma-
trix, we evaluate each alternative with respect to how well the evaluation
criteria are satisfied. The evaluation criteria are weighted to capture the likely
possibility that they are not all equally important. We chose to select these
weighting factors so that they add to unity to normalize the numbers and
simplify the evaluation. Weighting factors are developed by group decision-
making processes [9.9] involving the systems engineering team. Customer
inputs are highly desirable but usually difficult to obtain in quantitative terms.
   The individual ‘‘cells’’ in the matrix contain two basic numbers. The first
is the rating of the given alternative with respect to the stated evaluation
262     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


TABLE 9.2     System Alternatives Evaluation Framework
                                              Alternative Architectures
                                  System A           System B             System C
Evaluation       Criteria
 Criteria      Weights (Wi)    Rating   W⫻R       Rating   W⫻R       Rating    W⫻R
Criterion 1        0.08          7         0.56      8      0.64           9    0.72
Criterion 2        0.10          6         0.60      6      0.60           8    0.80
Criterion 3        0.13          6         0.78      7      0.91           7    0.91
Criterion 4        0.09          5         0.45      7      0.63           8    0.72
Criterion 5        0.12          8         0.96      9      1.08          10    1.20
Criterion 6        0.07          6         0.42      7      0.49           7    0.49
Criterion 7        0.11          7         0.77      6      0.66           5    0.55
Criterion 8        0.10          9         0.90      6      0.60           4    0.40
                   1.00                    5.44             5.61                5.79



criterion. The second is the product of the rating and the weight given to the
evaluation criterion. This latter product is then summed down the column to
place in evidence the final score for each alternative. This score is the basis
for comparing the alternatives against each other.
   There are many options available for the rating system that one might
select. Three such options are:

   1. A scale of 1 to 10
   2. A Likert scale with the numeric values of 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10
   3. S college scoring system of A, B, C, D, and F, equivalent to numeric
      scores of 4, 3, 2, 1, and 0

Table 9.2 shows the first of these options and the resultant scores for the three
alternatives. Each of the given scores can then be compared with the under-
standing that the maximum score for any given alternative is 10. The illus-
trative numbers in the table show preferences for Systems C, B, and A, in
that order.
   With this evaluation framework, one may then ask the question: Where do
the evaluation criteria come from? These criteria can be derived from several
sources simultaneously:

   • The requirements document for the system
   • Possible evaluation criteria defined by the customer
   • The measures of merit and effectiveness (MOMs and MOEs) that may
     have been developed
   • The technical performance measures (TPMs) for the system
                             9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING   263

In general, the TPMs (which are measurable) and other possibly subjective
factors, as well as cost measures, may make up the full set of evaluation
criteria. Examples of evaluation criteria for a communications system and a
transportation system are listed in Exhibit 9.3. The broad factors cited by
Rechtin (see Section 9.2) [9.1] may be said to apply to all systems, indepen-
dent of the domain in which they are operative.


  Exhibit 9.3: Illustrative Evaluation Criteria

  A Communications System
  • Availability
  • Bandwidth
  • Capacity
  • Connectivity
  • Expandability
  • Grade of service
  • Life-cycle costs
  • Number of channels (by type of channel)
  • Quality of service
  • Reliability
  • Response time
  • Risk
  • Security
  • Speed of service
  • Survivability
  • Throughput

  A Transportation System
  • Capacity
  • Capacity-to-demand ratio
  • Comfort and convenience
  • Economic impacts
  • Environmental effects
  • Frequency of service
  • Growth capability
  • Life-cycle costs
  • Quality of service
  • Reliability of service
  • Risk
264     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


  • Safety
  • Security
  • Speed
  • Trip time

In a study of the future development of the U.S. airport network, the Trans-
portation Research Board of the National Research Council addressed directly
the matter of criteria for its evaluation and developed the following set of
fourteen criteria:

   1. Capacity
   2. Safety
   3. Cost
   4. Competition
   5. Flexibility
   6. Time
   7. Frequency
   8. Reliability
   9. Comfort and convenience
  10. Congestion and pollution
  11. Other environmental concerns
  12. Compatibility
  13. Funding
  14. Management

So whether we are dealing with a very large system, such as the national
airport network, or a smaller system, such as a radar, the issue of developing
and using a coherent list of evaluation criteria remains approximately the
same.

9.5.5   Technical Performance Measurement (TPM)
Technical performance measurement plays a prominent role in Military Stan-
dard 499B. Exhibit 9.4 lists some of the TPM references in that standard.

  Exhibit 9.4: Selected TPM References in Mil-Std-499B
     Section 4.6.8. Technical Performance Measurement (TPM). The contractor
  shall establish and implement TPM to evaluate the adequacy of architectures
  and designs as they evolve to satisfy the requirements and objectives selected
  for tracking. TPM shall be used to identify deficiencies that jeopardize the ability
  of the system to meet a performance requirement. Actions taken due to defi-
  ciencies are dependent on whether the technical parameter is a requirement or
                                 9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING       265

  an objective. The level of detail and documentation shall be commensurate with
  the impact on cost, schedule, and performance of the technical program.
      Section 4.6.8.1. Implementation of TPM. The contractor shall track the
  achievement to date for each technical parameter as the analyses, design and
  development activity progresses. In the event that the achievement to date value
  falls outside the tolerance band, the variation shall be determined by comparing
  the achievement to date against the corresponding value on the planned value
  profile. In the event progress in the technical effort supports identification of a
  different current estimate than previously predicted, a new profile and current
  estimate shall be developed. The current estimate shall be determined from the
  achievement to date and the remaining schedule and budget. Risk assessments
  and analysis shall be updated to reflect changes in the TPM profiles and current
  estimates, and impacts on related parameters.
      Section 4.6.8.2. TPM on Requirements. For identified deficiencies, analyses
  shall be performed to determine the cause(s) and to assess the impact on higher
  level parameters, interface requirements, and system cost effectiveness. Alter-
  native recovery plans shall be developed with cost, schedule, performance, and
  risk impacts fully explored. For performance in excess of requirements, the mar-
  ginal cost benefit of the performance delta and opportunities for reallocation of
  requirements and resources shall be assessed and an appropriate course of action
  implemented.
      Section 4.6.8.3. TPM on Objectives or Decision Criteria. The contractor shall
  perform TPM on objectives and decision criteria as contained in their SEMP
  (systems engineering management plan)


   In general, TPMs are the key measures of technical performance of the
system, as previously illustrated in Chapter 7 (Section 7.3.7). They allow the
systems engineering team to carry out the evaluation ratings shown in Table
9.2. They deal with technical factors of the system and should be measurable
in a technical sense. Their measurement may be exceedingly complex, re-
quiring detailed modeling and simulation to compute the values of TPMs.
TPMs, in general, depend on a series of other parameters known as technical
performance parameters (TPPs). A method for relating TPPs to TPMs, de-
veloped by this author, is Parameter Dependency Diagramming (PDD) [9.9].
The PDD procedure is illustrated in Section 9.8.


9.5.6   Life-Cycle Costing
Life-cycle costs for the architectural alternatives may also be considered eval-
uation criteria. These costs may be broken down into subcategories, if con-
sidered desirable. Generally accepted subcategories include

  • Research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) costs
  • Procurement or acquisition costs
  • Operations and maintenance (O&M) costs
266     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


   There are several different ways in which costs may be factored into the
evaluation framework discussed before. Three such ways include

  1. Costs as formal evaluation criteria
  2. Costs in the context of effectiveness-to-cost ratios
  3. Costs as a separate, but related, consideration

In the first approach, costs are listed among the various evaluation criteria
and are weighted along with these other criteria. The weights reflect how
important costs are in relation to the other criteria. In the second approach,
formal effectiveness-to-cost ratios are computed in order to select one archi-
tecture over another. For the latter case, there is no integration of effectiveness
with the cost metrics, at least in a formal sense.
   There are times when cost considerations are elevated as well to a more
global set of considerations, which themselves can be included as evaluation
criteria. Such cost-related considerations include the extent to which the al-
ternative:

  • Supports overall economic growth
  • Is amenable to financing
  • Minimizes environmental costs
  • Minimizes the dislocation of people, and so forth

   As with the technical performance measures and their related evaluation
criteria, costs must be estimated for the various alternatives under evaluation.
This might imply the development of a first-order life-cycle cost model that
can be refined during later stages of system development. For purposes of
architecture comparison, a full life-cycle model is generally not necessary, or
even feasible.

9.5.7   Risk Analysis
In Chapter 7, we noted the four key areas of risk attendant to engineering
large-scale systems, namely:

  1. Schedule risk
  2. Cost risk
  3. Performance risk
  4. Societal risk

Risk must be considered one of the evaluation criteria for most complex
systems. Measurement of risk is a nontrivial matter, but it has been considered
                               9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING   267

in great detail in a variety of books and articles [9.9, 9.11, 9.12], ranging in
scope from broad systems considerations to software development.


9.5.8   Concurrent Engineering
Concurrent engineering is viewed here as a crucial part of architecting a
system because it brings together all the necessary technical and management
skills needed to design, test, produce, and operate the system. This broad
range of system considerations must be present to assure that some important
features are not neglected. As an example, many design engineers assume
that matters of production and producibility are easily resolvable. By having
a production engineer as part of the concurrent engineering team and effort,
we attempt to assure that such an assumption is valid. If it is not, then perhaps
other alternatives will become more attractive. The basic idea is that the CSE
must have the broadest range of technical and management inputs as part of
the architecting process. Additional information regarding concurrent engi-
neering can be found in Chapters 7 and 13.


9.5.9   Illustrative Example of Architecting Process
This section illustrates the core architecting process by using a concrete but
simplified example to demonstrate the essential steps. A more detailed version
of this example is also provided in the Appendix, Section A5.
   The illustrative system is called a Severe Climates Anemometry System
(SCAS) [9.10], and it contains the six major functions, and a set of subfunc-
tions, as listed below:
    1. Atmospheric Sensing
        1.1 Wind speed
        1.2 Wind direction
        1.3 Barometric pressure
    2. Mechanical Service
        2.1 Instrument housing
        2.2 Instrument orientation
    3. Environmental Service
        3.1 Ice control
    4. Power Service
        4.1 Main supply
        4.2 Regulation/conditioning
        4.3 Backup power
    5. Indoor/Outdoor Transmission
        5.1 Power
        5.2 Signal
        5.3 Physical linkages
268      SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


      6. Data Handling
         6.1 Collection
         6.2 Processing/storage
         6.3 Reporting, distribution, and display

As a next step, we are specifically interested in the fact that there are alter-
native design choices that we can make in order to implement each of the
functions and subfunctions. We array our design choices in a tabulation that
follows from Table 9.1, and in this case, becomes Table 9.3.
   We note that we are building three architectures, one each for a low-cost
system, a high-effectiveness system, and a baseline system. The latter is our
attempt at trying to find the ‘‘knee-of-the-curve’’ system, as illustrated in
Figure 7.5. The three architectures are constructed, in this case, at the sub-
functional level. For the first subfunction of wind speed sensing (subfunction
1.1), the architect selected a commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) pitot tube. In
moving to the other two architectures, the architect added a hard-wired trans-
ducer, and then a radio transducer. This was the choice of the architect (or
the architecture team) in order to add capability (effectiveness) in moving
from left to right on the table.
   For the case of wind speed direction (subfunction 1.2), the architect de-
cided that all three alternatives should be based upon a simple shaft drive
design choice. Further, the same three design choices for subfunction 1.1 were
used in subfunction 1.3. Moving to subfunction 2.1, the architect went from
an aluminum solution to a molded composite solution, to composites that are
more compact and weigh less. Three different choices were made as well for
the orientation/position subfunction 2.2. The process of selecting design
choices for each subfunction continued until all functions and subfunctions
were considered.
   The important point is that this core architecting process goes beyond the
mere articulation of system functions and subfunctions. It focuses upon the
design (synthesis) process whereby alternative design choices are made at the
subfunction level. Further, this is structured so as to produce only three al-
ternatives, but ones that have a cost-effectiveness basis for ultimately choosing
which of the three will turn out to be the preferred architecture.
   In most cases, the architect thought that each architecture should have a
different set of design choices. In two, the same design choice was selected
across the board (i.e., for subfunctions 1.2 and 4.1) The selected choices were
based upon the expertise of the architect and his or her subject knowledge in
this particular domain. If a team is utilized to carry out this process, it is
likely that better solutions will be forthcoming, since a team is able to draw
upon the expertise of many instead of just one or two. In its very compact
form, Table 9.3 can be thought of as the ‘‘synthesis’’ step in the top-level
architecting of a system. Each subfunction is addressed, moving from left to
right across the three alternative systems. Once the entire chart has been filled
in with alternative design choices, the architecting team must scan each al-
      TABLE 9.3    Alternative System Architectures for Anemometry System
                  Functions                   Subfunctions                   Low Cost                 Baseline             High Effectiveness
      1. Atmospheric Sensing           1.1 Wind speed sensing         COTS pitot tube           COTS pitot with         Add radio tranducer
                                                                                                  transducer
                                       1.2 Wind direction sensing     Simple shaft drive        Simple shaft drive      Simple shaft drive
                                       1.3 Pressure sensing           COTS pitot tube           COTS pitot with         Add radio transducer
                                                                                                  transducer
      2. Mechanical Service            2.1 Instrument housing         Machined aluminum         Add molded              Less weight/compact
                                                                                                  composites
                                       2.2 Orientation/position       Wind-vaned COTS           Less tail boom length   High-precision bear/
                                                                        bear                                              balancing
      3. Environmental Service         3.1 Ice control                Analog feedback           Add digitized control   Add process & heat
                                                                        temperature control                               pipes
      4. Power Service                 4.1 Main power supply          Commercial 220/110 V      Commercial 220/110      Commercial 220/110 V
                                                                        COTS                      V
                                       4.2 Power regulation/          Conditioners/rods         Add ground fault        Add lightning arrester
                                           conditioning                                           interrupter
                                       4.3 Backup power               Battery-instruments       Gas generator with      High-reliability diesel
                                                                                                  sensor                  with switch
      5. Indoor/Outdoor Transmission   5.1 Power transmission         Stranded wire harness     Stranded wire harness   Custom slip rings
                                       5.2 Signal transmission        Foil-shielded wire        Coaxial with slip       2-way radio, no wiring
                                                                        harness                   rings
                                       5.3 Physical linkages          Shaft/conduit, pressure   Add shielded            Minimum shaft-physical
                                                                         tube                      transducer             support
      6. Data Handling                 6.1 Data collection            Potential and indoor      Magnetic position       Optical position sensor
                                                                         Pneumatic cell            sensor
                                       6.2 Data processing/           Manual database entry     Automatic computer      Automatic computer
                                             storage                                               control                control
                                       6.3 Reporting, distribution,   Physical meters manual    GUI ⫹ modem access      DBMS ⫹ packet network




269
                                           and display
270     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


ternative from top to bottom in order to confirm that the selections, within a
system, are compatible and interoperable. If they are not, then changes have
to be made to assure harmonious intrasystem operation, that is, that the se-
lected design choices within a system will ‘‘play together.’’ If the team has
formulated more than three design choices for one or more subfunctions, it
may then be appropriate to expand the number of alternative architectures to
be considered.
   The next step in the architecting process is to formally evaluate the three
alternatives in terms of their costs and effectiveness. This step is the ‘‘anal-
ysis’’ part of the process, and it is clearly a critical one. Although the architect
has attempted to construct low-cost, high-effectiveness, and ‘‘knee-of-the-
curve’’ architectures, it is only by analyzing the three alternatives that we are
able to see what the cost-effectiveness profiles turn out to be.
   A simplified analysis procedure is illustrated in Table 9.4, following the
construction suggested previously in Table 9.2. Five specific criteria are de-
veloped, namely:

  • Criterion 1    Performance
  • Criterion 2    Human factors
  • Criterion 3    Maintainability
  • Criterion 4    Risk
  • Criterion 5    Other

Weights are developed for these criteria, and the three alternative architectures
are evaluated on a scoring system of from 1 to 10. Each score is multiplied
by the corresponding weight, and the resulting products are summed to obtain
a total score for each of the alternatives. At the same time, the costs for these
alternatives are determined. In this example, the results are:

                     Alternative                  Score          Costs
            Low-cost system                        6.8           200K
            Baseline system                        8.1           250K
            High-effectiveness system              8.4           400K

The question at this point becomes: which of the above three alternative
architectures does the architect wish to put forth as the preferred architecture?
If we treat cost as an independent variable (CAIV), we can plot the above
scores (as a measure of effectiveness) against the costs to obtain the points
shown in Figure 9.4. This graph illustrates the pattern shown in Figure 7.5.
The low-cost system is verified to have both the lowest cost ($200K) and the
lowest effectiveness. The high-effectiveness system has the highest cost
($400K), and also the highest effectiveness. The baseline system is in the
middle, showing a significant effectiveness improvement over the low-cost
      TABLE 9.4      Evaluation Framework for Architecting Illustrative System
                                                    Low Cost                         Baseline                High Effectiveness
        Evaluation
         Criteria             Weights      Score       Weight ⫻ Score       Score      Weight ⫻ Score   Score       Weight ⫻ Score
      Performance               0.3          6                 1.8               8              2.4      9                2.7
      Human factors             0.2          7                 1.4               8              1.6      9                1.8
      Maintainance              0.2          7                 1.4               9              1.8      9                1.8
      Risk                      0.2          8                 1.6               8              1.6      6                1.2
      Other                     0.1          6                 0.6               7              0.7      9                0.9
        Sums                    1.0                            6.8                              8.1                       8.4
      Costs of alternatives                           200K                            250K                         400K




271
272    SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


                                                                         High
                                                                         effectiveness
                       9
                                            Baseline



                       8




       Effectiveness
                       7
       score

                                               Low
                                               cost
                       6




                       5
                           100        200              300         400           500
                                                 Cost, thousands

                       Figure 9.4. Cost-effectiveness view of system.




system, but without a major increase in cost. Indeed, for this example, the
baseline system ‘‘looks like’’ the knee-of-the-curve solution. The graph of
Figure 9.4 is the third element in the architecting process, since it provides
an important ‘‘view’’ of the cost-effectiveness results of the first two steps
(i.e., synthesis and analysis). The alternative that the architect puts forth as
the preferred architecture now depends upon what the customer is ultimately
looking for as well as the constraints under which he may be operating.
Indeed, if you, the reader, imagine that you are the customer, you will be able
to construct a case for any of the three as preferred, based upon the scenario
that you envision (see Question/Exercise number 9.8).
    The example described here is a ‘‘boiled down’’ version of the one in the
Appendix, with some modifications in the interest of simplifying the presen-
tation. By referring to the Appendix, one will see that there are actually a set
of subcriteria for each of the five major criteria, as listed below in Table 9.5.
Other variations on these themes, as for example in the scoring system, may
be employed by the architecting team to explore sensitivities, as suggested
earlier. Also, as the team is able to spend the time required for a true and
objective set of measurements of effectiveness, confidence in the architectural
                              9.5   ESSENTIAL STEPS OF SYSTEM ARCHITECTING   273

             TABLE 9.5 Top-Level and Subordinate
             Evaluation Criteria for Anemometry System [9.10]
             • Evaluation Criterion 1—Performance
               1.1 Vaning function / stability
               1.2 Average power consumption
               1.3 Impact resistance / robustness
               1.4 Speed of data processing
               1.5 Data availability
               1.6 System availability
               1.7 System reliability
               1.8 Useful life
             • Evaluation Criterion 2—Human Factors
               2.1 Ease of use
               2.2 Operator safety
               2.3 Bystander safety
             • Evaluation Criterion 3—Maintainability
               3.1 Frequency of scheduled maintenance
               3.2 Ease of maintenance
               3.3 Complexity of assembly
             • Evaluation Criterion 4—Risk
               4.1 Cost risk
               4.2 Schedule risk
               4.3 Performance risk
               4.4 Technological risk
             • Evaluation Criterion 5—Other
               5.1 Manufacturability
               5.2 Market potential / demand
               5.3 Appearance / aesthetic quality
               5.4 Expandability / upgradability




solution will grow, in most cases. If not, a change in the alternatives may be
called for.
   Having explored in this chapter a variety of ways to look at the matter of
architecting a system, we are now in a position to formulate the following
recommended short-form definitions of an architecture, a preferred architec-
ture, as well as architecting:

Architecture. An organized top-down selection and description of design
  choices for all the important system functions and subfunctions, placed in
  a context to assure interoperability and the satisfaction of system
  requirements
Preferred Architecture. A choice among several architectures that is bal-
  anced, cost-effective, and most congruent with the stated requirements and
274     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


  what the customer is seeking, as tempered by program and/or system
  constraints
Architecting. A process with the following simplified steps: (1) functional
  decomposition of the system, (2) construction of design choices for all
  important functions and subfunctions (synthesis), (3) evalution of the re-
  sultant interoperable system alternatives (analysis), and (4) display of the
  results so as to facilitate the selection of a preferred, cost-effective archi-
  tecture from among the constructed alternatives.



9.6   THE 95% SOLUTION

All alternative architectures referred to before are designed to satisfy all stated
system requirements. That is, the low-cost, high-performance, and baseline
architectures are developed such that all requirements are met. A ‘‘95% so-
lution’’ is a term, coined by this author, to refer to a system architecture that,
instead of satisfying all of the system requirements, is designed to meet only
95% of the requirements. The number 95, in this context, is more heuristic
than it is precise. The notion flows from Rechtin’s observation [9.1] that
extreme requirements work against the balance necessary in architecting sys-
tems, ‘‘creating unexpected misfits and deficient performance.’’ Indeed, Re-
chtin makes his point very strongly: ‘‘[E]xtreme requirements should remain
under challenge throughout system design, implementation and operation.’’
   On this basis, as well as trade-off statements made in various standards,
another conceptual alternative architecture to the low-cost, high-performance,
and baseline alternatives has been added, namely, the 95% solution, which
satisfies 95% of the stated requirements. To achieve satisfaction of the addi-
tional 5%, extreme prices may have to be paid in terms of schedule and cost.
Put another way, if the system developer can build a system that satisfies 95%
of the requirements, and at the same time reduce both schedules and costs
by significant amounts, then it is an obligation of the developer to make that
alternative known to the customer. In such a situation, the 95% alternative
would be added to the evaluation framework shown in Table 9.2 and that
alternative would be compared to the other three alternatives in terms of the
set of evaluation criteria. Special notations would have to be added to make
it clear as to the precise requirements that have not been met as well as the
level of performance that is achieved by the 95% solution in relation to these
requirements. With the 95% solution, the developer is basically saying to the
customer: If I had the freedom to back off from the stated requirements, here
is the system architecture that I would recommend that would represent the
best balance among requirements, performance, cost, and schedule. Although
this approach flies in the face of many current system procurement practices,
it also implicitly suggests that perhaps a reformation of some of these prac-
tices is in order.
                                     9.7   TRADE-OFFS AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSES     275

9.7     TRADE-OFFS AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSES

Trade-off and sensitivity analyses are carried out to:

  • Select approaches at the functional level in the architecting process
  • Select specific design choices at the subsystem level
  • Determine how sensitive the overall system selection is to changes in the
      weights and ratings given to the various architecural alternatives


9.7.1    Military Standard 499B Perspective
Military Standard 499B [9.13] cites the following rationale for what are called
trade studies:

  Trade Studies (Para. 4.6.1). Desirable and practical trade-offs among stated user
  requirements, design, program schedule, functional and performance require-
  ments, and life cycle costs shall be identified and executed. Trade-off studies
  shall be defined, conducted and documented at the various levels of functional
  or physical detail to support requirements, functional decomposition / allocation,
  and design alternative decisions or, as specifically designated, to support the
  decision needs of the systems engineering process. The level of detail of a study
  shall be commensurate with cost, schedule, performance, and risk impacts.

We note that trade-offs involving user requirements and other system char-
acteristics are definitively called for. From this perspective, requirements are
not necessarily assumed to be fixed and inviolate.
   In the important area of synthesis, the standard identifies the following
areas as important in terms of trade studies:

  • Establish system/configuration item (CI) configuration(s).
  • Assist in selecting system concepts and designs.
  • Support make or buy, process, rate, and location decisions.
  • Examine proposed changes.
  • Examine alternative technologies to satisfy functional/design require-
      ments, including alternatives for moderate- to high-risk technologies.
  • Evaluate environmental and cost impacts of materials and processes.
  • Support decisions for new products and process developments versus
    nondevelopmental items (NDI) or commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS)
    products and processes.
  • Evaluate alternative physical architectures to select preferred products
    and processes.
  • Support materials selection.
276     SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


  • Select standard components, techniques, services, and facilities that re-
      duce system life-cycle cost and meet system effectiveness requirements
      (force structure and infrastructure impacts that emphasize supportabil-
      ity, producibility, training, deployment, and interoperability must be
      considered).

9.7.2   A Radar Detection Trade-Off Example
To illustrate the matter of trade-off analysis from a technical point of view,
we briefly discuss here an example of detection of a radar pulse signal. We
assume a simple threshold detection scheme whereby a target is declared to
be present when, at the sampling time, the threshold (T) is exceeded. If the
threshold is not exceeded, the decision is that no target was present.
   Under the general assumption of a pulsed system with additive independent
Gaussian noise:

  a. When a target is present, the threshold detector ‘‘sees’’ a signal-plus-
     noise Gaussian distribution with a mean value of voltage equal to V and
     a noise (power) variance equal to N.
  b. When a target is not present, the threshold detector ‘‘sees’’ a noise
     Gaussian distribution with a mean value of zero and a noise (power)
     variance equal to N.

In situation (a), we are interested in the probability of detection, P(d), that
is, the probability that we will correctly detect a target when it is present. In
(b), we wish to compute the false alarm probability, P( fa), that is, the prob-
ability that when no target is present, we may incorrectly conclude that there
is a target. This can occur when, at the time of sampling, the noise alone is
sufficiently large so as to exceed the set threshold.
    Trade-offs between detection and false-alarm probabilities can occur when
the threshold value (T), the pulse amplitude (V), and the noise power (N) are
varied. The following three cases further explain this idea.

  Case One: Increase Threshold; Pulse Amplitude and Noise Power
  Remain the Same
  As we increase the detection threshold, less of the signal-plus-noise dis-
  tribution remains to the right of the threshold value. Therefore, the detec-
  tion probability decreases. This is an undesirable effect. However, less of
  the noise-alone distribution is to the right of the threshold, so the false-
  alarm probability also diminishes. This is a desirable consequence. There-
  fore, by the increase in threshold, we are ‘‘trading’’ to obtain better
  false-alarm performance [a lower P(fa)], but at the expense of detection
  performance [a lower P(d)]. A natural question is: Is there a threshold
  selection that allows us to meet both the detection and false-alarm proba-
                                  9.7   TRADE-OFFS AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSES   277

  bility requirements? By performing this trade-off analysis, that is, stepping
  the threshold through increasing and decreasing values, we determine the
  answer to this question.

  Case Two: Increase Pulse Amplitude; Threshold and Noise Power
  Remain the Same
  In general, the pulse amplitude is increased by increasing the power trans-
  mitted by the radar. This normally increases the cost of the radar system.
  The signal-to-noise ratio increases and the signal-plus-noise distribution
  has a larger mean value, but the same noise variance (N). In this case, the
  detection probability increases for a target at the same range. Another way
  to look at this case is to say that for the same P(d) as in Case One, we
  can see a target at a longer range. Pumping more power out of the trans-
  mitter results in an improved detection capability. But if the noise power
  remains the same, so will the false-alarm probability.

  Case Three: Decrease Noise; Pulse Amplitude and Detector
  Threshold Remain the Same
  Decreasing the noise may be achieved by designing a lower-noise front-
  end receiver. This increases cost and may also increase development time
  if we are pushing the state of the art. Less noise shows up as a decrease
  in the variance (N) of both the signal-plus-noise and the noise-alone dis-
  tributions. This means that the detection probability increases and the false-
  alarm probability decreases! These are both desirable consequences.
  However, we must pay the price of the low-noise receiver and there are
  some natural limits as to how far the noise can be reduced.

   We may also explore trade-offs that involve changing two of the preceding
three key parameters at the same time. Such an exploration will reveal ad-
ditional variations in the detection and false-alarm probabilities. In addition,
other implementations and models may be considered (such as the integration
of pulses), but the same basic notions of trade-offs remain. One is trying to
find a balanced solution that satisfies user requirements. A more quantitative
treatment of this particular example can be found in a variety of texts [9.9].


9.7.3   Sensitivity to Criteria Weights
The evaluation framework shown in Table 9.2 reveals that the results are
obviously sensitive to:

  a. The selection of criteria
  b. The weighting of these criteria
  c. The ratings of each system
278    SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


As an example of the criteria-weight sensitivity, let us assume that the criteria
weights are changed as follows:

                                           Weight Change
           Criteria              From                       To
              1                   0.08               0.1
              2                   0.1                0.1 (no change)
              3                   0.13               0.1
              4                   0.09               0.1
              5                   0.12               0.1
              6                   0.07               0.1
              7                   0.11               0.2
              8                   0.1                0.2

With the same set of ratings, the total scores for each of the three alternatives
now become

  • Alternative A: 7.0
  • Alternative B: 6.8
  • Alternative C: 6.7

Thus, the modified criteria weights completely reverse the order of preference.
This may have occurred, for example, if criteria 7 and 8 were related to cost
and together comprise 40% of the total weight. If cost were considered that
important, the preferred alternative would shift from C to A. This example
leads to a simple but very important conclusion: No final system selection
should be made without extensive sensitivity analyses!


9.8   MODELING AND SIMULATION

Most of the time, modeling and simulation techniques are employed in order
to calculate technical performance measures (TPMs) and to carry out trade-
off studies between key measures and system parameters. The radar situation
involving the detection of pulses in the presence of noise, discussed in Section
9.7.2, serves as a good example of how a model may be used to determine
system performance.
   The model of the detection process may be expanded to include the normal
processing of pulses from the point at which they leave the transmitter to
their reception at the threshold detector. Such a model may be constructed as
a Parameter Dependency Diagram (PDD), a process developed by this author
to model and analyze complex systems [9.9]. We start a PDD by identifying
the key output parameters that we wish to compute. In the radar situation,
these are the probability of detection, P(d), and the false-alarm probability,
                                                 9.8    MODELING AND SIMULATION      279

P(fa), as cited earlier. For each of these outputs, we then ask the question:
What do these parameters depend on? As shown in Figure 9.5, P(d) depends
on three parameters: noise power (N), signal voltage (V), and detection thresh-
old (T). In a similar vein, P(fa) depends on N and T, but not V. All of these
dependent parameters are also known as technical performance parameters
(TPPs). If we continue to work backwards from these TPPs (N, V, and T),
we can determine their dependent parameters until we come to the input
signal, S(in), and the parameters on which it depends. This latter dependency
is also known as the radar range equation, with the following TPPs:

  • Power transmitted, P(t)
  • Gain of receiving antenna, G(r)
  • Gain of transmitting antenna, G(t)
  • Wavelength, ␭
  • Target cross section strength, ␴
  • Receiver processing power gain, G
  • Receiver power processing losses, L
  • Range to target, R

The blocks in the PDD implicitly represent relationships or equations that
relate the input parameters to the output parameters. If we are operating in
the frequency domain, the boxes can be thought of as the transfer functions
relating inputs to outputs. In all cases, the PDD is constructed initially without
knowing the precise relationship between inputs and outputs. The structure
of the PDD, however, makes it very clear as to what the key parameters are
and the known or unknown relationships among these parameters. If a rela-
tionship is currently unknown, then a modeling effort is required to determine


                                                    V
                             Other                  N
                                                                             P(d)
                             TPPs                   T
       P(t)
                             S(in)
       G(r)
       G(t)                                                    N
       λ
                                                           T                 P(fa)
       σ
       G
       L
       R

              Figure 9.5. Illustrative parameter dependency diagram (PDD).
280      SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


the necessary equations. The PDD is therefore a ‘‘roadmap’’ that explicitly
shows the TPMs, the TPPs, and the known or unknown relationships between
them. It is a performance ‘‘model’’ that represents how the key measures and
parameters interrelate. Given the PDD and the necessary equations, the sys-
tems engineer is now in a position to carry out extensive trade-off studies and
sensitivity analyses.
   The preceding Parameter Dependency Diagramming (PDD) procedure is
but one of many modeling techniques. If a model is particularly complex, the
system engineer may wish to move to simulation, either by building a sim-
ulator to apply to the situation at hand or by using an existing, commercially
available, simulation package. If workable in terms of the problem, the latter
is highly recommended because there are numerous software packages avail-
able, at reasonable cost, to the systems engineering team. A list of such
packages is provided in Exhibit 9.5 [9.14, 9.15]. For the reader who is inter-
ested in the perspectives of one of the industry leaders in modeling and sim-
ulation, it is recommended that the words of A. Pritsker be taken very
seriously [9.17].

  Exhibit 9.5: Selected Modeling and Simulation Software [9.14, 9.15]
  Name of Software Package                     Builder/Publisher of Software
      Achilles                              In-Motion Technology
      ADAS                                  Cadre Technologies Inc.
      ALSS II                               Productivity System
      AutoMod                               AutoSimulations Inc.
      BATCHES                               Batch Process Technologies Inc.
      Best-Network                          Best Consultants
      CADmotion                             SimSoft Inc.
      Cinema Animation System               Systems Modeling Corp.
      COMNET II.5                           CACI Products Company
      DISC⫹⫹                                Texas Tech University; Industrial En-
                                               gineering Department
      ESL                                   ISIM Simulation
      Extend                                Imagine That Inc.
      FACTOR                                Pritsker Corporation
      FMS⫹⫹                                 Texas Tech University; Industrial En-
                                               gineering Department
      G2                                    Gensym Corp.
      GEMS-II                               Lodestone II Inc.
      General Simulation Sys.               Prediction Systems Inc.
      GENETIK                               Insight International Ltd.
      GPSS/H                                Wolverine Software Corp.
      GPSS/PC                               Minuteman Software
      HOCUS                                 P-E International PLC
      INMOD 1.8                             Technical University—Sofia, Bulgaria
                                             9.8   MODELING AND SIMULATION   281

  Name of Software Package                  Builder/Publisher of Software
   INSTRATA                             Insight International Ltd.
   InterSIM                             OLIM Holding Company
   ISEE-SIMNON                          Engineering Software Concepts Inc.
   ISI-PC                               Extech Ltd.
   LANNET II.5                          CACI Product Company
   MAST Simulation Environ              CMS Research Inc.
   Micro Saint & Animation              Micro Analysis/Design Simulation
                                           S/W
   micro-GPSS                           Stockholm School of Economics
   MODSIM II                            CACI Product Company
   MOGUL                                High Performance Software Inc.
   MOR/DS                               Holden-Day Publishing Company
   NETWORK II.5                         CACI Products Company
   Packaging Lines Sim.Sys              Pritsker Corporation
   Pascal Sim                           University of Southhampton, UK
   PASION                               S. Raczynski, Mexico
   PC Simula                            Simula a.s., Norway
   PCModel                              SimSoft
   PERCNET                              Mitchell & Gauthier Associates
   ProModel/PC                          Production Modeling Corp.
                                           International
   Proof Animation                      Wolverine Software Inc.
   Q⫹                                   AT&T Bell Laboratories
   QASE RT                              Advanced System Technologies Inc.
   SES/workbench                        Scientific and Engineering Software.
                                           Inc.
   SIGMA                                The Scientific Press Inc.
   SIMAN                                Systems Modeling Corp.
   SIMFACTORY II.5                      CACI Products Company
   SIMNET II                            SimTec Inc.
   SIMNON                               SSPA Systems, Sweden
   SIMNON                               Engineering Software Concepts Inc.
   SIMSCRIPT II.5                       CACI Products Company
   SIMSTARTER                           Network Dynamics Inc.
   SLAM/TESS                            Pritsker Corporation
   SLAMSYSTEM                           Pritsker Corporation
   Teamwork/SIM                         Cadre Technologies Inc.
   XCELL⫹                               Pritsker Corporation

    Modeling and simulation is a specialized and rather complex subject, but
it is essential that the systems engineering team master a variety of tools and
techniques to be in a position to evaluate system performance on a quantitative
basis. Until the system, or portions thereof, is actually built, there is really
282    SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING: PRINCIPLES


no other choice but to depend on modeling and simulation for performance
assessments. The systems engineering team that faces this issue squarely will
be competitive in the world of building large-scale systems. Those who do
not are likely to be behind the power curve.


9.9   SUMMARY

This chapter focused on the key systems engineering element of systems
architecting. As suggested, this element is a cornerstone of the systems en-
gineering process. Strong emphasis has been placed on the generation and
evaluation of alternatives, and on avoiding the tendency to leap to judgment
with respect to a preferred system architecture. The roles of evaluation cri-
teria, an evaluation framework, technical performance measurement, trade-off
and sensitivity analyses, and modeling and simulation were also discussed.
An attempt has been made to focus on principles as well as on an illustrative
demonstration of how these principles are converted into practice. The Ap-
pendix shows several additional examples of how these principles may be
applied to a variety of systems architecting situations and problems.


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

9.1 Contrast and discuss how an architect designs a house or building with
    the systems architecting approach of this chapter.
9.2 Contrast and discuss the process of architecting with that of carrying
    out all of the thirty elements of systems engineering.
9.3 Architect a personal computer system.
9.4 Use the architecting approach defined here to select a cost-effective
    a. automobile
    b. project management software system
    c. modeling and simulation software system
9.5 Write a three-page review of the essentials of E. Rechtin’s book (see
    the References).
9.6 Cite a dozen evaluation criteria for
    a. an automobile
    b. a house
    c. a system of your choice
9.7 Architect and engineering (A & E) firms architect buildings of various
    types and then engineer them. In what ways does that relate to the
    building of systems, as described in this as well as earlier chapters?
                                                                 REFERENCES      283

9.8 The illustrative architecture in this chapter (Section 9.5.9) suggests that
    any of the three alternatives might be preferred, depending upon the
    scenario you envision. Define three scenarios that would likely lead to
    each of the three alternatives as the preferred architecture.


REFERENCES

9.1 Rechtin, E. (1991). Systems Architecting. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
9.2 The NASA Mission Design Process (1992). Washington, DC: National Aeronau-
     tics and Space Administration, NASA Engineering Management Council.
9.3 Phase C / D Requirements Specification for the Earth Observing System Data and
     Information System (EOSDIS) (1990). Greenbelt, MD: Goddard Space Flight
     Center.
9.4 Earth Observing System (EOS) Data and Operations System (EDOS) Statement
     of Work (1992). Greenbelt, MD: Goddard Space Flight Center.
9.5 Payload Data Services System (PDSS) Operations Concept Document and De-
     velopment Specification (1992). National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
     Marshall Space Flight Center.
9.6 C4ISR Architecture Framework, version 2.0 (1997). Washington, DC: Architec-
     tures Working Group, U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), December 18.
9.7 Standard for Systems Engineering, IEEE P1220 (1994). Piscataway, NJ: Institute
     of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Standards Department.
9.8 Draft Recommended Practice for Architectural Description, IEEE P1471 / D5.2,
     (1999). New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE),
     December.
9.9 Eisner, H. (1988). Computer-Aided Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
     Prentice-Hall.
9.10 The architecting of this particular system was carried out by Richard C. Ander-
     son, a student at The George Washington University, using the procedure defined
     by this author. The original description of and architecture for this system is
     provided in Section A.5 of the Appendix.
9.11 Henley, E., and H. Kumamoto (1981). Reliability Engineering and Risk Assess-
     ment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
9.12 Charette, R. (1989). Software Engineering Risk Analysis and Management. New
     York: Multiscience Press.
9.13 Systems Engineering, Military Standard 499B (Draft) (1991). Washington, DC:
     U.S. Department of Defense.
9.14 Swain, J. (1991). ‘‘World of Choices: Simulation Software Survey,’’ OR / MS To-
     day (October): 81–102.
9.15 Swain, J. (1993). ‘‘Flexible Tools for Modeling,’’ OR / MS Today (December):
     62–78.
9.16 Swain, J. (2001). ‘‘Power Tools for Visualization and Decision-Making,’’ OR /
     MS Today (February): 52–63.
9.17 Pritsker, A. (1990). Papers, Experiences, Perspectives. West Lafayette, IN: Sys-
     tems Publishing.
                10
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING




10.1   INTRODUCTION

A headline in the business section of the Washington Post [10.1] declared
‘‘Fidelity Says It Reported Wrong Prices.’’ The Fidelity was Fidelity Invest-
ments and it apparently provided out-of-date information on the value of its
mutual funds. The reason? It was ‘‘because of a computer software glitch,
Fidelity reported.’’ The impact of this glitch was not divulged, but it very
likely had many investors rather unhappy.
   This type of problem—some variety of computer software glitch—is ex-
perienced every day across the country. Our systems contain increasing
amounts of software and we have not yet been able to migrate software de-
velopment from mostly art to mostly engineering or science. There are many
reasons for this problem, ranging from the fast-moving pace of the state of
the art in software creation to lack of corporate infrastructures that adequately
support the processes and products inherent in software development. For
these reasons, we treat software engineering, defined herein as a subset of
systems engineering, in a special and separate chapter. This chapter provides
only an overview of software engineering, which itself is an appropriate sub-
ject for an entire book [10.2, 10.3, 10.4]. This overview attempts to capture
selected highlights of software engineering in terms of dominant issues that
are faced by industry practitioners.
   It is also recognized that software development and engineering, in the
main, developed without an explicit connection to the methods and disciplines
of systems engineering. Thus, we are at least partially concerned with the
relationship between systems and software engineering. This matter is also
recognized in a software standard (Mil-Std-498) discussed in the next section.

                                                                             285
286      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


10.2     STANDARDS

Standards play an important part in both systems and software engineering.
We explored Military Standard 499B in relation to systems engineering in
previous chapters. With respect to software engineering, we briefly examine
the following four standards: (1) Mil-Std-498; (2) DOD-Std-2168; (3) ISO
Standards; and (4) IEEE Standards.


10.2.1    Mil-Std-498
This is a landmark standard established by the U.S. Department of Defense
(DoD) [10.5], building on an earlier DoD Standard known as Mil-Std-2167A
[10.6], which had a major influence on how companies developed software
for the DoD as well as for other parts of the government, that is, government
civil agencies.
   The table of contents for the general requirements for software develop-
ment is shown in Exhibit 10.1. This exhibit provides an overview of the scope
of this standard. Under item 4.1, the detailed software development process
is delineated, as shown in Exhibit 10.2.

  Exhibit 10.1: General Requirements of DoD Software Standard
  4.1 Software development process
  4.2 General requirements for software development
      4.2.1 Software development methods
      4.2.2 Standards for software products
      4.2.3 Reusable software products
            • 4.2.3.1 Incorporating reusable software products
            • 4.2.3.2 Developing reusable software products
      4.2.4 Handling of critical requirements
            • 4.2.4.1 Safety assurance
            • 4.2.4.2 Security assurance
            • 4.2.4.3 Privacy assurance
            • 4.2.4.4 Assurance of other critical requirements
      4.2.5 Computer hardware resource utilization
      4.2.6 Recording rationale
      4.2.7 Access for acquirer review

  Exhibit 10.2: The Software Development Process
  a. Project planning and oversight
  b. Establishing a software development environment
  c. System requirements analysis
                                                      10.2   STANDARDS   287

  d. System design
  e. Software requirements analysis
  f. Software design
  g. Software implementation and unit testing
  h. Unit integration and testing
   i. Computer Software Configuration Item (CSCI) qualification testing
   j. CSCI/Hardware Configuration Item (HWCI) integration and testing
  k. System qualification testing
   l. Preparing for software use
  m. Preparing for software transition
  n. Integral processes:
      (1) Software configuration management
      (2) Software product evaluation
      (3) Software quality assurance
      (4) Corrective action
      (5) Joint technical and management reviews
      (6) Other activities

From these exhibits, we see the initial focus on the ‘‘system,’’ which then
moves to the specific software item considerations. The more limited view of
the software development process in DoD-Std-2167A is also expanded. Fi-
nally, the last item listed (Exhibit 10.2, Other activities) includes:

  • Risk management
  • Software management indicators
  • Security and privacy
  • Subcontractor management
  • Interface with software independent verification and validation (IV&V)
    agents
  • Coordination with associate developers
  • Improvement of project processes

  In this standard, software is decomposed into

  • Computer software configuration items (CSCIs)
  • Computer software components (CSCs)
  • Computer software units (CSUs)

which, to a large extent, parallels the decomposition notions previously de-
scribed in systems engineering. That is, the systems engineer decomposes the
system into functions and subfunctions. The view presented in this standard
288      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


is that the systems (software) engineer breaks down the system into segments.
These segments are then broken down into hardware and software configu-
ration items. Once that breakdown is accomplished, the CSCIs are decom-
posed into CSCs and the CSCs into CSUs. This provides a challenge for the
systems engineer, namely, to bring system functional decomposition in con-
formance with the preceding software breakdown structure. A way to meet
that challenge is to associate one or more layers of functional decomposition
with the ‘‘segment’’ element. Once the lowest level of functional decompo-
sition is attained, then the HWCI and CSCI breakout is entirely appropriate.
This issue, at times, represents a disconnect between how systems engineers,
in distinction to software engineers, look at and analyze a system that is
composed of both hardware and software.
    This standard was intended to supercede DoD-Std-2167A by making cer-
tain improvements. Particular emphasis was placed on resolving issues in
2167A with respect to the following:

  1. Improving compatibility with incremental and evolutionary develop-
     ment methods
  2. Improving compatibility with nonhierarchical design methods, that is,
     object-oriented methods
  3. Improving compatibility with computer-aided software engineering
     (CASE) tools
  4. Providing alternatives to, and more flexibility in, the preparation of
     documentation
  5. Providing clearer requirements for incorporating reusable software
  6. Including the use of software management indicators
  7. Putting more emphasis on software supportability
  8. Improving links to systems engineering

   Each of these suggests one or more key issues with respect to the overall
subject of software development. As such, they are discussed further either
later in this chapter or in Chapter 12, which deals with trends in software
engineering. It should be noted, however, that this standard makes the explicit
statement that it ‘‘is not intended to specify or discourage the use of any
particular software development method.’’ In addition, and in conjunction with
other standards, it ‘‘provides the means for establishing, evaluating, and main-
taining quality in software development products.’’


10.2.2    DoD-Std-2168
This standard [10.7], dealing with software quality evaluation, represented a
companion standard to 2167A. Its basic function was to establish require-
                                                       10.2   STANDARDS   289

ments for evaluating the quality of software and associated documentation
and activities for mission-critical computer systems. It also may be applied
to the independent verification and validation (IV&V) of software.
   The essence of this standard was to provide a framework for the preceding
evaluation. Evaluation matrices are defined for each of the products of the
eight steps identified as part of the software development process. The basic
evaluation criteria for this process are:

   1. Adherence to required format and documentation standards
   2. Compliance with contractual requirements
   3. Internal consistency
   4. Understandability
   5. Technical adequacy
   6. Appropriate degree of completeness
   7. Traceability to indicated documents
   8. Consistency with indicated documents
   9. Feasibility
  10. Appropriate requirements analysis, design, coding techniques used to
      prepare item
  11. Appropriate level of detail
  12. Appropriate allocation of sizing and timing resources
  13. Adequate test coverage of requirements
  14. Adequacy of planned tools, facilities, procedures, methods, and
      resources
  15. Appropriate content for intended audience

The standard also defines software quality factors that may be included as
requirements in the software requirements specification, namely:

  • Correctness
  • Efficiency
  • Flexibility
  • Integrity
  • Interoperability
  • Maintainability
  • Portability
  • Reliability
  • Reusability
  • Testability
  • Usability
290      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


  We also note that this standard called for an evaluation of risk management,
expressed in the following manner:

  The contractor shall evaluate the procedures employed and the results achieved
  by risk management throughout the software development cycle. This evaluation
  shall verify that risk factors are identified and assessed, resources are assigned
  to reducing risk factors, alternatives for reducing risk are identified and analyzed,
  and sound alternatives are selected, inplemented and evaluated.

The subject of risk management arises explicitly in the context of a devel-
opment process known as the Spiral Model, cited again later in this chapter.
The matter of software quality is also closely related to reliability, which is
also is discussed later in this chapter.

10.2.3    ISO Standards
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has been promul-
gating standards [10.8] that are becoming more widely recognized and ac-
cepted. ISO standards referred to in Mil-Std-498, discussed before, are

  ISO/IEC 12207:         Software Life Cycle Processes
  ISO/IEC 9126:          Quality Characteristics and Guidelines for Their Use
  ISO 9001:              Quality System—Model for Quality Assurance in
                           Design/Development, Production, Installation and
                           Servicing
  ISO 9000-3:            Guidelines for the Application of ISO 9001 to the
                           Development, Supply and Maintenance of Software

As implied by their titles, ISO 12207 and ISO 9000-3 apply directly to soft-
ware development.
   ISO 12207 is focused on three types of life-cycle processes, namely, pri-
mary, supporting, and organizational. Primary processes deal with such areas
as acquisition, supply, development, operation, and maintenance. Supporting
processes are concerned with documentation, configuration management,
quality assurance, verification and validation, reviews, audits, and problem
resolution. Organizational processes include management, infrastructure, im-
provement, and training.
   ISO 9000-3 (Part 3 of ISO 9000) particularizes ISO 9001 to matters dealing
with software. Key areas within this document are concerned with

  • Management responsibility
  • Quality systems
  • Internal quality system audits
  • Corrective action
                                                        10.2   STANDARDS   291

  • Quality system life-cycle activities
  • Quality system supporting activities

In general, the ISO standards are broader than Mil-Std-498 with respect to
software. They also revolve around the centerpiece of quality. Practitioners
who wish to do business in the international community, however, should
devote time to understand the main thrusts of the ISO standards to be
successful.


10.2.4   IEEE Standards
Mil-Std-498 also refers to IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics En-
gineers) standards that are related to software development. The IEEE stan-
dards referenced are cited in Exhibit 10.3. We note from the exhibit that there
is a standard for software project management plans. The list of IEEE stan-
dards is ever-growing and represents a touchstone for both military and com-
mercial practices with respect to software development as well as other
endeavors.

  Exhibit 10.3: Selected IEEE Standards
IEEE Std 730:          Standard for Software Quality Assurance Plans
IEEE Std 828:          Standard for Configuration Management Plans
IEEE Std 829:          Standard for Software Test Documentation
IEEE Std 830:          Recommended Practice for Software Requirements
                         Specifications
IEEE Std 982.2:        Guide: Use of Standard Measures to Produce Relia-
                         ble Software
IEEE Std 990:          Recommended Practice for Ada as a Program De-
                         sign Language
IEEE STd 1008:         Standard for Software Unit Testing
IEEE Std 1012:         Standard for Software Verification and Validation
                         Plans
IEEE Std 1016:         Recommended Practice for Software Design
                         Descriptions
IEEE Std 1016.1:       Guide for Software Design Descriptions
IEEE Std 1028:         Standard for Software Reviews and Audits
IEEE Std 1042:         Guide to Software Configuration Management
IEEE Std 1044:         Standard Classification for Software Anomalies
IEEE Std 1045:         Standard for Software Productivity Metrics
IEEE Std 1058.1:       Standard for Software Project Management Plans
IEEE Std 1059:         Guide for Verification and Validation Plans
292      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


IEEE Std 1061:           Standard for Software Quality Metrics Methodology
IEEE Std 1063:           Standard for Software User Documentation
IEEE Std 1074:           Standard for Developing Software Life Cycle
                           Processes
IEEE Std 1209:           Recommended Practice for the Evaluation and Selec-
                           tion of CASE Tools
IEEE Std 1219:           Standard for Software Maintenance
IEEE Std 1228:           Standard for Software Safety Plans
IEEE Std 1298:           Software Quality Management System

   The reader with a further interest in IEEE standards may access all software
(and other) standards through their standards catalog [10.9]. The Software
Engineering Standards Collection, a compilation of software-related stan-
dards, contained twenty-seven IEEE standards and is obtainable at a modest
price.


10.2.5    IEEE/EIA 12207 [10.10]
The 12207 standard, which may be thought of as a next step beyond Military
Standard 498, focuses on life cycle processes that support software and in-
formation systems engineering. Since it is process-oriented, it falls in line
with other endeavors (such as business process reengineering) that highlight
process in such a way as to declare that if one gets the process right, most
of the problem is solved. Although this point is debatable, one can make the
solid point that the wrong process is likely to lead to no end of difficulty.
This author’s view is that a correct process is a necessary, but still insufficient,
basis for success. The primary element that clears up the insufficiency is
appropriate subject and domain knowledge that can be applied to the problem
at hand.
   This standard emphasizes three sets of life cycle processes that address the
following concerns:

  1. Primary areas
  2. Supporting areas, and
  3. Organizational areas

Life cycle processes that are considered primary deal with:

  1. Acquisition
  2. Supply
  3. Development
  4. Operation, and
  5. Maintenance
                                    10.3   SOFTWARE MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES     293

Those processes that provide support to the primary areas include:

  1. Documentation                   5. Validation
  2. Configuration management        6. Joint review
  3. Quality assurance               7. Audit
  4. Verification                    8. Problem resolution

Finally, there are life-cycle processes with respect to significant organizational
matters in the following areas:

  1. Management
  2. Infrastructure
  3. Improvement
  4. Training

The seventeen processes represented in the primary, support, and organiza-
tional areas are described in considerable detail in this standard. At the same
time, Annexes in the standard suggest and provide guidance on how to tailor
the standard to suit a particular software project. This standard is also a good
example of the influence of process-thinking and the resultant emphasis on
both defining all relevant processes and implementing them correctly.


10.3   SOFTWARE MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

Exhibit 10.2 defined a version of the software development process in the
form of some thirteen steps. However, there has been a considerable amount
of dialogue and experimentation regarding the best sequencing of these types
of steps. The earliest management approach was the so-called ‘‘waterfall
model,’’ which defined a linear sequence such that there was basically no
revisitation or iteration of earlier steps. The basic elements of the waterfall
model were:

  1. System requirements analysis
  2. System design
  3. Software requirements analysis
  4. Preliminary design
  5. Detailed design
  6. Coding and CSU test
  7. CSC test and integration
  8. CSCI testing

Indeed, DoD-Std-2167A [10.6] reinforced this linear perspective.
294    SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


   Moving beyond the waterfall model, Boehm suggested the notion of a
‘‘spiral model’’ [10.11]. This model showed several iterations of risk analysis,
building prototypes as well as reviews and validations of requirements.
Whereas the spiral model received a lot of attention as a new way of looking
at a software process strategy, it was not formally accepted as part of a stan-
dard approach. Instead, Mil-Std-498 came on the scene with other ‘‘candidate
program strategies,’’ namely:

  • A Grand Design strategy
  • An Incremental strategy
  • An Evolutionary strategy

Standard 498 defined these strategies as follows:

  Grand Design. A ‘‘once through, do each step once’’ approach that de-
    termines user needs, defines requirements, designs the system, imple-
    ments the system, tests, fixes, and then delivers
  Incremental. Determines user needs and defines the system requirements
    and then performs the rest of the development in a sequence of builds;
    the first build incorporates part of the desired capabilities, the next build
    adds more capabilities, and so on, until the system is complete (also
    called a preplanned product improvement strategy).
  Evolutionary. Develops a system in builds, but acknowledges that the user
    needs are not fully understood and all requirements cannot be com-
    pletely defined up front; thus, user needs and requirements are refined
    in each successive build

   The features of these three strategies may be articulated, in part, as follows
[10.5]:

                                               Program Strategy

                               Grand Design       Incremental      Evolutionary
Defines all requirements             Yes               Yes              No
  first?
Has multiple development             No                Yes              Yes
  cycles?
Fields interim software?             No              Maybe              Yes

The preferred approaches are the incremental and the evolutionary, depending
on the circumstances surrounding the software project itself. A risk-
opportunity analysis, however, is also suggested to arrive at a selection for
any one particular project. An example of such a risk-opportunity evaluation
is outlined in Table 10.1 [10.5].
      TABLE 10.1     Sample Risk Analysis for Determining the Appropriate Program Strategy
                      Grand Design                                      Incremental                                       Evolutionary
                  Risk Item                    Risk                Risk Item                    Risk                 Risk Item                   Risk
         (Reasons against this strategy)       Level      (Reasons against this strategy)       Level       (Reasons against this strategy)      Level
      Requirements are not well understood      H      Requirements are not well understood      H
      System too large to do all at once        M      User prefers all capabilities at first    M      User prefers all capabilities at first    M
                                                         delivery                                         delivery
      Rapid changes in mission technology       H      Rapid changes in mission technology       H
        anticipated—may change the                       are expected—may change the
        requirements                                     requirements
      Limited staff or budget available now     M
               Opportunity Item                Opp. Opportunity Item                            Opp.             Opportunity Item                Opp.
          (Reasons to use this strategy)       Level (Reasons to use this strategy)             Level       (Reasons to use this strategy)       Level
      User prefers all capabilities at first    M      Early capability is needed                H      Early capability is needed                H
        delivery
      User prefers to phase out old system      L      System breaks naturally into              M      System breaks naturally into              M
        all at once                                      increments                                       increments
                                                       Funding / staffing will be incremental    H      Funding / staffing will be incremental    H
                                                                                                        User feedback and monitoring of           H
                                                                                                          technology changes are needed to
                                                                                                          understand full requirements
                                                                                                        Decision: Use this strategy




295
296    SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


   Finally, it is important at this juncture to mention another development
approach, known as ‘‘rapid prototyping.’’ This approach, as the title suggests,
involves the very quick building of at least one prototype in order to:

  • Develop a better understanding of the key design elements
  • Identify critical problems as early as possible
  • Have a system mock-up to show to the customer
  • Obtain explicit feedback from the customer

Rapid prototyping is highly recommended and can be utilized in conjunction
with either the incremental or the evolutionary strategies described before.
Project constraints may preclude its use but, whenever possible, it should be
suggested as a viable approach to the customer. Under certain types of soft-
ware system procurements within the general category of systems integration,
a live test demonstration (LTD) is often a requirement prior to the award of
a contract. An LTD is basically a form of rapid prototyping.


10.4   CAPABILITY MATURITY

One of the more interesting developments in software engineering has been
that of the Capability Maturity Model (CMM). The CMM was formulated by
the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie Mellon University, with
the assistance of subcontractors. Work on the CMM was sponsored by the
DoD and has had an enormous impact on the thinking, as well as the behavior,
of a large number of industrial companies. It has also found its way into the
programs of civil government agencies, for example, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA).
   Notions of the software CMM are generally attributed to Watts Humphrey
[10.12] and his colleagues [10.13] at the SEI. The structure of the CMM is
based on a five-level characterization of software maturity, namely:

  1. An initial level
  2. A repeatable level
  3. A defined level
  4. A managed level
  5. An optimizing level

  Initial Level. At this level, software development processes are mostly ad
     hoc, and therefore can be chaotic at times. Individual as well as group
     processes are generally not defined or well organized, and individual
     efforts and capabilities have a strong influence on the success, or lack
     of it, on a software development project.
                                                 10.4   CAPABILITY MATURITY   297

  Repeatable Level. Some processes are established at this level, mostly
    dealing with the tracking of schedule, cost, and software functionality.
    Processes established at the initial level can be repeated to the extent
    that they led to success. A repeatable level can be achieved by adopting
    similar earlier applications, but generally not with new applications.
  Defined Level. At the defined level, the software processes for the team
    effort are documented, standardized, and integrated for the organization.
    That is, all projects within an organization follow standard software
    processes that are designed to be effective in the various domains of
    software engineering.
  Managed Level. A key element of this level is measuring the software
    process as well as the results (products) of that process. Through such
    measurement, it is then possible to determine process and product effi-
    cacy and exercise control through changes when both are not yielding
    appropriate results.
  Optimizing Level. At the optimizing level, continuous process improve-
    ment is achieved through a well-developed system of measurement,
    feedback, and change. New ideas and technologies for improvement are
    routinely explored with the objective of optimizing all software devel-
    opment processes and products.

   Given these basic concepts, the next obvious question is: How is one to
determine, or measure, the capability maturity level of an organization? Con-
siderable attention has been focused on this matter, bringing the CMM from
a conceptual framework to a real-world change mechanism and agent. Imple-
mentation is structured into two parts, namely:

  1. A Software Process Assessment (SPA)
  2. A Software Capability Evaluation (SCE)

For the SPA, the focus is an individual organization and how it can (a) identify
the status of its software process, and (b) establish priorities with respect to
improving that process. Thus, the SPA is an internal mechanism to help an
organization determine where it is in terms of capability maturity and point
the direction toward enhancing that level of maturity. The SCE, on the other
hand, is used by agencies that are acquiring software systems to determine
the CMM levels of various organizations. It is therefore an external view of
an organization’s capability for the main purpose of establishing which or-
ganizations are qualified to produce high-quality software and systems.
   For both SPA and the SCE, key process areas (KPAs) are defined and
profiled, and questionnaires are used as assessment and evaluation devices.
Examples of key process areas for CMM levels 2 through 5 are shown in
Exhibit 10.4.
298    SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


 Exhibit 10.4: Examples of Key Process Areas (KPAs)
CMM Level 2
 • Requirements management
 • Software project planning
 • Software project tracking and oversight
 • Software subcontract management
 • Software quality assurance
 • Software configuration management
CMM Level 3
 • Organizational process focus
 • Organizational process definition
 • Training program
 • Integrated sofware management
 • Software product engineering
 • Intergroup coordination
 • Peer reviews
CMM Level 4
 • Process measurement and analysis
 • Quality management
CMM Level 5
 • Defect prevention
 • Technology innovation
 • Process change management

Each key process area is rated as not satisfied (NS), partially satisfied (PS),
or fully satisfied (FS).
   With respect to the use of questionnaires as part of the CMM, there are
some lessons to be learned. Often, project systems and software engineers
tend to disregard processes that they consider to be less than fully rigorous
and measurable. However, as the CMM construct demonstrates, it is indeed
possible, through questionnaires, to obtain some type of measurement that
can be used to make both qualitative and quantitative statements about or-
ganizations and the processes that they employ. This method of ‘‘measuring
the unmeasurable,’’ although perhaps not fully rigorous or even repeatable,
can be put into place and can also have enormous real-world impacts. The
project, systems, and software engineering managers must understand the role
of such procedures and use them wherever and whenever they appear to be
applicable. An unyielding stance that fails to acknowledge the utility of
checklists and questionnaires normally leads to management difficulties and
problems. Organizations are paying a great deal of attention to the CMM
notions because they are having major impacts on what they do and how
prepared they are to do business in the software development world.
                                                           10.5   METRICS   299

   Although essentially everyone appears to acknowledge the impacts of the
CMM notions, not everyone is pleased by these impacts and their conse-
quences. For example, in some circles, it is claimed that the ‘‘opposition (to
the CMM) is loud and clear’’ [10.14]. However, the bottom line reported is
that ‘‘the CMM, on balance, can be considered a very successful model,
particularly when combined with TQM [Total Quality Management] princi-
ples.’’ Examples of CMM implementations by Hughes and Raytheon sup-
ported this latter conclusion. For example, Hughes, in moving a division from
level 2 to level 3, spent about $400,000 over a three-year period. The esti-
mated return on that investment was $2 million annually. Raytheon invested
almost $1 million annually in process improvements, achieving a 7.7:1 return
on that investment and 2:1 productivity gains.
   Based on extensive industry interest in adopting CMM and because some
government agencies are indicating that competition will be limited to enter-
prises that achieve certain levels of capability, it is likely that the CMM, and
extensions thereof, will continue to have a strong influence on the practice of
software engineering. Thus, for all software-intensive systems, the Project
Manager (PM), Chief Systems Engineer (CSE), and Chief Software Engineer
are likely to have to pay considerable attention to the CMM.
   Beyond the CMM for software lies a CMM concept and implementation
for systems engineering (in distinction to software engineering). This issue is
explored in Chapter 12.


10.5     METRICS

Various initiatives with respect to making vital measurements of the software
development process and its products have been ongoing for many years.
Such measurements are called software metrics, several of which are briefly
described in this section.

10.5.1    Management Indicators
By way of introducing the subject of software metrics, perhaps the least con-
troversial is a set of management indicators [10.5] that is clearly measurable
in terms of factors in which management has a specific interest. Such a set
is provided in Exhibit 10.5 and is a candidate for use on a software devel-
opment project.

  Exhibit 10.5: Candidate Management Indicators
    1. Requirements Volatility. The total number of requirements and require-
       ment changes over time.
    2. Software Size. Planned and actual number of units, lines of code, or
       other size measurements over time.
    3. Software Staffing. Planned and actual staffing levels over time.
300      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


   4. Software Complexity. Complexity of each software unit.
   5. Software Progress. Planned and actual number of software units de-
      signed, implemented, unit tested, and integrated over time.
   6. Problem/Change Report Status. Total number, number closed, number
      opened in the current reporting period, age, priority.
   7. Build Release Content. Planned and actual number of software units
      released in each build.
   8. Computer Hardware Resource Utilization. Planned and actual use of
      computer hardware resources (such as processor capacity, memory ca-
      pacity, etc.) over time.
   9. Milestone Performance. Planned and actual dates of key project
      milestones.
  10. Scrap/Rework. Amount of resources expended to replace or revise
      software products after they are placed under project-level or higher
      configuration control.
  11. Effect of Reuse. A breakout of each of the preceding indicators for
      reused versus new software products.

Although this list is quantitative, more conventional metrics known in the
industry are considered in the next sections.

10.5.2    COCOMO
COCOMO is an acronym meaning ‘‘COnstructive COst MOdel.’’ It was de-
veloped by Barry Boehm [10.15] and has been a cornerstone of the industry
with respect to estimating the levels of effort and times required to develop
software.
   The basic equations for COCOMO, a formal cost-estimating relationship
(CER), follow:

                                 PM ⫽ C(KDSI)X                         (10.1)
                                TDEV ⫽ D(PM)Y                          (10.2)
                                         DSI
                                PROD ⫽                                 (10.3)
                                         PM
                                          PM
                                FTES ⫽                                 (10.4)
                                         TDEV

where   PM ⫽ person-months required to complete software
      KDSI ⫽ thousands of delivered source instructions
     TDEV ⫽ required development time
     PROD ⫽ productivity
      FTES ⫽ full-time equivalent staff needed
 C, D, X, Y ⫽ empirically derived constants
                                                          10.5   METRICS     301

The environment within which the software development is being carried out
is defined as the mode of the effort. For Boehm’s organic mode, characterized
by a relatively small team, extensive experience, and a stable in-house envi-
ronment, Equations (10.1) and (10.2) become

                              PM ⫽ 2.4(KDSI)1.05                           (10.5)
                            TDEV ⫽ 2.5(PM)       0.38
                                                                           (10.6)

To illustrate the results obtained by these COCOMO equations, assume that
the number of delivered source instructions is estimated to be 40,000. The
preceding two equations then yield

           PM ⫽ 2.4(40)1.05 ⫽ (2.4)(48.1) ⫽ 115.4 person-months
         TDEV ⫽ 2.5(115.4)0.38 ⫽ (2.5)(6.076) ⫽ 15.2 months

The productivity is thus

                 40,000
       PROD ⫽           ⫽ 346.6 DSI/PM, or about 16.5 DSI per day
                 115.4

and the full-time equivalent staff required is

                                    115.4
                           FTES ⫽         ⫽ 7.6 people
                                    15.2

The COCOMO equations are nonlinear so that, for example, if the DSI dou-
bles to 80,000, the person-months and development time become 239 and 20
months, respectively, and the productivity drops slightly to 15.9 DSI per day.
Thus, the calculations are rather straightforward and yield important planning
estimates for the software developer.
   One of the more serious questions raised with respect to COCOMO (and
there are several issues that have been raised regarding COCOMO’s use) is
that of obtaining good estimates of the delivered source instructions. Indeed,
if they are not valid or accurate, then the usual ‘‘garbage-in, garbage-out’’
admonition applies. This issue has never really been solved, but various en-
terprises have made attempts at trying to assure good input estimates. Among
the best of these approaches is to obtain multiple and independent estimates
from key personnel on the development team to see what the spread might
be and to ultimately converge on a workable consensus. This is a recom-
mended approach when attempting to utilize COCOMO or its variants for
which the fundamental input is the delivered source instructions or lines of
code.
   Other criticisms of COCOMO have focused on the fact that other variables,
such as the language used, use or not of CASE tools, and so forth, are not
302    SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


explicitly accounted for. Some of this criticism is blunted by the extensions
to COCOMO (e.g., REVIC, discussed in what follows) that take such varia-
bles into consideration in an explicit manner.
   COCOMO II [10.16] is, of course, an update of COCOMO I, as described
briefly above. The model is designed to accommodate three basic levels of
granularity, as well as three stages in the life of software development. These
levels refer to:

  1. Prototyping. The input is sized in object points.
  2. Early Design. The input is provided in source statements (lines of code)
     or function points, and there are seven effort multipliers.
  3. Post Architecture. The input is stated in source statements or function
     points, and there are seventeen effort multipliers.

There are also five scale factors that replace the previous use of the organic,
semidetached, and embedded modes.
  The source statements form of the COCOMO II model basically takes the
same form as that in COCOMO I. That is, person-months (PM) are calculated
with the following formula:

                            PM (effort) ⫽ A (size)B

where PM is the effort in person-months, A is characterized by a set of effort
multipliers (EMs), size is the number of source statements, and B represents
a set of scale factors that model economies (B ⬍ 1.0) or diseconomies (B ⬎
1.0) of scale. The value of B is itself a function of five scale factors, namely:

  1. Precedentedness
  2. Development flexibility
  3. Risk resolution
  4. Team cohesion
  5. Process maturity

The value of A is also a function of seven or seventeen cost drivers, known
as effort multipliers, depending upon whether one is using the early design
or the post architecture version of the model. The reader is referred to the
COCOMO II book [10.16] for complete lists of these effort multipliers, as
well as how they may be used to determine the value of A in the basic
COCOMO equation.
   Thus, a central theme of COCOMO II is that it is a model that estimates
person-months as a function of 12 (5 scale drivers ⫹ 7 effort multipliers) or
of 22 (5 scale drivers ⫹ 17 effort multipliers) additional variables. These
variables are factors that influence the effectiveness and efficiency of the
software development effort. COCOMO II also spells out relationships for
                                                             10.5   METRICS   303

project scheduling, as was the case for COCOMO I. COCOMO II also ex-
pands its areas of consideration, including important topics such as reuse,
reengineering, rapid application development, the use of commercial-off-the-
shelf (COTS) software, software quality, productivity estimation and risk as-
sessment. COCOMO II is considered to be another major step forward in
understanding the quantitative relationships that surround the development of
software.

10.5.3   REVIC
REVIC is an extension of COCOMO that has been developed in a software
package by Raymond Kile [10.17]. It is structured around the basic CO-
COMO notions and extends them by considering variables that had not been
previously incorporated into the COCOMO model. Such variables include
programmer capability, applications experience, programmer language expe-
rience, requirements volatility, database size, use of software tools, manage-
ment reserve for risk, and others. The software requests low, most probable,
and high line of code input estimates for each code module. It is claimed that
better answers are obtained with smaller modules. For each module, inputs
are also requested with respect to modifications of the design and the code.
Outputs are displayed regarding effort required (person-months), schedule
(months), numbers of people, productivity (lines of code per person-month),
and costs. By virtue of the three estimates for the input lines of code, a
standard deviation is also computed and shown. REVIC is a very useful soft-
ware package with a great deal of utility for the software developer.
   The Air Force has made REVIC available to the software community and
has encouraged additions and expanded applications. Software disks for
REVIC can be obtained through the Air Force’s Software Technology Support
Center (STSC) [10.18]. The STSC also provides a variety of documents that
describe the tools that can be used to support the software development pro-
cess (see also Chapter 12).

10.5.4   Function Points
The use of function points is considered to be an alternative to the COCOMO
model to estimate the effort required to develop software. Indeed, its leading
proponent, Capers Jones, argues strongly that function point analysis (FPA)
is much superior to COCOMO and its derivative methods [10.19].
   A formulation of FPA claims that unadjusted function points (UFPs) are
related to the numbers of inputs, outputs, master files, interfaces, and inquiries
[10.20]. These components are defined in more detail in the literature [10.21].
In particular, the UFP count is a linear combination of these components,
with weighting factors. The UFP thus derived is then multiplied by an ad-
justment factor that changes the UFP by at most 35% to develop the final
function point count (FP). The adjustment factor is itself a function of some
304      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


fourteen aspects of software complexity. One model for the estimation of
effort, measured in work-hours, is then derived from the final function point
count:

                            E ⫽ 585.7 ⫹ 15.12(FP)                           (10.7)

Thus, we have a method whereby we can estimate effort in work-hours from
the function points, which, in turn, are derivable from the user-related esti-
mates of inputs, outputs, files, interfaces and inquiries.
    The preceding FPA has some definite attractions, as pointed out in the
literature [10.20]. First, it does not explicitly depend on the source instructions
or lines of code estimates, which, as pointed out here, can be difficult to
estimate accurately. It also does not depend on the language used or other
variables such as the use of CASE tools, and so forth. Also, the FPA may be
usable at the stage of development when only requirements or design speci-
fications have been formulated. Finally, the FPA tends to be oriented to the
user’s view of the system, as reflected by the five input components.
    FPA has been gaining support and is considered to be a more than viable
alternative to COCOMO-type estimation procedures. It is also embodied in
existing software tools (e.g., SPQR/20 and ESTIMACS) that add credibility
and ease of use. Here again, only time will tell which of these two methods,
if either, becomes the preferred procedure in terms of developer usage and
customer acceptance.


10.5.5    Reliability
The issue of reliability in the software arena is still in its formative stages
and is likely to be in a state of flux as industry gains more experience with
the various ways in which software reliabiity has been viewed. The procedure
described here is based on the theoretical and empirical work done at Bell
Labs [10.22]. Their recommended approach is embedded in what is known
as the Basic Execution Time Model (BETM).
   BETM can be explained by referring to Figure 10.1. The graph plots the
software failure intensity (I) against the total number of failures experienced
(N) and, in this model, it is described as a straight line. The implication is
that the software in question starts out at a given failure intensity Io and has
a total number of defects No (the Y and X intercepts, respectively). BETM is
a nonhomogeneous Poisson process, such that the failure intensity (I) varies
and decreases linearly to zero as failures occur and are ‘‘repaired.’’ Also, time
is measured in computer program execution time, that is, the time actually
spent by a processor in executing program instructions.
   The key issues associated with the use of the BETM are:
                                                                           10.5   METRICS     305


                                                I = mN + Io




                    Failure intensity, I
                                                       Basic model




                                           Number of failures/defects, N
                Figure 10.1. Basic execution time model of reliability.



  a. The initial failure intensity must be estimated.
  b. The total number of failures, or defects, in the software must also be
     estimated.

For both issues, the software developer may not have much experience on
which to base these intial estimates. As experience is gained, and empirical
data derived on real programs, these estimates are likely to improve.
   The equation describing the BETM, as represented in Figure 10.1, is
simply

                                                I ⫽ mN ⫹ Io                                 (10.8)

where I ⫽ failure intensity
      N ⫽ number of failures or defects
      m ⫽ slope of failure intensity/failure line
      Io ⫽ the initial estimate of failure intensity

To illustrate how this relationship leads to a probability estimate, assume that
Io ⫽ 60 failures per CPU-hour, and the total number of estimated failures
(No) is 300. These estimates fully describe the BETM line in Figure 10.1.
Now let us further assume that we have experienced a total of 200 failures
to date. The calculated slope of the line is ⫺60/300, or -0.2, and Equation
(10.8) becomes

                                              I ⫽ ⫺0.2N ⫹ 60

We then calculate the current failure intensity as
306      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


      I ⫽ (⫺0.2)(200) ⫹ 60 ⫽ ⫺40 ⫹ 60 ⫽ 20 failures per CPU-hour

This so-called ‘‘instantaneous’’ failure intensity describes the current situation
and can be used as the ‘‘failure rate’’ in a Poisson process, but only at the
current time and situation. We can then ask the question: What is the prob-
ability that there will be k failures found in the next T hours of execution
time? We can use the Poisson probability distribution to calculate this answer
as

                                      (IT)k exp (⫺IT)
                             P(k) ⫽                                         (10.9)
                                             k!

If, for example, we take k ⫽ 0 and the number of hours T ⫽ 0.1 CPU-hour,
the Poisson reduces to the exponential aound becomes

                P(0) ⫽ exp [⫺(20)(0.1)] ⫽ exp (⫺2) ⫽ 0.135

Thus, in this illustration, the probability that no defects will be found, that is,
no failures experienced, in the next 0.1 CPU-hour is 0.135.
   The BETM is, of course, not the only formulation of software reliability.
Indeed, Bell Labs researchers argue that the logarithmic Poisson execution
time model has high predictive validity and is only somewhat more compli-
cated than is the BETM. Several other competitive models are presented and
explored in their book [10.22], many of which have also been incorporated
into the software package known as SMERFS, as discussed in the next
section.


10.5.6    SMERFS
A particularly useful initiative on the part of the Navy led to the development
of SMERFS (Statistical Modeling and Estimation of Reliability Functions for
Software) [10.23]. SMERFS provides both the background mathematics as
well as computer program disks that support the calculation of software re-
liability. As an example, one module in SMERFS deals with the execution of
five software reliability models that yield reliability estimates for execution
time data. These models are:

  1. The Musa Basic Execution Time Model
  2. The Musa Log Poisson Execution Time Model
  3. The Littlewood and Verrall Bayesian Model
  4. The Geometric Model
  5. The NHPP Model for Time-Between-Errors
                                                            10.5   METRICS   307

The first item on this list is the basis for the software reliability formulation
in the previous section.
   If the user is inclined to adopt an error-count approach to reliability esti-
mation and prediction, the SMERFS formulation is able to support such an
approach through the following five models:

  1. The Generalized Poisson Model
  2. The Nonhomogeneous Poisson Model
  3. The Brooks and Motley Model
  4. The Schneidewind Model
  5. The S-Shaped Reliability Growth Model

   Thus, developments such as SMERFS provide a good foundation for the
rational consideration of how to deal with the difficult issue of software re-
liability, which itself is likely to be under debate for some time to come
[10.24].

10.5.7   McCabe Metrics
One of the early developers of software metrics was T. McCabe, who wrote
a seminal paper that identified a software complexity measure [10.25]. Since
that time, the field has blossomed, but the metrics developed by McCabe’s
company have been plentiful and very well received by industry and
government.
   The desired characteristics of a complexity measure, according to McCabe,
are as follows [10.26]:

  • It should be closely related to the amount of work it takes to test or
    validate a program.
  • It should conform to our intuitive notion of complexity.
  • It should be straightforward for programmers to calculate the complexity
    measure.
  • It would be useful if the measure could be automated.
  • It should be objective; different people should get the same complexity
    for the same program.
  • It should be language-independent.
  • It should apply to structured and unstructured code.
  • It should map into an operational step and actually drive the test effort.

   The centerpiece of McCabe’s original idea satisfying these characteristics
is the notion of software cyclomatic complexity. Cyclomatic complexity is a
measure of the logical complexity of a software module and of the minimum
308    SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


effort required to qualify that module. It is the number of linearly independent
paths and, as such, represents the minimum number of paths that one should
test.
   To illustrate the cyclomatic complexity metric, we refer to Figure 10.2,
which shows three representations of the logical code, or flowgraph, of a
module. Cyclomatic complexity can be calculated using the formula:




                      Image rights not available




               Figure 10.2. Illustration of cyclomatic complexity [10.26].
                                                          10.5   METRICS      309

                             CC ⫽ E ⫺ N ⫹ 2                                (10.10)


where CC ⫽ cyclomatic complexity
       E ⫽ number of edges or connections of the code
       N ⫽ number of nodes in the code


Thus, cyclomatic complexity is easy to compute and, in fact, has been auto-
mated by McCabe & Associates and is available as a software metrics tool.
We note the significance of this metric in terms of identifying testing effort
and paths for testing.
   McCabe has gone considerably beyond the original complexity measure as
described before, producing a variety of metrics as well as software packages
that compute these metrics. As a further example, essential complexity mea-
sures the extent to which a module contains unstructured constructs. The
procedure is that all structured constructs are removed, and then the cyclom-
atic complexity of the reduced flowgraph represents the essential complexity.
Essential complexity has the advantages of


  • Quantifying the degree of structuredness
  • Revealing the quality of the code
  • Predicting the maintenance effort
  • Helping in the modularization process


In addition to the preceding, McCabe has produced a variety of software
metrics that measure various aspects of software, including the following
tools:


  • McCabe IQ2
  • CodeBreaker
  • Design Complexity Tool
  • The Battlemap Analysis Tool
  • The McCabe Instrumentation Tool
  • The McCabe Slice Tool


The reader with a further interest in McCabe metrics should contact McCabe
& Associates directly (see [10.26] in the References). They are a leading
purveyor, both nationally and internationally, of automated tools that compute
software metrics.
310     SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


10.6   SUMMARY

As suggested in this chapter, software development is in a state of flux, with
continuing initiatives to try to bring it from largely an art to a well-understood
and repeatable engineering process.
   Researchers and observers have given us much to contemplate, and new
technologies as well as proferred solutions are in abundance. By adding new
perspectives, they also add a ‘‘confusion of plenty’’ as we struggle to find the
right answers that will improve the way we develop software. As final ex-
amples, we now look at some suggestions made by selected observers of the
scene, followed by the ten commandments of software engineering.
   First, we have the analogy provided by N. Augustine, a leader in govern-
ment, industry, and academia:

  Software is like entropy, it is difficult to grasp, weighs nothing, and obeys the
  second law of thermodynamics, i.e., it always increases [10.27].

   Second, we have the observations of E. Rechtin, previously the President
of the Aerospace Corporation:

  In architecting a new software program, all the serious mistakes are made on
  the first day.
  A team producing at the fastest rate humanly possible spends half of its time
  coordinating and interfacing [10.28].

Third, we cite points ‘‘Wirth’’ noting, taken from an article by Niklaus Wirth,
the designer of the programming language Pascal:

  The way to streamline software lies in disciplined methodologies and a return
  to the essentials.
  The most difficult design task . . . is the decomposition of the whole into a
  module hierarchy.
  The belief that complex systems require armies of designers and programmers
  is wrong [10.29].

  Fourth, we are indebted to Frederick Brooks [10.30] for his many insightful
contributions to software engineering, a few of which are cited here:

  From this process [i.e., Wirth’s top-down methods] one identifies modules of
  solutions or of data whose further refinement can proceed independently of other
  work.
  A good top-down design avoids bugs in several ways
  Adding manpower to a late software project makes it later (Brooks’ Law)
                                                  QUESTIONS / EXERCISES   311

Finally, we complete this chapter with this author’s ten commandments for
software projects:

  Commandment 1. Formulate a software development plan and process that
    seem to work and stick with them.
  Commandment 2. Maintain continuity of personnel and high-performance
    software development teams (see also Chapter 6).
  Commandment 3. Adopt and adapt the notions of the Capability Maturity
    Model, coupled with a commitment to continuous improvement.
  Commandment 4. Always do a detailed risk-assessment and -mitigation
    analysis at the beginning of a project, and at selected points during the
    project.
  Commandment 5. Begin and maintain a program of software measurement
    and metrics, to include keeping statistics on all projects.
  Commandment 6. Develop a modest but effective software engineering
    environment (see Chapter 12), including a supportive infrastructure.
  Commandment 7. Review the status of every serious software development
    project at least twice a month and at times weekly.
  Commandment 8. Manage the software requirements, including challeng-
    ing requirements that do not make sense.
  Commandment 9. Do not allow documentation to overwhelm and under-
    mine the development of the software or the time of your key software
    designers and developers.
  Commandment 10. Integrate your software engineering efforts and team
    with your systems engineering methods and team.


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

10.1 Which software management strategy do you favor? Why?
10.2 Define and discuss three reasons why software development projects
     run into problems. How would you avoid these problems?
10.3 What software standards appear to be most important today? Explain.
10.4 What is the highest capability-maturity level for software development
     in your organization? Cite and discuss three new initiatives that are
     necessary to achieve the next level in capability maturity.
10.5 Calculate the person-months, development time, productivity and full-
     time equivalent staff required for a software project involving 80,000
     delivered source instructions. How does the productivity compare with
     the example in the text?
312     SOFTWARE ENGINEERING


10.6 For a software project, it is estimated that the initial failure intensity
     is 60 failures per CPU-hour and the slope of the Basic Execution Time
     Model (BETM) line is ⫺0.3. The total number of failures experienced
     to date is 150.
     a. What is a good estimate of the total number of failures or defects
         in the software?
     b. What is a good estimate of the current failure intensity?
     c. What is the probability that no defects will be found in the next 0.1
        CPU-hour?
10.7 Show an example of how COCOMO II utilizes the five scaling drivers
     to determine a numeric value of the exponent in the COCOMO II
     equation.
10.8 For COCOMO II, define the seven and seventeen effort multipliers
     associated with the early design and post-architecture forms of the
     model.




REFERENCES

10.1  Fromson, B. (1994). ‘‘Fidelity Says It Reported Wrong Prices,’’ Washington
      Post, June 23.
10.2 Fox, J. (1982). Software and Its Development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
      Hall.
10.3 Marciniak, J., and J. Reifer (1990). Software Acquisition Management. New
      York: John Wiley.
10.4 Arthur, L. J. (1992). Rapid Evolutionary Development. New York: John Wiley.
10.5 Military Standard—Software Development and Documentation, Military Stan-
      dard 498 (1994). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
10.6 Military Standard—Defense System Software Development, DOD-STD-2167A
      (1988). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
10.7 Military Standard—Software Quality Evaluation, DOD-STD-2168 (1979).
      Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
10.8 ISO 9000, Contact American National Standards Institute (ANSI). New York:
      International Organization for Standardization.
10.9 IEEE Standards Products Catalog (1995). Piscataway, NJ: Institute of Electrical
      and Electronics Engineers.
10.10 Standard for Information Technology - Software Life Cycle Processes, IEEE /
      EIA 12207.0-1996 (ISO / IEC 12207) (1998). New York: Institute of Electrical
      and Electronics Engineers, March.
10.11 Boehm, B., ed. (1989). Software Risk Management, New York: IEEE Computer
      Society Press.
                                                                  REFERENCES       313

10.12 Humphrey, W. (1987). Characterizing the Software Process: A Maturity Frame-
      work, CMU / SEI-87-TR-11, DTIC Number ADA 182895. Pittsburgh: Software
      Engineering Institute.
10.13 Paulk, M. B. Curtis, and M. B. Chrissis (1991). Capability Maturity Model for
      Software, CMU / SEI-91-TR-24. Pittsburgh: Software Engineering Institute.
10.14 Saiedian, H., and R. Kuzara (1995). ‘‘SEI Capability Maturity Model’s Impact
      on Contractors,’’ IEEE Computer Magazine (January): 16–25.
10.15 Boehm, B. (1981). Software Engineering Economics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
      Prentice Hall.
10.16 Boehm, B., et al. (2000), Software Cost Estimation with COCOMO II. Upper
      Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR.
10.17 Kile, Raymond L. (1992). REVIC, Version 9.1.1. Contact STSC, Hill AFB,
      Ogden, Utah.
10.18 Software Technology Support Center (STSC), Hill AFB, Ogden, UT: See also
      CrossTalk: The Journal of Defense Software Engineering, Ogden ALC / TISE,
      7278 Fourth Street, Hill AFB, UT 84056-5205.
10.19 Jones, C. (1994). ‘‘Software Metrics: Good, Bad and Missing,’’ IEEE Computer
      Magazine (September): 98–100.
10.20 Matson, J., B. Barrett, and J. Mellichamp (1994). ‘‘Software Development Cost
      Estimation Using Function Points,’’ IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
      20(4): 275–286.
10.21 Marciniak, J., ed. (1994). Encyclopedia of Software Engineering. New York:
      John Wiley.
10.22 Musa, J., A. Iannino, and K. Okumoto (1987). Software Reliability. New York:
      McGraw-Hill.
10.23 Farr, W., and O. Smith (1991). Statistical Modeling and Estimation of Reliability
      Functions for Software (SMERFS) Users Guide, NAVSWC TR 84-373, Revi-
      sion 2. Dahlgren, VA: Naval Surface Warfare Center.
10.24 Lyu, M., F. Buckley, R. Tausworthe, T. Keller, and J. Musa (1995). ‘‘Software
      Reliability: To Use or Not To Use?,’’ CrossTalk 8(2): 20–26. Published by the
      Software Technology Support Center, Hill AFB, Ogden, UT.
10.25 McCabe, T. (1976). ‘‘A Complexity Measure,’’ IEEE Transactions on Software
      Engineering 2(4): 308–320.
10.26 McCabe & Associates Website: www.mccabe.com
10.27 Augustine, N. (1982). Augustine’s Laws. New York: American Institute of Aer-
      onautics and Astronautics.
10.28 Rechtin, E. (1991). Systems Architecting. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
10.29 Wirth, N. (1995). ‘‘A Plea for Lean Software,’’ IEEE Computer Magazine (Feb-
      ruary): 64–68.
10.30 Brooks, F. P., (1995). The Mythical Man-Month. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley
      Longman.
                11
SELECTED QUANTITATIVE
RELATIONSHIPS




11.1   INTRODUCTION

This chapter has been reserved for a variety of important quantitative rela-
tionships so that they can be found in one location in this book. Both systems
engineering and project management depend on the mastery of basic quan-
titative relationships, with an emphasis on the former. That is, it is really not
possible to understand the details of systems engineering without mastering
these relationships.
    Several earlier chapters introduced key quantitative relationships, for ex-
ample, the chapters containing discussions of requirements analysis, technical
performance measurement, simulation, and modeling. Some of these relation-
ships are reiterated here.
    A central motivation for examining the relationships set forth in this chap-
ter is to predict the performance of systems. In the early stages of system
development and engineering, there is no real system that can be tested to
determine its performance. Thus, we resort to ‘‘pencil and paper’’ studies that
purport to tell us how the designed system will, we hope, perform in the real
world. Today, and for the foreseeable future, the pencils and papers have
turned into computers. In that sense, we must also master a variety of com-
puter applications that contain the quantitative relationships appropriate to the
task at hand.
    This chapter is almost exclusively devoted to probability relationships, in
distinction to other classes of mathematics (e.g., differential equations, trans-
formation calculus, control systems theory, etc.). The basic reason for this is
that many of the technical performance measures of systems are expressed in
terms of probabilities. A few examples are:

                                                                             315
316     SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


  • The detection and false-alarm probabilities for a radar system
  • The response time probability for an on-line transaction-processing sys-
    tem (OLTP)
  • The probability of a call going through in a telephone system
  • The probability of having a system available to operate when called on
    to do so
  • The probability of successful operation of a system over its lifetime
  • The kill probability for a weapons system
  • The probability of experiencing some type of disastrous failure that
    places peoples’ lives in jeopardy (e.g., a nuclear plant incident)
  • The circular error probability for a guidance system
  • The distribution of trip times for a transportation system

As difficult as it might be to calculate these probabilities, we often have little
choice because many of the analyses and trade-offs that we must carry out
as systems engineers are based on these measures. This chapter contains but
a small sampling of the theory available to us in this regard.


11.2   BASIC PROBABILITY RELATIONSHIPS

The centerpiece of probability theory is simply that we wish to express and
then calculate the probability of the occurrence of a particular event. Such an
event can be as simple as the toss of a die or as complex as the likelihood
of a false signal in a city’s subway system. Given this notion, we are then
interested in considering several events (say, A and/or B), in the context of
both events occurring, or possibly one or the other event occurring, as dis-
cussed in what follows.
   We summarize the elementary probability relationships here:

                  P(A) ⭓ 0 for every event                                 (11.1)
                  P(C) ⫽ 1 for the certain event C                         (11.2)
            P(A or B) ⫽ P(A ⫹ B) ⫽ P(A) ⫹ P(B), if A and B
                           are mutually exclusive                          (11.3)
          P(A and B) ⫽ P(AB) ⫽ P(A兩B)P(B) ⫽ P(B兩A)P(A)                     (11.4)
          P(A and B) ⫽ P(AB) ⫽ P(A)P(B)
                           for independence between A and B                (11.5)
                  P(A) ⫽ P(A兩B)P(B) ⫹ P(A兩B)P(B) where (B ⫹ B)
                           constitutes the certain event                   (11.6)
                                      11.2   BASIC PROBABILITY RELATIONSHIPS   317

  Example. The probability of throwing a 3 with a single die is simply 1/6.
  Example. The probability of throwing a 3 or a 4 with a single die toss is
    P(3 ⫹ 4) ⫽ P(3) ⫹ P(4) ⫽ 2/6 ⫽ 1/3.
  Example. The probability of throwing a 3 on one toss and a 4 on the next
    toss is P(3 and 4) ⫽ P(3)P(4) ⫽ (1/6)(1/6) ⫽ 1/36.

Although these relationships and examples are simple and highly intuitive, in
systems engineering and project management we may be faced with simple
notions for which it is rather complex to develop an answer. For example, in
the context of project risk, we may ask the question: What is the likelihood
(probability) that instead of completing our project in three months (the sched-
uled time), it is completed in four months (a one-month overrun)? If the
answer is close to ‘‘1,’’ the project schedule is in great jeopardy and the
penalties for missing the due date may be quite high. It would be therefore
rather important to find another schedule solution that does not lead to this
problem. Not only is an issue of this type very important, developing the
necessary probability estimates is anything but simple, especially for a large
project.
   In terms of a system performance requirement, we may ask this question:
What is the probability that our design for an OLTP (on-line transaction-
processing) system will meet the response time requirement of less than or
equal to seven seconds? There are only two events in this question, either
meeting the requirement or not. Here again, the question can be posed in
simple terms, but it is a major task to develop an answer in which we have
some confidence. Indeed, the simulation of our overall computer system de-
sign may be necessary to do so.


11.2.1   Discrete Distributions
The notion of probability distributions is that of describing the entire proba-
bility scheme for the question at hand. For the die toss, the overall scheme
is simple: For each toss, there are six possible events (outcomes) and the
probability of occurrence for each of these outcomes is the same, namely,
1/6. Because each event is discrete, the description is called a discrete prob-
ability distribution, and may be expressed as P(X) ⫽ 1/6 for all six possible
events. This is called a uniform distribution because all probabilities are equal.
Examples of other types of discrete distributions are:

  • The triangular distribution
  • The binomial distribution
  • The Poisson distribution

Each distribution is briefly discussed later in this chapter.
318      SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


11.2.2    Continuous Distributions
For continuous distributions, the variable of interest is considered to be a
continuous variable. For example, if we spin a pointer that is fixed at the
center, we can assume that the resultant angle from some reference angle is
more or less continuous. If we are attempting to hit the center of a bull’s-
eye, the distance from the center is also a continuous variable. This might
apply to a situation in which we are trying to point an instrument aboard a
spacecraft toward a certain point in space, for example, a star. Continuous
probability distributions are normally expressed by formula in terms of prob-
ability density functions [p(x)] and cumulative distribution functions [F(x)],
the latter being the integral of the former, and yielding direct estimates of
probability values. Later in this chapter, we briefly explore the following types
of continuous distributions:

  • The normal (Gaussian) distribution
  • The uniform distribution
  • The exponential distribution
  • The Rayleigh distribution

In general, we will use the following notations:

  • P(X) for a discrete variable and distribution
  • p(x) for a continuous density function distribution, and
  • F(x) for a continuous cumulative distribution function (CDF)


11.2.3    Means and Variances
The mean value of a distribution may be viewed as the average or expected
value of that distribution. It is found by weighting (multiplying) all values of
the variable with the values of the probabilities or probability densities, and
summing the results. The relationships for the discrete and continuous cases,
respectively, can be defined as:

                 Mean value of X ⫽ m(X) ⫽ ⌺ XP(X), for all X              (11.7)
                 Mean value of x ⫽ m(x) ⫽ 兰 xp(x) dx                      (11.8)

The mean value of x is often expressed as the expected value of x, or E(x).

  Example. The mean value of the single die tossing situation is (1)(1/6) ⫹
    (2)(1/6) ⫹ (3)(1/6) ⫹ (4)(1/6) ⫹ (5)(1/6) ⫹ (6)(1/6) ⫽ 3.5. We note
    that this result leads to a mean value that is different from all possible
    values of the variable.
  Example. The mean value for the distribution generated by tossing two
    dice is 7, as all of us know intuitively. As an exercise, the reader may
                                     11.2       BASIC PROBABILITY RELATIONSHIPS      319

     wish to prove this by developing the overall (triangular) distribution,
     where values range from 2 to 12.

   The variance of a distribution can be found by weighting all values of the
probabilities or probability density with the expression (x ⫺ m)2. That is, the
mean value is subtracted from each value of the variable, the result squared
(yielding a positive number), weighted with the probability values, and then
summed. The variance is always a positive number, whereas the mean value
may be negative. The variance is a measure of the ‘‘spread’’ of the distribution
and is extremely important in, for example, carrying out error analyses of
systems. In formal terms, the variance, for the discrete and continuous cases,
respectively, may be found as:

           Variance ⫽ ␴ 2 ⫽ ⌺ (X ⫺ m)2P(X), for all values of X                    (11.9)
           Variance ⫽ ␴ ⫽ 兰 (x ⫺ m) p(x) dx
                          2                 2
                                                                                  (11.10)

  Example. The variance for the single die toss is calculated formally as:
    (1 ⫺ 3.5)2(1/6) ⫹ (2 ⫺ 3.5)2(1/6) ⫹ (3 ⫺ 3.5)2(1/6) ⫹ (4 ⫺ 3.5)2
    (1/6) ⫹ (5 ⫺ 3.5)2(1/6) ⫹ (6 ⫺ 3.5)2(1/6) ⫽ 2.9

   By definition, the square root of the variance is the standard deviation or
root-mean-square value (␴) of the distribution.
   On occasion, we are interested in the ratio of the standard deviation to the
mean value, or its reciprocal. This tells us something about the significance
of the standard deviation, or variance, in the problem at hand. If the deviation
is small compared to the mean value, we may be less concerned about its
influence or effect. For example, if we were to calculate the standard deviation
in our time schedule for a project as two weeks in a hundred-week project,
we are perhaps less concerned than if the overall project were scheduled for
eight weeks.
   Another situation in which the preceding ratio shows itself is in a com-
munications system. A critical performance measure in such a system is the
signal-to-noise ratio (S/N), where S is the signal power and N is the noise
power. This is, more or less, equivalent to a ratio of the square of the signal
value to the variance of the noise distribution. Thus, we see an immediate
application of the notions of mean value and variance to the theory and prac-
tice of communications systems.

11.2.4   Sums of Variables
The notion of a sum of random variables has already been introduced here
in dealing with the expression:

 P(A or B) ⫽ P(A ⫹ B) ⫽ P(A) ⫹ P(B) if A and B are mutually exclusive
                                                                                  (11.11)
320     SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


In this same context, if X and Y are random variables, then the distribution
of their sum, Z, is often of immmediate interest. This may be explored by
means of a further look at the matter of tossing a pair of dice, where one
variable, X, is the result of tossing one die and the other variable, Y, is the
result of tossing the second die. We are thus interested in the distribution of
the sum, that is, the results obtained when the faces shown on each die are
added.
   Clearly, and intuitively, there are eleven possibilities for the sum when two
dice are thrown, namely, the discrete numbers 2 through 12. However, as we
know, not all of these have the same or equal probabilities, as was the case
with a single die. The probability distribution of Z, the sum of X and Y, can
be determined to be the following:

                    P(Z ⫽ 2) ⫽ 1/36           P(Z ⫽ 8) ⫽ 5/36
                    P(Z ⫽ 3) ⫽ 1/18           P(Z ⫽ 9) ⫽ 1/9
                    P(Z ⫽ 4) ⫽ 1/12           P(Z ⫽ 10) ⫽ 1/12
                   P(Z ⫽ 5) ⫽ 1/9             P(Z ⫽ 11) ⫽ 1/18
                    P(Z ⫽ 6) ⫽ 5/36           P(Z ⫽ 12) ⫽ 1/36
                    P(Z ⫽ 7) ⫽ 1/6

If this distribution is plotted, it will form a ‘‘triangular’’ distribution. In formal
terms, the distribution of a sum is the convolution of the individual distribu-
tions. Convolving two uniform distributions leads to the triangular distribu-
tion. In the continuous case, the convolution integral is expressed as

                     p(z) ⫽ p(x ⫹ y) ⫽ 兰g(x)h(z ⫺ x) dx                      (11.12)

The next areas of interest with respect to sums of random variables are the
values of the means and variances of the sum.
   The mean value of the sum of two random variables is

           Mean(Z) ⫽ E(Z) ⫽ mean(X ⫹ Y) ⫽ mean(X) ⫹ mean(Y)                  (11.13)

that is, the mean value of a sum is the sum of the mean values.

   Example. The mean value of the sum of throwing two dice is 3.5 ⫹
     3.5 ⫽ 7. It also can be verified that the same result is obtained by finding
     the mean value of the sum using the definition of a mean value and the
     previously cited full distribution for the sum.
                                      11.2   BASIC PROBABILITY RELATIONSHIPS      321

  In the case of the variance of a sum, it is the sum of the variances only
when the individual distributions are independent, that is, when P(XY) ⫽
G(X)H(Y). This can be expressed as

   ␴ 2(Z) ⫽ ␴ 2(X ⫹ Y) ⫽ ␴ 2(X) ⫹ ␴ 2(Y) when X and Y are independent
                                                                               (11.14)

The situation in which the individual variables are not independent is dealt
with later in this chapter.
   Adding variances for independent random variables is critically important
in error analyses of systems, as alluded to in Chapter 8 as well as later in
this chapter. In these analyses, it is often assumed that one has a set of
independent and additive random variables and that the overall error is there-
fore the sum of the individual errors, with all errors expressed as variances.
If there are coefficients that relate these additive variables together, then the
appropriate relationships are as follows: If z ⫽ c1x ⫹ c2 y, where c1 and c2
are coefficients, then for additive independent variables,

                         ␴ 2(z) ⫽ c12 ␴ 2(x) ⫹ c22 ␴ 2(y)                      (11.15)

and similarly for a set of coefficients c1 through cn.
   The systems engineer also must be aware of the association between errors
and variances as, for example, one or two sigma values. At times, errors are
taken at the one-sigma value, and at other times, the two-sigma value. This
choice depends on the degree to which it is important to keep errors within
certain bounds. This issue is reexamined in the sections dealing with the
normal (Gaussian) distribution and error analyses.

11.2.5   Functions of Random Variables
Functions of random variables arise when we make a functional transforma-
tion and then wish to examine the resultant distributions. As an example, if
we transform a random variable X into a random variable Y by means of the
transformation Y ⫽ g(X), where g( ) is some arbitrary function, and we know
the distribution of X, we may then inquire into the distribution of Y.
   To make this notion more concrete, consider the transformation of random
variables expressed as

                                 Y ⫽ mX ⫹ b                                    (11.16)

where X and Y are random variables and m and b are constants. This simple
transformation converts the distribution of X into some other distribution of
Y. Because this particular function is linear, we would expect a preservation
in the form of the distribution. Another example is the so-called square-law
322      SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


detector device that modifies the input variable X into an output variable Y
by means of the relationship

                                      Y ⫽ X2                             (11.17)

Just as X is processed, so is the distribution of X through this particular
square-law transformation. In this case, we would expect the form of the
distribution to be modified because this is a nonlinear relationship.
   From a systems engineering perspective, one of the values of understanding
the transformation of random variables is to track how such a variable behaves
as it is processed through some type of system. It has special relevance, as
well, to transformations from one coordinate system to another, for example,
going from rectangular to polar coordinates. This issue is discussed in some-
what greater detail in the next section.

11.2.6    Two Variables
Often, we are concerned with the joint behavior of two random variables. We
may describe such behavior in terms of a joint distribution (density function)
such as p(x, y). As suggested before, if such a distribution is partitionable, as

                                p(x, y) ⫽ g(x)h(y)                       (11.18)

then the two variables x and y are independent.

  Example. We may develop a simple joint distribution when tossing two
    dice, where each die represents a random-variable generator. The prob-
    ability of obtaining any given pair of numbers, say, 3 and 5 [a 3 on the
    ‘‘X’’ die and a 5 on the ‘‘Y’’ die is P(X, Y) ⫽ P(3, 5)]. For any given
    pair, of which there are 36 possibilities, the probability is clearly 1/36.
    Therefore, this is a uniform discrete joint distribution that has only one
    value, namely, P(X, Y) ⫽ 1/36.

   There is also a mean or expected-value concept when dealing with a joint
distribution. This may be expressed as

                          E(xy) ⫽ 兰兰xyp(x, y) dx dy                      (11.19)

As might be expected, if x and y are independent, the preceding yields the
product of the expected, or mean, values of the individual distributions.

11.2.7    Correlation
If two random variables bear some relationship to one another, they may be
correlated. This notion has a specific meaning in probability theory. First, we
define a term known as the covariance of two distributions, given as
                                           11.3   THE BINOMIAL DISTRIBUTION      323

         Cov(xy) ⫽ E{[x ⫺ E(x)][y ⫺ E(y)]} ⫽ E(xy) ⫺ E(x)E(y)                 (11.20)

Clearly, if the two variables are independent, then E(xy) ⫽ E(x)E(y) and the
covariance reduces to zero.
   For correlated random variables, we may also inquire into the effect on the
variance of the sum of such variables, that is, var(x ⫹ y). In such a case, the
variance has a covariance term, as

                 var(x ⫹ y) ⫽ var(x) ⫹ var(y) ⫹ 2 Cov(xy)                     (11.21)

A formal correlation coefficient may also be calculated from the definition:

                                                   Cov(xy)
                      Correlation coefficient ⫽                               (11.22)
                                                  ␴ (x) ␴ (y)

By dividing by the product of the individual standard deviations, the corre-
lation coefficient is normalized to values between ⫺1 and ⫹1.


11.3   THE BINOMIAL DISTRIBUTION

The specific discrete distribution known as the binomial distribution arises
when there are repeated independent trials with only two resultant possibili-
ties. If we call the probability of success p and the probability of failure q,
where (p ⫹ q ⫽ 1), then the distribution becomes

             P(x) ⫽   冉冊
                       n
                       x
                         p xq n⫺x,     for x ⫽ 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , n
                                                                              (11.23)
                  ⫽ 0,                 otherwise

This distribution defines the probability of exactly x successes in n indepen-
dent trials.

  Example. We often assume that the bits of data that are transmitted in a
    digital communication system are independent from one another and
    that there is a bit error rate (BER) of some value, for example, 10⫺8.
    For purposes of illustrating the binomial, we assume a character that is
    8 bits long and that the BER is 10⫺3. If receiving an individual bit
    without error is defined as success, then the probability of ‘‘success’’ is
    0.999 and the probability of ‘‘failure’’ is 0.001. The probability that we
    will have eight successes (no errors in the transmission of a character)
    is then

                 P(8) ⫽   冉冊
                           8
                           8
                             (0.999)8(0.001)0 ⫽ (0.999)8 ⫽ 0.992
324      SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


    In a similar fashion, one can then calculate the probabilities of no error
    in a set of bits (a byte), characters (a word), a series of words (a mes-
    sage), and so forth.
  Example. If, when throwing a die, an odd number is success and an even
    number failure, the probability of exactly four successes in ten trials is

           P(4) ⫽   冉冊
                     10
                      4
                        (0.5)4(0.5)6 ⫽ (210)(0.0625)(0.015625) ⫽ 0.205

  The mean value of the binomial is equal to np, which is the expected
  number of successes in n trials. This is in consonance with our intuition
  as we, for example, would expect to have 40 successes in 100 trials if the
  probability of success on each trial were 0.4.


11.4    THE POISSON DISTRIBUTION

The Poisson distribution was introduced briefly in Chapter 10, Section 10.5.5,
which dealt with the issue of software reliability. The Poisson is a discrete
distribution given by the following formula:

                       (␭t)k exp(⫺ ␭t)
              P(k) ⫽                  ,        for k ⫽ 0, 1, 2, . . . , n   (11.24)
                              k!

where P(k) is the probability of exactly k events of interest, ␭ is the rate at
which such events are occurring, and t is the time (or space) over which the
events are occurring. This distribution may be used in situations for which
events happen at some rate and we wish to ascertain the probability of some
number of events occurring in a total period of time, or in a certain space.

  Example. Cars are passing a toll booth at an overall rate of about 120 cars
    per hour. The probability that exactly three cars will pass through the
    toll booth in a period of 1 minute would be

                                 [(2)(1)]3 exp [⫺(2)(1)]
                        P(3) ⫽                           ⫽ 0.18
                                            3!

       The Poisson distribution, when k ⫽ 0, reduces to P(0) ⫽ exp (⫺ ␭t),
       which is the exponential distribution. For example, if failures were oc-
       curring in a system at a rate of ␭, and we were concerned with the
       likelihood of having no failures in some period of time, t, we would use
       the exponential to make this calculation. The subject of reliability is
       examined again later in this chapter.
                                       11.5   THE NORMAL (GAUSSIAN) DISTRIBUTION           325

11.5   THE NORMAL (GAUSSIAN) DISTRIBUTION

The normal distribution, sometimes also called the Gaussian distribution, is
a continuous distribution that is very commonly used. Its shape is as shown
in Figure 11.1(a), the familiar bell-shaped curve.
   One common formula for the density function for the normal distribution,
shown in Figure 11.1, is


                             p(x) ⫽
                                          1
                                      ␴ 兹2␲
                                                   exp   冉 冊
                                                          ⫺x2
                                                          2␴2
                                                                                    (11.25)


The normal distribution (in this case) is symmetric about x ⫽ 0 and has the
standard deviation ␴ as a parameter.
   If we wish to calculate probabilities, however, it is necessary to integrate
a continuous density function. Formally, the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) is found, for the continuous case, as


                                   F(x) ⫽     冕 p(x) dx
                                               x

                                              ⫺⬁
                                                                                    (11.26)


F(x) calculates the probability that random variable x is equal to or less than
some particular value. For example, in Figure 11.1, we would calculate the
probability that the random variable is less than or equal to zero as 0.5 by
integrating from minus infinity to zero. The CDF for the normal distribution
with zero mean value is also plotted in Figure 11.1(b), and its ordinate values
correspond directly to probabilities.
   The normal distribution is not readily integrable, so that we resort to table
lookups in order to calculate other than the simplest probability cases. Further,
these tables have been developed for the ‘‘standard normal,’’ which has a
mean value of zero and a standard deviation of unity.


                                                                           1.0


                                                                           0.5




                  0            x                                       0                    x
       (a) The density function                          (b) The cumulative distribution
                                                                 function (CDF)
                      Figure 11.1. The normal (Gaussian) distributing.
326     SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


  Example. For the normal distribution shown in Figure 11.1, the probabil-
    ities that the random variable is equal to or less than one and two sigma
    (␴) to the right of the mean are:

                 For one sigma, the value is 0.5 ⫹ 0.3413 ⫽ 0.8413
                 For two sigma, the value is 0.5 ⫹ 0.4772 ⫽ 0.9772

    The values 0.3413 and 0.4772 were obtained by referring to a standard
    normal table for the argument equal to one and two, respectively. The
    probabilities that the variable lies within plus-and-minus one and two
    sigma from the mean are simply 0.6827 and 0.9545, respectively. Thus,
    about 95% of the distribution lies within plus-and-minus two sigma from
    the mean.
  Example. We assume that the critical path of a simple PERT network con-
    sists of five independent sequential activities, with the following esti-
    mates of optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic times in weeks:

      Activity    Optimistic Time       Most Likely Time     Pessimistic Time
         A                1                     2                    3
         B                2                     4                    6
         C                4                     6                    8
         D                1                     3                    5
         E                4                     6                    8

The questions regarding this example are as follows:

  1. What is the expected time for the project?
  2. What is the standard deviation in the project’s end date?
  3. What is the likelihood that the project will exceed 23 weeks?

Using the formulas in Section 4.2 of Chapter 4, we calculate the expected
times and variances for each of the preceding activities as follows:

      Activity                  Expected Time                   Variance
         A                              2                          1/9
         B                              4                          4/9
         C                              6                          4/9
         D                              3                          4/9
         E                              6                          4/9

The expected time for the project is the sum of the preceding expected times
because the path described is the critical path. Its value is 21 weeks. The
variance of the end date is the sum of the variances of each activity, as shown
                                               11.6     THE UNIFORM DISTRIBUTION     327

before, and is equal to 17/9, or 1.89. The standard deviation is its square
root, or 1.37 weeks. If we now assume that the end-date distribution is normal,
we can calculate the probability of the project exceeding 23 weeks, using the
normal table and the fact that the mean (expected) value is 21 weeks. The
time period between 23 and 21 weeks is 2 weeks, representing 1.46 sigma
from the mean. From a table lookup at the 1.46 point, we obtain the area
from the mean as 0.4279. The area to the right of that is therefore 0.5 ⫺
0.4279, or 0.0721. This corresponds to the probability that the project end
date will exceed 23 weeks.
   In the preceding example, it is demonstrated that the normal need not have
a mean value of zero. If the distribution is shifted to the right by the value
m, then it has a mean value equal to m and m is subtracted from the value
of x in Equation (11.25). The mean value m and the standard deviation ␴ can
be independently selected because it is a two-parameter distribution. A small
standard deviation ‘‘narrows’’ the distribution and a large standard deviation
broadens it.
   The normal distribution is often used in analyzing communications systems
to represent the noise distribution. As alluded to earlier, the noise power (N)
is equivalent to the variance of the normal distribution, that is, N ⫽ ␴ 2. The
normal distribution will be examined again in this chapter in the discussion
of detecting a signal in noise.


11.6   THE UNIFORM DISTRIBUTION

As the name implies, the uniform distribution is ‘‘flat’’ over its entire range,
as shown in Figure 11.2. The discrete case of the uniform distribution was
discussed earlier in this chapter with respect to the toss of a die where all the
probabilities are equal.
   The uniform distribution shows up in the phase relationship when we are
converting two independent normal distributions with the same variance from


                                            F(x)
p(x)
                                                   1




           a                 b       x                       a                 b         x
        (a) The density function                       (b) The cumulative distribution
                                                               function (CDF)
                        Figure 11.2. The uniform distribution.
328     SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


rectangular to polar coordinates. Such a case, applied, for example, to shoot-
ing at a bull’s-eye, means that the shot is equally likely to be at any angle
over the range zero to 2␲ radians.
   The mean value for the uniform distribution that has a range from a to b
is (a ⫹ b)/2 and its variance is (b ⫺ a)2 /12. We also have seen that adding
two uniform random variables leads to a triangular distribution.


11.7   THE EXPONENTIAL DISTRIBUTION

The exponential distribution is illustrated in Figure 11.3 and has the following
density function:

                      p(x) ⫽ ␭ exp (⫺ ␭x),            for x ⭓ 0                   (11.27)
                            ⫽ 0,                      for x ⬍ 0

Also shown in the figure is the CDF, which starts at zero and approaches the
value of unity asymptotically.
   We have seen the exponential distribution as derivable from the Poisson
when k ⫽ 0. This distribution is widely used in reliability theory wherein the
value of ␭ is taken to be a constant failure rate for a part of a system (e.g.,
a component). In such a case, variable x is converted into a time variable, t,
and the CDF is found by integrating the preceding relationship, yielding

                      F(t) ⫽ 1 ⫺ exp (⫺ ␭t),          for t ⭓ 0                   (11.28)

Because this is a failure distribution (i.e., represents the failure behavior), it
can be converted into a reliability formula as


                                              F(x)

p(x)                                             1

                     p(x) = λe–λx

                                                                    F(x) = 1 – e–λx


                                      x                                               x
        (a) The density function              (b) The cumulative distribution function
                       Figure 11.3. The exponential distribution.
                                                     11.9   ERROR ANALYSES      329

                  R(t) ⫽ 1 ⫺ F(t) ⫽ exp (⫺ ␭t),      for t ⭓ 0               (11.29)

where R(t) is the probability of successful (failure-free) operation to time t.
This is the very familiar expression of the reliability of a system, or com-
ponent, with a constant failure rate. As indicated in Section 8.7.2 of Chapter
8, the failure rate and the mean time between failures (MTBF) are reciprocals
of one another. The MTBF, or 1/ ␭, is the mean value of this distribution
because it represents the mean time to failure.


11.8   THE RAYLEIGH DISTRIBUTION

The Rayleigh distribution density function has the following form:

                     p(x) ⫽
                              x
                              ␴
                              2
                                  exp   冉 冊
                                        ⫺x2
                                        2␴2
                                            ,     for x ⭓ 0
                                                                             (11.30)
                          ⫽ 0,                    for x ⬍ 0

This distribution shows up in the aforementioned case when converting two
independent normal distributions with the same variance from rectangular to
polar coordinates. This a a very common situation because it is the case of
looking for the radius distance from the origin in a polar coordinate system.
Just as the angle distribution in polar coodinates are uniformly distributed
(see Section 11.6), the radial distance from the origin is Rayleigh-distributed.
Thus, for the bull’s-eye example, the vector from the origin obeys the Ray-
leigh law under the circumstances described before.
   Unlike the normal distribution, the Rayleigh can be integrated in a straight-
forward manner. Thus, the CDF for the Rayleigh becomes

                    F(x) ⫽ 1 ⫺ exp      冉 冊
                                         ⫺x 2
                                         2␴ 2
                                              ,    for x ⭓ 0                 (11.31)

and represents, as usual, the probability that the variable is less than or equal
to a particular value of x.


11.9   ERROR ANALYSES

The purpose of error analyses is to identify all critical sources of error and
be in a position to control the magnitudes of such errors in all cases for which
they may significantly detract from system performance. An error analysis
example was set forth in Chapter 8 with respect to pointing at a target in a
shipboard environment.
330      SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


  The sequence of steps in an error analysis is as follows:

  1. Identify all significant error sources.
  2. Develop a computational ‘‘model’’ that relates the errors to one another.
  3. Estimate the magnitudes of the significant errors.
  4. Allocate error budgets, where necessary.
  5. Continue to estimate, predict, and control errors throughout the project.

   The ultimate benefit of a formal error analysis is to assure that the system
meets all requirements. The greatest leverage is obtained when this is accom-
plished prior to the actual building of the system. In that way, backtracking
and reengineering are avoided, together with the penalties in cost and schedule
that are usually involved.
   Errors are often associated with the standard deviation of some error dis-
tribution. Unless otherwise specified, the systems engineer must decide how
to relate the error requirement (e.g., pointing error) to the error distribution.
A ‘‘5% solution’’ is often adopted, which means that the error corresponds
to the two-sigma value. In more concrete terms, if the pointing error require-
ment was stated in terms of, for example, 1 degree, then this requirement
would be associated with the two-sigma value of the error distribution. The
standard deviation of that distribution would then be limited to at most 0.5
degree. If the design were to be even more rigorous, three- and four-sigma
values might be used, but these choices impact the design and might be
difficult to achieve.
   A brief example illustrates some of the issues involved in the preceding.
Let us assume that an on-line transaction processor (OLTP) requirement is
stated as ‘‘99% of the time, the system must respond to a request for service
in less than or equal to seven seconds.’’ After some analysis, it is concluded
that:

  • The error distribution in response time may be well described by the
      normal distribution.
  • Analysis shows that the average response time has been calculated to be
      four seconds.

From a normal probability table, the value 0.4900 (yielding a 0.99 probability)
corresponds to 2.33 sigma from the mean. This constrains the ‘‘distance’’
from seven to four seconds to be equal to 2.33 sigma, that is, 2.33 sigma is
set equal to 7 ⫺ 4 ⫽ 3 seconds. From this data, we conclude that the value
of sigma should be no greater than 3/2.33 ⫽ 1.29 seconds. This establishes
an ‘‘error budget’’ for the further design of the system.
   The same problem can be viewed somewhat differently if we keep the
seven-second requirement but the 99% is not part of the stated requirement.
In such a situation, we may conclude that we wish the range from the mean
                                             11.10   RADAR SIGNAL DETECTION   331

of four seconds to the constraint of seven seconds to correspond to the two-
sigma value of the distribution. That implies that 2␴ ⫽ 3 seconds and ␴ ⫽
1.5 seconds. Two sigma from the mean, from the normal table, yields the
value 0.4772. When this is added to the left half of the distribution, we obtain
the probability of 0.5 ⫹ 0.4772 ⫽ 0.9772. Our conclusion is that having a
sigma of 1.5 leads to a probability of 0.9772, somewhat smaller than the
previous case described earlier. In other words, if the error budget were not
exceeded, we would satisfy the required system response time 97.7% of the
time.

  Example. If Z ⫽ 2X ⫹ 3Y, where X and Y are independent error variables,
    and m(X) ⫽ 6, ␴(X) ⫽ 4, m(Y) ⫽ 5, and ␴(Y) ⫽ 7, find the mean value
    of the random variable Z and the allowable error variance of Z. The
    mean value of Z is found simply as (2)(6) ⫹ (3)(5) ⫽ 27. The allowable
    variance of Z is equal to (22)(16) ⫹ (32)(49) ⫽ 505.


11.10   RADAR SIGNAL DETECTION

In Chapter 9, Section 9.7.2, a radar-detection trade-off example was intro-
duced. In this example, we had a signal plus additive Gaussian noise. The
signal voltage was equal to V and the noise power (variance) equal to N, with
threshold detection at a voltage value of T. Of interest were the calculations
of the detection probability, P(d), and the false-alarm probability, P( fa). With
the information in this chapter, we are now in a position to carry out a simple
quantitative analysis.
   Specifically, we calculate the detection and false-alarm probabilities when
the noise and threshold are kept constant and the signal level is increased.
Specific assumed values are:

  Case 1: V ⫽ 4 volts, N ⫽ 4 watts, T ⫽ 1 volt
  Case 2: V ⫽ 8 volts, N ⫽ 4 watts, T ⫽ 1 volt
  Case 3: V ⫽ 10 volts, N ⫽ 4 watts, T ⫽ 1 volt

In all cases, the noise power remains the same, so that because ␴2 ⫽ N, the
noise standard deviation is equal to 2 volts.
   For Case 1, the range from the mean value of 4 volts to the threshold of
1 volt is 3 volts. Therefore, the threshold is at 1.5 sigma from the mean. At
a value equal to 1.5, from the normal probability table, the corresponding
area under the right-hand portion of the normal is 0.4332. When added to
0.5, a detection probability of P(d) ⫽ 0.9332 is obtained. For noise alone (no
signal present), we may calculate the false-alarm probability by recognizing
that the mean value of zero is only 1 volt from the threshold. That is, the
threshold is only 1/2 ⫽ 0.5 sigma from the mean. The corresponding table
332    SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


lookup value is 0.1915. However, in this situation, this must be subtracted
from 0.5 to yield the correct answer of 0.3085.
   In Case 2, the signal is increased to 8 volts with the other parameters
remaining the same. This means that the distance from the threshold is 8 ⫺
1 ⫽ 7 volts, which represents 3.5 sigmas from the mean. At a value of 3.5,
the normal table lookup gives us a value of approximately 0.49975. When
added to 0.5, the detection probability for this case becomes 0.99975. Because
neither the threshold nor the noise variance was changed, the false-alarm
probability remains the same as in Case 1.
   For Case 3, the signal is further increased to 10 volts. The distance from
the threshold is now 10 ⫺ 1 ⫽ 9 volts, which in this example is 4.5 sigmas.
The table lookup results in a value of 0.499997, which when added to 0.5
yields a detection probability of 0.999997. As with Case 2, the false-alarm
probability remains the same as in Case 1.
   Although these values have been chosen so as to be amenable to lookup
in the normal probability integral table, and are not necessarily realistic for a
radar system, they illustrate the way in which one might make detection and
false-alarm probability calculations, using the material presented in this
chapter.

  Example. In a pulse-signal-detection situation, (a) if the noise power is 9
    watts, and the false-alarm probability is 0.0099, where is the threshold?
    In this case, ␴ ⫽ 3 and the area under the normal distribution is 0.5 ⫺
    0.0099 ⫽ 0.4901. This yields a value from the normal table of 2.33.
    The threshold is therefore at 2.33 ␴ ⫽ (2.33)(3) ⫽ 6.99 volts. For part
    (b), what is the root-mean-square (rms) signal-to-noise ratio to achieve
    a detection probability of 0.9772? For 0.9772 ⫺ 0.5 ⫽ 0.4772, the nor-
    mal table yields a value of 2, in which case 2␴ ⫽ (2)(3) ⫽ 6. This value,
    when added to 6.99, results in an rms signal of approximately 13 volts.
    Thus, the rms signal-to-noise ratio is approximately 13/3 ⫽ 4.33.

   These examples illustrate the way in which signals might be detected in
the presence of noise. The signal pulse is corrupted by additive Gaussian
noise during transmission, so that at the receiver, both signal and noise are
present. The threshold detection scheme simply compares the signal-plus-
noise value to the threshold and decides that a signal is present when the
threshold is exceeded.
   In the section in this chapter dealing with the binomial distribution, we
calculated the probability of no errors in a sequence of eight pulses that
represented an alphanumeric character. We now can see how this section and
that previous section fit together in that we are now in a position to calculate
the error probability for a single pulse. Although there is much more to be
explored in this regard, such as errors of both types, we hope that the reader
can see more concretely the value in the preceding Gaussian error model and,
as well, the binomial computation from the previous section.
                                                    11.11   SYSTEM RELIABILITY      333

11.11     SYSTEM RELIABILITY

The discussion in Section 11.7 developed the exponential distribution as most
directly applicable to the matter of component and system reliability. In this
section, we further elaborate on a few reliability calculations.
   We define the hazard function for a system or component as

                                           f(t)
                                h(t) ⫽                                           (11.32)
                                         1 ⫺ F(t)

If the distribution in question is exponential, then

                                    ␭ exp (⫺ ␭t)
                           h(t) ⫽                ⫽␭                              (11.33)
                                     exp (⫺ ␭t)

which is therefore a constant hazard or failure rate. Under these conditions,
the system or component has no ‘‘memory’’ and, technically, does not wear
out. For most types of purely electronic equipment, this is a good approxi-
mation. For mechanical equipment, this is usually a poor model and should
not be used. Instead, the Weibull distribution is a better choice.
    For the exponential, then, the probability of failure-free operation to time
t is

                               R(t) ⫽ exp (⫺ ␭t)                                 (11.34)

where R(t) is the reliability and ␭ is the constant failure rate, which, in turn,
is equal to 1/MTBF.


11.11.1    Components in Series
If two components (that comprise a system) are placed in a ‘‘series’’ reliability
configuration, as in Figure 11.4(a), it means that both must be operative for
the system to be working properly. The reliability of the system is therefore

                  Rs ⫽ R(A)R(B) ⫽ exp (⫺ ␭at) exp (⫺ ␭bt)                        (11.35)
                                    ⫽ exp [⫺(␭a ⫹ ␭b)t]

This is the basis for the simple addition of failure rates for components when
considering the reliability of a system.
  Because the MTBFs and failure rates are reciprocals of one another,
334    SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


                                                                Component A

                                                                       R(A)



          Component A         Component B                       Component B

             R(A)                R(B)                                  R(B)

                        (a)                                            (b)
                        Figure 11.4. Two reliability configurations.



                                  ␭s ⫽ ␭a ⫹ ␭b                                (11.36)
                                1     1     1
                                   ⫽     ⫹                                    (11.37)
                              MTBFs MTBFa MTBFb

as described in Chapter 8, Section 8.7.2. Extension to many components in
a series reliability configuration is immediate.

  Example. The probability that the system described in Figure 8.3 will sur-
    vive without failure for 500 hours can be computed by adding the given
    failure rates of 0.0004, 0.0005, 0.0006, and 0.0005, yielding a system
    failure rate of 0.002. The reliability of the system is therefore exp
    (⫺.002t), where, in this case, t ⫽ 500 hours. This then reduces simply
    to R ⫽ exp (⫺1) ⫽ 0.368. We note that this is the result for any simple
    exponential system in terms of failure-free operation to its MTBF.

11.11.2     Components in Parallel
A parallel reliability configuation, as in Figure 11.4(b), means that at least
one of the components must be operative in order for the system to be work-
ing. For two components in parallel, the system reliability therefore can be
expressed as

                 Rs ⫽ 1 ⫺ [1 ⫺ R(A)][1 ⫺ R(B)]                                (11.38)
                    ⫽ 1 ⫺ [1 ⫺ exp (⫺ ␭at)][1 ⫺ exp (⫺ ␭bt)]                  (11.39)

and the failure rates are not additive for such a system. The parallel config-
uration introduces redundancy, and thus improves the reliability of the system,
with the penalty being the addition of the redundant component. This is nec-
essary when it is extremely important to keep a system on the air, such as
with a manned spacecraft or an air traffic control system.
                                                       11.13   AVAILABILITY   335

  Example. If we take the system in the previous example and place it in a
    redundant configuration, the reliability then becomes

             Rs ⫽ 1 ⫺ (1 ⫺ 0.368)(1 ⫺ 0.368) ⫽ 1 ⫺ (0.632)2 ⫽ 0.6

    Thus, the reliability has improved from 0.368 to 0.6 by adding simple
    redundancy, for which one pays the price of duplicating this piece of
    equipment.
  Example. What is the probability of succesful operation for 100 hours for
    a system with two subsystems with MTBFs of 200 and 300 hours when
    (a) the two subsystems are in ‘‘series,’’ and (b) the two subsystems are
    in ‘‘parallel’’? For part (a), R1 ⫽ exp (⫺100/200) ⫽ 0.6065 and R2 ⫽
    exp (⫺100/300) ⫽ 0.7168. The product of these represents the series
    case, which yields the result 0.434. In part (b), we have an overall
    reliability of 1 ⫺ (1 ⫺ 0.6065)(1 ⫺ 0.7168) ⫽ 1 ⫺ (0.3935)(0.2852) ⫽
    0.8885.


11.12   SOFTWARE RELIABILITY

Another application of the probability relationships discussed in this chapter
deals with software reliability. As indicated in Chapter 10, there are several
models for calculating the reliability of software. The one selected for expla-
nation in the last chapter was the so-called basic execution time model
(BETM). In that model, the failure intensity (I) was decreasing linearly with
the increasing number of failures/defects. Because failure intensity and failure
rate are basically the same notion, we did not have the simple constant failure-
rate situation. A new failure intensity had to be found as the number of
failures/defects increased and were discovered. Knowing the new failure in-
tensity then allowed us to utilize the Poisson distribution to calculate the
reliability. For the case in which we were inquiring into the probability of
exactly zero failures in time t, the Poisson reduced to the exponential case,
as shown in the discussion in Section 10.5.5.
   As suggested in the previous chapter, many other software reliability ap-
proaches depend heavily on probability relationships. For that essential rea-
son, it is important, especially for the software systems engineer, to master
the elements of probability theory.


11.13   AVAILABILITY

The availability of a system, as previously discussed in Sections 7.3.17 and
8.6.4, is the probability that a system will operate when called on at random
to do so. A mean-value approach to availability (see Chapter 8) defines it as
336      SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


                                      MTBF
                               A⫽                                       (11.40)
                                    MTBF ⫹ MDT

where A ⫽ availability
  MTBF ⫽ mean time between failures
   MDT ⫽ mean down time


Availability can be viewed as the percentage of time that the system is op-
erative, on the average, in relation to the total time.

  Example. If the failure rate for a system is 0.01 failure per hour and the
    mean-time-to-repair distribution is uniform in the range 2 to 8 hours,
    what is the system availability? The MTBF, from the failure rate, is
    1/0.01, or 100 hours. The mean down time is taken to be the average
    value of the repair-time uniform distribution, which is calculated as
    (2 ⫹ 8)/2 ⫽ 5 hours. From the preceding formula, the availability is
    100/(100 ⫹ 5) ⫽ 0.952.


11.14    SUMMARY

In this chapter, we presented selected quantitative relationships that support
systems engineering and project management. Most of these relationships
were drawn from the field of probability theory. Other domain-specific rela-
tionships are too numerous to be considered here, but may have to be ad-
dressed, depending on the domain knowledge necessary with respect to a
given project (e.g., guidance, control, or aerodynamics).
   The essential purpose of mastering these and other relationships is to mea-
sure the performance of the system that is being designed and built. Other
purposes include the effective management of the overall systems engineering
effort and the support of the quantitative aspects of all of the thirty elements
of systems engineering.
   A brief summary of the most significant relationships covered in this chap-
ter is provided in Exhibit 11.1.

  Exhibit 11.1: Summary of Quantitative Relationships
  General
  P(A ⫹ B) ⫽ P(A) ⫹ P(B),            if AB ⫽ 0
        P(AB) ⫽ P(A 兩 B)P(B) ⫽ P(B 兩 A)P(A)
               ⫽ P(A)P(B),       if A and B are independent
  Mean value of x ⫽ m(x) ⫽ E(x) ⫽ 兰xp(x) dx
                                                             11.14   SUMMARY   337

  Variance ⫽ ␴ 2 ⫽ 兰(x ⫺ m)2 p(x) dx
  Mean(X ⫹ Y) ⫽ mean(X) ⫹ mean(Y)
  ␴ 2(X ⫹ Y) ⫽ ␴ 2(X) ⫹ ␴ 2(Y),              when X and Y are independent
  E(xy) ⫽ 兰兰xyp(x, y) dx dy
  Cov (xy) ⫽ E(xy) ⫺ E(x)E(y)
                               Cov (xy)
  Correlation coefficient ⫽
                               ␴(x)␴(y)
  Cumulative distribution function (CDF) ⫽ 兰p(x) dx
  Specific Distributions and Applications

     Binomial: P(x) ⫽   冉冊  n
                            x
                              p xq n⫺x

                        (␭t)k exp (⫺␭t)
      Poisson: P(k) ⫽
                               k!

      Normal: p(x) ⫽
                         1
                        ␴兹2␲
                             exp         冋
                                 ⫺(x ⫺ m)2
                                    2␴ 2             册
  Exponential: p(x) ⫽ ␭ exp (⫺␭x)

     Rayleigh: p(x) ⫽
                        x
                        ␴   2
                              exp   冉 冊
                                    ⫺x 2
                                    2␴ 2
  Reliability ⫽ R(t) ⫽ e⫺␭t ⫽ exp (⫺t/MTBF)
  Series reliability ⫽ R(A)R(B) ⫽ exp [⫺(␭a ⫹ ␭b)t]
  Parallel reliability ⫽ 1 ⫺ [1 ⫺ exp (⫺␭at)][1 ⫺ exp (⫺␭bt)]
                     MTBF
  Availability ⫽
                   MTBF ⫹ MDT


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

11.1 For the binomial example in Section 11.3, calculate the probability of
     either one or zero errors.
11.2 For a roulette wheel with 18 red, 18 black, a zero, and a double zero,
     what is the probability of:
     a. winning when you bet on black?
     b. losing when you bet on red?
11.3 For a normal distribution with a mean value of 6 and a variance of 9,
     what is the probability that the random variable will exceed:
338     SELECTED QUANTITATIVE RELATIONSHIPS


       a. 10
       b. 12
       c. 14
11.4 What is the probability of successful operation for 200 hours for a
     system with three subsystems with MTBFs of 100, 200, and 300 hours
     when the subsystems are:
     a. in a ‘‘series’’ reliability configuration?
     b. placed in a redundant configuration?
11.5 If the failure rate is 0.02 failure/hour and the mean-time-to-repair dis-
     tribution is uniform in the range 2 to 10 hours, what is the system
     availability?
11.6 For threshold detection of a radar pulse in Gaussian additive noise, the
     pulse voltage is 14 volts, the threshold is set at 5 volts, and the noise
     power is 9 watts.
     a. Find the detection and false-alarm probabilities.
     b. Where would you put the threshold to obtain a false-alarm proba-
        bility of approximately 0.02? What is the resultant detection
        probability?
11.7 The three one-sigma errors of a system, where the errors are additive
     and independent, are in the ratio 3:4:5, and the total allowable error
     variance is 0.5. What are the maximum values of the three independent
     errors?
11.8 What is the probability that a system will operate without failure:
     (a) to its mean-time-between-failure (MTBF), and
     (b) twice its mean-time-between failure?


REFERENCES

11.1 Feller, W. (1950). An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications,
     Vol. 1. New York: John Wiley.
11.2 Parzen, E. (1960). Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications. New York:
     John Wiley.
11.3 Lloyd, D., and M. Lipow (1962). Reliability: Management, Methods and Math-
     ematics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
11.4 Eisner, H. (1988). Computer-Aided Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
     Prentice Hall.
PART IV
TRENDS AND
INTEGRATIVE
MANAGEMENT
               12
SYSTEMS/SOFTWARE
ENGINEERING
AND PROJECT
MANAGEMENT TRENDS


12.1   INTRODUCTION

Trends in systems engineering and project management, to a great extent, are
based on two primary factors:

  1. The demands placed on the project manager and the engineering team,
     particularly as systems become larger and more complex
  2. The advances in methods and technology that can be utilized to respond
     to the preceding

The problems that we face as project managers and systems engineers are
plentiful and we have little choice but to be aware of the new options that
are continually becoming available. This can be done, at least in part, by
tracking the trends and adopting new solutions where they have proven to be
useful. This chapter provides an overview of trends in systems engineering,
software engineering, and project management. Over the years, as new issues
arise, new trends will develop. Many of the trends examined here may be
expected, however, to be with us for quite some time.



12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS

In broad terms, most system developers are attempting to make continuous
improvements in their systems engineering capabilities and processes. When

                                                                        341
342      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


successful, they lead to building systems within the specified and required
constraints of time (schedule), cost (budget), and technical performance.


12.2.1    International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE)
In the early 1990s, a new organization, the National Council on Systems
Engineering (NCOSE), was formed to recognize the disciplines of systems
engineering and improve its practice. Changing its name and scope, the cur-
rent INCOSE has made important contributions to the field of systems
engineering.
   As an example, the inaugural issue [12.1] of the Journal of INCOSE dealt
with the following selected issues:

  • The basics of systems engineering
  • Systems architecting
  • Relationships between systems and software engineering
  • Model-based systems engineering
  • Systems thinking
  • Case studies

Moving forward in time to the 5th Annual International Symposium of
INCOSE [12.2], we see the following selected topics listed in the technical
program:

  • Systems engineering management
  • Systems engineering tools
  • Systems engineering processes and methods
  • Requirements management
  • Measurement
  • Emerging applications
  • Education and training

The comprehensive scope of INCOSE considerations is likely to make it an
important force in the development and application of the discipline of sys-
tems engineering for many years to come. The professional systems engineer
is thus encouraged to join INCOSE and participate in its activities.


12.2.2    System of Systems (S2) Engineering
Many practitioners of systems engineering have, in effect, been working on
a ‘‘system of systems.’’ Very large systems tend to be systems of systems,
such as our national communications system and our national air transpor-
tation system. But even in a much narrower context, we also find systems of
                                        12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS   343

systems. An example is the national air defense system with its many ele-
ments that deal with threat warning, attack assessment, and system response.
   As we move more into the ‘‘information age,’’ we are finding large num-
bers of information ‘‘systems of systems.’’ Examples include the National
Information Infrastructure or Highway, the Internet, and other customized
networks, and the merging of computers and communications technologies
and systems.
   With the emergence and prevalence of systems of systems, the matter of
how the systems engineer and project manager should deal with this situation
has arisen. A partial response is the notion of system of systems (S2)
engineering.
   A system of systems perspective is applicable when one or more of the
following circumstances is operative [12.3]:

  • A variety of related systems are being acquired independently, with each
    such system subject to the usual systems engineering disciplines
  • The schedule relationship between the related systems is arbitrary and
    asynchronous
  • There is an overriding system of systems mission, that is, each system
    must interoperate with the others so as to provide and integrate capability
    and response

For the previous situations, the recommended structure [12.3] for system of
systems engineering contains the elements shown in Exhibit 12.1. These el-
ements are to be performed by a systems engineering team that has the charter
to attempt to optimize the performance, schedule, and cost of the system of
systems. In addition, it is suggested that these elements be supported by a set
of systems engineering tools (see Section 12.2.7).

  Exhibit 12.1: Elements of Systems of Systems (S2) Engineering
  1. Integration engineering
     1.1 Requirements
     1.2 Interfaces
     1.3 Interoperability
     1.4 Impacts
     1.5 Testing
     1.6 Software verification and validation
     1.7 Architecture development
  2. Integration management
     2.1 Scheduling
     2.2 Budgeting/costing
     2.3 Configuration management
     2.4 Documentation
344     SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


  3. Transition management
     3.1 Transition planning
     3.2 Operations assurance
     3.3 Logistics planning
     3.4 Preplanned product improvement (P3I)

   Building upon these notions of S2 engineering is that of Rapid Computer-
Aided System of Systems Engineering (RCASSE). This construction recog-
nizes that system development schedules for large-scale systems are rarely
satisfied. This leads to situations in which by the time a system is fielded, it
is almost obsolete, especially in the domain of information technologies.
   RCASSE emphasizes a rapid, disciplined, and computer-supported design
process, with the following ten steps executed over a nominally specified
six-month period [12.4]:

   1. Mission engineering
   2. Baseline architecting
   3. Performance assessment
   4. Specialty engineering
   5. Interfaces/compatibility evaluation
   6. Software issues/sizing
   7. Risk definition/mitigation
   8. Scheduling
   9. Preplanned product improvement (P3I)
  10. Life-cycle cost-issue assessment

This reengineering of the more conventional systems engineering process is
designed to be used when there exist:

  • A system of systems situation
  • Extreme schedule pressure
  • A sophisticated development team with access to and experience with a
      variety of systems engineering tools

It focuses on only the essential elements in an attempt to converge quickly
on a baseline system that satisfies the requirements.
   It may be expected that further efforts to adapt the elements of systems
engineering to a system of systems environment will be forthcoming as we
continue to be faced with situations of this nature and the problems that they
entail.
                                        12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS   345

12.2.3   Capability Maturity Model (CMM) for Systems Engineering
Chapter 11 briefly described the capability maturity model (CMM) for soft-
ware. A current trend is to develop a CMM for systems engineering. It is
likely that this effort will be successful and have a significant impact on the
systems engineering community.
    The Software Engineering Institute (SEI), primary developers of the soft-
ware CMM, has taken a key position in formulating a CMM for systems
engineering (SE-CMM). An important ingredient in its structure is the iden-
tification of process areas (PAs), which it considers to be key elements of
systems engineering [12.5, 12.6]. PAs have been broken down into three main
categories, namely, (1) project, (2) organizational, and (3) engineering. Ap-
proximately seventeen preliminary PAs have been established under these
three categories. The structure also breaks each PA into base practices (BPs).
    The approach to the SE-CMM appears to have strong similarities to that
of the CMM for software. It is a maturity model for systems engineering and
a related method for assessment. As the software CMM had five levels of
maturity (see Chapter 11), this SE-CMM has six levels:

  Level 0: Initial
  Level 1: Performed
  Level 2: Managed
  Level 3: Defined
  Level 4: Measured
  Level 5: Optimizing

These levels are intended to differentiate the process capability of the
organization.
   INCOSE has also been investigating a CMM for systems engineering. In
this conception, some fifteen key focus areas have been defined under three
categories [12.7]:

  • Engineering Process
    —System requirements
    —System design
    —System integration and verification
    —Integrated engineering analysis
  • System Management
    —Planning
    —Tracking and oversight
    —Subcontract management
    —Intergroup coordination
    —Configuration management
346    SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


    —Quality assurance
    —Risk management
  • Organizational
    —Process management
    —Training
    —Technology management
    —Environment and tool support

These key focus areas, at this time, are not precisely the same as the process
areas (PAs) of the SE-CMM, but they have the same basic thrust. There are
also other differences, and similarities, between the INCOSE approach and
the SEI approach to a systems engineering CMM.
   With the above SEI and INCOSE approaches as background, three orga-
nizations moved forward in order to synthesize these approaches. These or-
ganizations were the Electronics Industry Association (EIA), INCOSE, and
the Enterprise Process Improvement Collaboration (EPIC). The net result was
SECM, the Systems Engineering Capability Model, as embodied in EIA/IS-
731 [12.8] (see also Chapter 2). This standard has two parts—the SECM
model and the SECM appraisal method. It also has a total of nineteen focus
areas, distributed under technical, management, and environment categories.
   Another notable piece of work was the formulation of the iCMM (the
Integrated Capability Maturity Model) by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) [12.9]. This model was focused upon the acquisition of software in-
tensive systems and contains the process areas (PAs) listed below:

  • Life Cycle or Engineering Processes
      PA 01—Needs
      PA 02—Requirements
      PA 03—Architecture
      PA 04—Alternatives
      PA 05—Outsourcing
      PA 06—Software development and maintenance
      PA 07—Integration
      PA 08—System test and evaluation
      PA 09—Transition
      PA 10—Product evaluation
  • Management or Project Processes
      PA 11—Project management
      PA 12—Contract management
      PA 13—Risk management
      PA 14—Coordination
                                        12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS   347

  • Supporting Processes
      PA 15—Quality assurance and management
      PA 16—Configuration management
      PA 17—Peer review
      PA 18—Measurement
      PA 19—Prevention
  • Organizational Processes
      PA 20—Organization process definition
      PA 21—Organization process improvement
      PA 22—Training
      PA 23—Innovation


   Finally, with respect to this overall topic, the SEI set forth the CMMI, also
an integrated version of the Capability Maturity Model [12.10]. This form of
the CMM concept was intended to provide ‘‘guidance for improving your
organization’s processes and ability to manage the development, acquisition,
and maintenance of products and services.’’
   The significance of the preceding, however, is not that there are different
approaches to formulating a systems engineering or integrated CMM. Rather,
this body of work represents a trend toward better understanding of the ele-
ments of systems engineering and the improvement of the internal processes
of systems engineering and its management. This can only have a beneficial
effect on both the theory and practice of systems engineering.

12.2.4   Systems Architecting
All of Chapter 9 is devoted to a key element of systems engineering, namely,
the architecting of the system. As important as this element is, one can expect
that efforts will continue to attempt to define and develop how architecting
is to be accomplished. Because it is fundamentally a design or synthesis
process, it differs from analysis in that one is attempting to ‘‘invent’’ a new
configuration that may not have existed before. Fascination with the creative
process of architecting a new system is not misplaced.
   As stated in Chapter 9, E. Rechtin has played a key role in studying the
sometimes mysterious process of system architecting. Beyond his seminal
books in this area [12.11, 12.12], Dr. Rechtin has continued to explore the
subject of systems architecting. For example, in examining the foundations
of systems architecting [12.13], he indicates that systems architecting ‘‘is
focused and scoped by six core concepts or ideas: the systems approach,
purpose orientation, ultraquality, modeling, experience-based heuristics, and
certification.’’ At about the same time, he also commented on the role and
responsibility of the systems architect [12.14]. Questions (and answers) that
he poses in this regard are as follows:
348     SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


  • Do I need an architect? (Asked by the client.)
  • How do I make sure I get what I want?
  • How do we keep on track?
  • How do I know that the system has been satisfactorily completed?

Rechtin continues to emphasize heuristics as a major factor in systems ar-
chitecting, citing heuristics with respect to architecting qualitative change,
maintaining system integrity, and systems acceptance. These heuristics and
their value apparently came as a ‘‘great surprise.’’ Many systems engineers
recognize this in terms of ‘‘rules of thumb’’ that they use in order to architect
new systems. Such rules are experience-based and are a testament to the
extensive domain knowledge of the best systems engineers.
   The issue of systems architecting was also examined in some detail at a
workshop sponsored by the Navy Department [12.15], with the central ques-
tion being how to improve architecting for increasingly complex systems and
environments. In response, some of the architecting tenets were defined:

  • Adherence to fundamental architecting principles
  • Recognition of a systems architect
  • Client involvement
  • Keeping the process creative
  • Controlled teamwork

   It was also suggested that the systems acquisition process should contain
a ‘‘systems architecture milestone’’ that would contain the following:

  • A definition of the systems architecture
  • System acceptance requirements
  • A life-cycle plan
  • A rationale that convinces the stakeholders that the system will:
      —satisfy their overall needs
      —satisfy functional, performance, and quality requirements
      —have an acceptable level of risk
      —do the foregoing at least as well as any alternative architecture

  Other notions discussed at the workshop were

  • The use of an architecture design language (ADL)
  • The unique needs of complicated systems
  • Methods that enable the architecting of complex systems
  • Tools for systems architecting
  • Workgroup collaborations
                                        12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS   349

  • Taxonomies of system styles
  • Training and career paths for systems architects

   Another important thrust with respect to systems architecting is represented
by the C4ISR (Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence,
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance) Architecture Framework [12.16], as dis-
cussed previously in Chapter 9. It will be recalled that this framework was
structured around three basic views, namely:

  • The operational view
  • The systems view, and
  • The technical view

This Architecture Framework was confirmed, in part, by the C4ISR Archi-
tectures Working Group (AWG) within the Department of Defense (DoD)
[12.17]. In its deliberations, the AWG was broken down into four panels to
consider:

  • The framework
  • Interoperability matters
  • Data modeling and analysis tools
  • Roles and responsibilities

Based upon their report [12.17], the following recommendation areas were
considered:

  • Establish common architecture terms and definitions
  • Implement a common approach for architectures
  • Strengthen architecture policy and guidance
  • Define and use levels of interoperability
  • Build architecture relationships with other DoD processes
  • Manage DoD architectures

The reader is urged to examine both the Architecture Framework [12.16] as
well as the AWG Final Report [12.17] in order to obtain a full understanding
of the significance of these efforts.
   Based upon these and other stated interests in this subject, it may be ex-
pected that continuing research into and application of various processes of
systems architecting will yield results that can be brought into the mainstream
of systems engineering practice.
350      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


12.2.5    Sustainable Development
In its statement of public policies and priorities, the American Association of
Engineering Societies (AAES) officially endorsed the notion of sustainable
development, which has been defined as ‘‘meeting the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs’’ [12.18]. It is further stated that ‘‘engineers will play a critical role in
sustainable development and must acquire the skills, knowledge, and infor-
mation that are the stepping stones to a sustainable future.’’
   Preserving our resources and our environment are key aspects of sustain-
able development. Because, as suggested earlier, engineers are and will con-
tinue to be deeply involved in such development projects, it is critical that
systems engineering be expanded, wherever necessary, to specifically accom-
modate the principles and practices of sustainable development. As articulated
in a position paper from the AAES, ‘‘engineers must work with others to
adapt existing technologies and create and disseminate new technologies that
will facilitate the practice of sustainable engineering and meet societal needs’’
[12.19]. This unmistakable trend should influence the way projects and sys-
tems engineering teams are deployed and managed. Moreover, it is likely that
ultimately, the elements of systems engineering will be modified so as to place
more emphasis on assuring sustainable development, explicitly including sus-
tainable technologies and processes.


12.2.6    The Structure of Systems Engineering
Fortunately, the overall structure of systems engineering appears to be under
constant examination. The Navy workshop [12.15] previously cited did so by
exploring the state of the art as well as recommendations for the future in the
following key focus group areas:

  • Design capture
  • Evolutionary systems
  • Infrastructure and tools
  • Organizational/institutional learning
  • Systems architecting
  • Reengineering

Results in these areas cannot be reiterated here, but it is clear that the very
structure of systems engineering is being analyzed in considerable detail, with
participation of many of the best systems engineers in the country.
   While mentioning the best systems engineers, it is also necessary to ac-
knowledge the varied, prolific, and significant work, over many years, of
Andrew Sage [12.20, 12.21, 12.22, 12.23]. As an example, in 1994, Dr. Sage
discussed the ‘‘many faces of systems engineering’’ in the INCOSE inaugural
issue of its journal [12.24]. Among the topics examined were
                                       12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS   351

  • Systems management
  • Systems methodology
  • Knowledge types
  • Formulation, analysis, and interpretation
  • Life-cycle models
  • Interactions across life cycles
  • Architecture levels

   Another examination of the structure of systems engineering was carried
out by the Software Productivity Consortium (SPC), expanding its original
charter from software considerations to the broader context of systems
[12.25]. The result was a tailorable process for systems engineering that was
given the name of Generic Systems Engineering Process (GSEP). The basic
notion was to view all elements of systems engineering in terms of the de-
tailed processes that were required in order to carry them out. In effect, it
was equivalent to taking the thirty elements of systems engineering defined
here and answering the question: What process is necessary for the proper
execution of each element? In order to give the process descriptions some
rigor, ICAM (Integrated Computer-aided Manufacturing) Definition (IDEF)
diagrams were used as descriptors. This method is also embodied in several
systems/software engineering tools so that the process flows are easily
automated.
   These are but a few of the many examinations of the basic structure of
systems engineering that are under constant scrutiny and reevaluation. It is
believed that trends in this direction are helpful and likely to continue
indefinitely.


12.2.7   Systems Engineering Environments and Tools
Given the thirty elements of systems engineering and descriptions of the pro-
cesses required to carry out these elements, two natural questions that follow
are:

  1. Is there a set of automated tools that the systems engineering team can
     use?
  2. Can these tools be integrated in some fashion to create a ‘‘systems
     engineering environment’’ (SEE) with which the team can operate in a
     highly effective and efficient manner?

A book by this author concentrated on answering the first of these [12.26],
and also made it clear that a large number of such tools have been developed
for other purposes, and that many were focused on software engineering.
Further developments with respect to system of systems (S2) engineering, as
discussed earlier in this chapter [12.3, 12.4], depended highly on the availa-
352    SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


bility of systems engineering supporting tools. This situation is true today
with tool developers giving emphasis to applications in software engineering
and even business process reengineering (BPR) [12.27], in distinction to sys-
tems engineering. The need for tools that support systems engineering has
now been widely recognized, and groups such as INCOSE and others [12.28]
are working on this issue as a continuing activity.
   With respect to a systems engineering environment, a leading position was
taken by the Air Force’s Rome Laboratory in developing the System Engi-
neering Concept Demonstration (SECD). The primary goal of this program
was to ‘‘increase the productivity and effectiveness of system and specialty
engineers involved in the development, maintenance, and enhancement of
military computer systems’’ [12.29]. Within the scope of this effort, the Air
Force specifically addressed the automation of the systems engineering role
and the various activities that support systems engineering. These activities
fell into the categories of engineering, communications, and management.
   Ultimately, the program focused on the development of Catalyst, an au-
tomated systems engineering environment that targeted the systems engineer-
ing team as the user and addressed these three categories. The building blocks
of Catalyst were tools that dealt with interface mechanisms and environment
frameworks that took the form of:

  • Process automation
  • Generic engineering and management tools
  • Concurrent engineering groupware
  • Integration mechanisms
  • Environment adminstration tools

Documentation of SECD was produced in six volumes addressing:

  1. Systems engineering needs
  2. A process model
  3. Interface standards studies
  4. Technology assessments
  5. Trade studies
  6. A security study

From this point, the SECD program transitioned from exploratory to advanced
development that involved the building of critical Catalyst components.
   Because systems engineering continues to be a process that calls for con-
siderable ingenuity in working with massive amounts of information, it is
likely that efforts to build automated systems engineering environments will
continue for the indefinite future. One key issue is the extent to which these
environments are designed to incorporate tools that are fully integrated, that
                                        12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS   353

is, tools that work together so as to minimize rekeying and manual transport
of data. Another, of course, is the scope of these tools. In the context of this
book, that question may be stated as: To what extent does such an environ-
ment cover the full thirty elements of systems engineering? These issues carry
forward into constructing a software engineering environment, otherwise
known as CASE (computer-aided software engineering). Further discussion
of these points appear later in this chapter under the subject of software
engineering trends.


12.2.8   Education
Systems engineering, in many colleges with engineering programs, has not
yet been fully accepted as a discipline of study. It certainly does not have the
emphasis given to the old and more widely established fields of electrical,
mechanical, chemical, and nuclear engineering. Notable exceptions to this are
programs at the University of Virginia, Virginia Tech, the University of Ari-
zona, George Mason University, the University of Maryland, and The George
Washington University, among others. In some cases, systems engineering is
tied into industrial engineering, operations research, or engineering manage-
ment. As the demand for more formal training in systems engineering con-
tinues, it may be expected that more schools will focus on this need and build
more substantial education programs responsive to activities called for in
much of our industrial base. This is a relatively slow process, so many firms
obtain nonacademic training in systems engineering by contracting with spe-
cialty companies that offer short courses that may be adapted to individual
needs. Whatever the form of delivery, it can be safely predicted that the
development of systems engineering education programs and options will
continue for a long time.


12.2.9   Acquisition Practices
Incredible amounts of time and energy have been expended with respect to
defining and reforming the processes involved in the acquisition of systems,
especially in the government. These efforts, of course, have major impacts
on industry and so various companies and industry groups have had signifi-
cant inputs to the thinking that has gone into acquisition change and reform.
   The motivation for acquisition reform has been centered around three key
issues—speeding up the process, competition, and fairness. The first of these
has been felt rather strongly because the time for the acquisition of large-
scale systems has become longer and longer. Indeed, many systems are almost
obsolete by the time all the preliminary phases are executed and the system
is finally fielded. For both government and industry, this is an intolerable
condition. With respect to competition and fairness, the number of award
protests has increased dramatically in government systems procurements for
354      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


a variety of reasons. The resolution of these protests has also had a major
impact on the time required to acquire a system.
    Chapters 2 and 7 discussed the rather large documents known as the 5000
series in the Department of Defense (DoD). This series incorporated a direc-
tive, instruction, and documentation requirement and process for the acqui-
sition of military systems. Collectively, they are extensive in their scope and
penetrating in their detail.
    A number of so-called acquisition reform initiatives have been important
to the government. Two such efforts were the Federal Acquisition Reform
Act (FARA) and the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act (FASA) [12.30].
Judging from the extensive dialogue on these matters, reengineering acqui-
sition practices has been and remains a distinctly nontrivial exercise. By look-
ing at the practices over the past thirty years, continuing attention to these
matters can be expected to be with us for the indefinite future. These practices
impact the way both project managers and systems engineers do their jobs,
especially during the proposal development phase.
    Another major thrust in the direction of acquisition reform developed in-
ternally within the DoD in order to solve some of the problems alluded to
earlier. This was basically initiated by the Secretary of Defense in his mem-
orandum of June 29, 1994 [12.31], which called for a move from military
specifications and standards to increased use of best commercial practices.
The stage was set for this definitive action during the previous year when the
Deputy Under Secretary for Acquisition Reform established a Process Action
Team (PAT). The charter for this PAT [12.32] was to develop

  (a) a comprehensive plan to ensure that DOD describes its needs in ways that
  permit maximum reliance on existing commercial items, practices, processes and
  capabilities, and (b) an assessment of the impact of the recommended actions
  on the acquisition process.

The PAT produced a ‘‘Blueprint for Change’’ [12.33], which highlighted some
thirteen principal recommendations, reproduced in Exhibit 12.2. These activ-
ities, along with an implementation plan, defined a significant trend toward
acquisition reform that is undeniable. Although some parties suggested more
far-reaching approaches [12.32], there is no doubt that reform of the way in
which the government acquires large systems is necessary. All of this repre-
sents an environment in which both the Project Manager and the systems
engineering team must do their jobs.

  Exhibit 12.2: Thirteen Principal Recommendations of the Process
  Action Team (PAT) on Military Specifications and Standards [12.32]
      1. All ACAT [Acquisition Category] Programs for new systems, major
         modifications, technology generation changes, nondevelopmental
         items, and commmercial items shall state needs in terms of perform-
         ance specifications.
                                        12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS    355

   2. Direct that manufacturing and management standards be canceled or
      converted to performance or nongovernment standards.
   3. Direct that all new high value solicitations and ongoing contracts will
      have a statement encouraging contractors to submit alternative solu-
      tions to military specifications and standards.
   4. Prohibit the use of military specifications and standards for all ACAT
      programs except when authorized by the Service Acquisition Execu-
      tives or designees.
   5. Form partnerships with industry associations to develop nongovern-
      ment standards for the replacement of military standards where
      practical.
   6. Direct government oversight be reduced by substituting process control
      and nongovernment standards in place of development/production
      testing and inspection and military unique quality assurance systems.
   7. Direct a goal of reducing the cost of contractor-conducted development
      and production test and inspection by using simulation, environmental
      testing, dual-use test facilties, process controls, metrics, and continuous
      process improvement.
   8. Assign Corporate Information Management offices for specifications
      and standards preparation and use.
   9. Direct use of automation to improve the processes associated with the
      development and application of specifications and standards and Data
      Item Descriptions (DIDs).
  10. Direct the application of automated aids in acquisition.
  11. Direct revision of the training and education programs to incorporate
      specifications and standards reform. Contractor participation in this
      training effort shall be invited and encouraged.
  12. Senior DoD management take a major role in establishing the envi-
      ronment essential for acquisition reform cultural change.
  13. Formalize the responsibility and authority of the Standards Improve-
      ment Executives, provide the authority and resources necessary to im-
      plement the standards improvement program within their service/
      agency, and assign a senior official with specifications and standards
      oversight and policy authority.

   A particular response to the preceding was the formulation, by the De-
partment of Defense, of an Evolutionary Acquisition Strategy to acquire
weapon systems [12.34]. In this approach, the Joint Logistics Commanders
gave their formal guidance to Program Managers. They expressed their belief
that such an approach provided ‘‘a good alternative means to develop and
acquire weapon systems while providing for incremental growth over time,’’
and recommended that the Guide be used as a ‘‘foundation for effective
weapon system acquisition planning.’’ Further, the Evolutionary Acquisition
(EA) Process was defined as
356    SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


  A strategy for use when it is anticipated that achieving the desired overall ca-
  pability will require the system to evolve during development, manufacture or
  deployment.

The Guide goes on to indicate that the EA approach was basically the same
as Preplanned Product Improvement (P3I), one of the elements of systems
engineering, as defined herein. This suggests that new trends may be estab-
lished by reordering priorities and changing emphasis with respect to elements
and processes that already have been well understood. This is an observation
that should be kept in mind by Project Managers and systems engineers.
   Much of the detail regarding DoD processes and products attendant to the
acquisition of systems is contained within the latest version of the DoD 5000
series [12.35]. These documents tend to be updated every several years or so
as we gain deeper insights into acquisition matters or wish to change emphasis
within overarching goals and objectives. One significant statement of such
goals is cited below, as contained within a description of the ‘‘Road Ahead’’
by the then Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology,
Jacques Gansler [12.36]:

  Goal One: Field high-quality defense products quickly; support them
  responsively
  Goal Two: Lower the total ownership cost of defense products
  Goal Three: Reduce the overhead cost of the acquisition and logistics
  infrastructure

Looking down the road, a variety of study teams explored issues and problems
in acquisition and logistics, dealing with the following topics:

  • Research, development, test, and evaluation (RDT&E) infrastructure
  • Product support
  • Requirements and acquisition interfaces
  • Training and tools for acquisition of services
  • Commercial business environment

Integrating the results of these primary studies, as well as other inputs, led to
the articulation of some near-term actions that are critically important to the
DoD. These are [12.36]:

  1. Increased reliance on an integrated civil-military industrial base
  2. A new approach to acquisition whereby ‘‘price and schedule play a key
     role in driving design development and systems are reviewed by
     portfolio’’
  3. A transformation of the mass logistics system into one that is agile,
     reliable, and delivers logistics on demand
                                         12.2   SYSTEMS ENGINEERING TRENDS   357

  4. Reduction of acquisition infrastructure and overhead functions and costs
  5. A workforce that is adequately trained to ‘‘operate efficiently in this
     new environment and will perpetuate continuous improvement’’
  6. The institutionalization of continuous improvement as well as change
     management so as to achieve a virtual learning environment.


12.2.10   Systems Integration
Systems integration is a most interesting term, since many of the largest
companies call themselves ‘‘systems integrators.’’ If they are asked to describe
the business they’re in using just a couple of words, they are similarly likely
to respond with ‘‘the systems integration business.’’ All this, of course, sug-
gests that these special words should be very well defined and that there
perhaps should be more books on systems integration than there are on sys-
tems engineering. It appears that the opposite is true. With some exceptions
[e.g., 12.37], discussions of systems integration tend to be few and far be-
tween. However, most companies seem to agree that systems engineering is,
in fact, a core competency that they need in order to carry out their primary
mission as systems integrators. In addition, these companies appear to doc-
ument what they mean by systems integration, but for competitive reasons
are not anxious to share this information with the rest of the world. They
prefer to use their unique approach to systems integration as a means of
differentiating themselves in the marketplace. Given this situation, this author
would like to suggest his own short-form definition of systems integration:

Systems Integration. The process of bringing together a variety of (possibly
  disparate) functional elements, subsystems, and components into a larger
  (meta)system, or system of systems, to provide a highly interoperable and
  cost-effective solution that satisfies the customer’s needs and requirements,
  while at the same time managing the overall process and delivery of prod-
  ucts in a highly effective and efficient manner.

We can make several observations about this definition and what it might
imply. First, systems integration looks a lot like the optimal synthesis of
systems engineering and program/project management. In that sense, this
book, by addressing both project management and systems engineering, might
also be called a text about at least a major part of systems integration. Second,
in dealing with ‘‘systems of systems,’’ systems integration deals also with the
topics discussed earlier in this chapter regarding systems of systems. Third,
from a technical perspective, systems integration is about searching for ways
to find an integrated solution, that is, one that deals as necessary with (1)
legacy stovepipe systems, (2) upgrades to legacy stovepipe systems, (3) com-
mercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) and nondevelopment items (NDI) that need to
be part of the solution, (4) reused components, as appropriate, (5) new sys-
358      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


tems and subsystems that need to be built for the first time. Systems integra-
tion also emphasizes the architecting of a system with the appropriate balance
of the above five elements.
   In addition, interoperability and compatibility become critical elements in
the systems integration process. They also constitute a most difficult part of
the problem since (1) it is a nontrivial matter to integrate disparate subsystems
so that they interoperate in a harmonious manner, and (2) systems tend to be
more failure prone at the interfaces, which is a critical aspect of achieving
interoperability and compatibility. Further, the sequence in which parts of
systems are integrated is not necessarily obvious, and becomes an important
consideration in the systems integration process. Finally, the systems integra-
tor needs to be able to question requirements in order to do his or her job,
possibly contrary to some views regarding the subject.
   As the last element of commentary here regarding the topic of systems
integration, it is necessary to point out two misconceptions about systems
integration. The first misconception is that the best solution is one that max-
imizes the degree of integration of all stovepipe systems, with the goal being
100%. The second misconception is that, if we integrate a set of ‘‘best of
breed’’ subsystems, we will necessarily achieve an overall ‘‘best’’ solution.
The reader is urged to consider these two propositions, think them through,
and use them as necessary in addressing the next systems integration problem
that crosses your desk.




12.3     SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS

Trends in software engineering are at least as extensive as they are in systems
engineering. The reason is that software development remains our most sig-
nificant problem within the context of systems engineering. Put another way,
many of the failures in performance, schedule, or cost are traceable to defi-
ciencies in software engineering processes. In this section, we explore trends
in a variety of areas. Other more detailed technical trends (e.g., the move
toward object-oriented design and programming) are not considered here, but
can be found in many texts and documents devoted only to software
engineering.


12.3.1    National Software Council
The significance of software as part of our systems is underscored by estab-
lishment of the National Software Council (NSC) in 1995. This nonprofit
organization was founded to ‘‘propel software to the forefront of the national
agenda and define the National Software Strategy to preserve U.S. competi-
                                       12.3   SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS    359

tiveness and security into the 21st century’’ [12.38]. Its statement of mission
is to ‘‘ensure that the U.S. software sector continues to make a strong and
growing contribution to national economic prosperity.’’ Thus, the NSC has
embraced a rather large vision with potential impacts on a national scale.
   The NSC tends to focus on the following three activities:

  1. Identify and articulate national software issues
  2. Provide a forum for analysis and discussion of software issues
  3. Propose policy recommendations to achieve software goals

Clearly, the NSC has to work with people from industry and government to
achieve its goals. Its initial prospectus appears to be very thoughtful and well-
conceived. Under the able leadership of John Marciniak as the first President,
it is likely that the NSC will have a very positive influence on the national
agenda with respect to software. Readers are encouraged to track and partic-
ipate in the future activities of the Council.


12.3.2   Commercial Practices
The previous section on systems engineering discussed the thrust in the DoD
toward commercial practices and away from military specifications and stan-
dards. This clear trend is reflected as well in the software arena. As an ex-
ample, in 1994, the Defense Science Board (DSB) examined the issue of the
commercial acquisition of defense software [12.39]. This extremely interest-
ing report summarized principal findings and recommendations in the follow-
ing categories:

  • Process credibility
  • DoD program management
  • DoD personnel
  • Use and integration of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) software
  • Software architecture
  • Software technology base
  • Management control and oversight

The report is strong on the point that the way the DoD currently does business
is not compatible with the extensive use of commercial practices. It therefore
calls for major changes in current software acquisition and development pro-
cesses and practices. Exhibit 12.3 [12.39] provides a selected list of some of
the findings and recommendations in the DSB report.
360    SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


   Exhibit 12.3: Selected Defense Science Board Findings
   and Recommendations
Findings
   • High life-cycle cost in time and dollars
   • Incredibly long (13–15 years) development cycle
   • Excessive acquisition agent involvement in design detail and process
   • Contractor–government relationship based on mistrust versus mutual
     trust
   • Approach tends to be design it all and then build it
   • Little focus on design for reusability
   • Requirements and source selection inflexibility
   • Complicated regulations
   • Program management does not encourage ‘‘80% solution for 20% cost’’
   • Shortage of qualified software personnel in DoD
   • Normally no COTS market analysis
   • Insufficient advantage taken of commercial research and development
     (R&D)
   • Reasons for trouble on development programs:
     —Poor requirements definition
     —Inadequate process management and control by contractor
     —Lack of integrated product teams (IPTs)
     —Lack of consistent attention to software process
     —Too little attention devoted to software architecture
     —Focus on innovation rather than cost and risk
Recommendations
  • Make necessary changes in acquisition regulations
  • Establish overarching software life-cycle guidelines
  • Renew software program management education and training initiative
  • Require trade studies of the use of COTS
  • Emphasize use of software architecture
  • Strengthen software technology transfer

The DBS report is but one milestone of many that define a significant trend
in software engineering and development—a fundamental belief that com-
mercial practices will streamline the process and result in shortened time
frames and decreased costs, without any performance penalties.
   In November of 2000, another report was produced by the DSB Task Force
on Defense Software [12.40]. The Board was asked to explore defense soft-
ware in relation to the use of commercial practices, and also to develop a
                                      12.3   SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS   361

strategy that makes appropriate use of these practices. The DSB examined
six previous major DoD-wide studies and the 134 recommendations contained
in them. They also concluded that only a few of these recommendations had
been implemented, an indicator of how difficult it is to get a very large en-
terprise, such as the DoD, to shift gears and make changes.
    As part of their work, the DSB reiterated what they called disturbing sta-
tistics that apparently apply to both commercial and government information
technology (IT) projects. These numbers, attributed to the Standish Group
[12.41], are cited below:

  • About 16% of all of the IT projects were completed on time and within
    budget.
  • Some 31% of these projects were canceled before they were completed.
  • Adding the above (which is 47%), we are left with about 53% of the
    projects that are both late and over budget, with the actual expenditure
    being greater than the budgeted expenditure by more than 89%.
  • For those projects that were completed, computed above as 69% of the
    total, only about 61% had the original set of features that had been
    specified (39% did not).

  The overall recommendations of this DSB Task Force can be summarized
by the following, in terms of new actions to be taken by the DoD:

  1. More stress should be placed upon past performance and the degree of
     process maturity.
  2. Additional independent expert reviews (IERs) of programs should be
     initiated.
  3. The software skills of acquisition and program management personnel
     need to be improved.
  4. Best practices in relation to software should be collected, disseminated,
     and employed.
  5. Contract incentives need to be restructured.
  6. The technology base that supports software development is in need of
     strengthening and stabilizing.

We shall see, down the road, if, when, and how these recommendations are
implemented.


12.3.3   Reuse
Among the issues cited in the Defense Science Board report is insufficient
focus on design for reusability. The matter of software reuse, however, con-
362      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


stitutes a significant trend in software development. The basic notion is that
many software modules (builds, configuration items, etc.) whose performance
has been verified can be reused in at least two contexts:

  1. Within a company, utilizing the best software it has developed
  2. In a government repository of ‘‘certified’’ software that can be accessed
     by persons and organizations that have approved reasons to have such
     access

There are, however, a large number of issues that surround the matter of reuse
of software. A Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, in 1993, distrib-
uted a memorandum [12.42] that set forth a software reuse incentive policy.
Some of the provisions of that memorandum are listed as follows:

  • We should consider designing all new software for reuse.
  • Every acquisition strategy panel should explore the full or partial reuse
    of existing software, including COTS.
  • When software reuse may not be feasible, consideration should be given
    to the design of new software to facilitate reuse in future applications.
  • We should identify several specific ‘‘test’’ programs that will require
    reuse and design for reuse.

    A reuse education and training workshop in 1994 [12.43] had the goal of
‘‘identifying key reuse concepts and how they can be integrated into an ex-
isting curriculum’’ regarding software engineering. The following subgoals
for that workshop reinforce the importance of reuse:

  • Identify key software engineering assumptions and concepts relevant to
      reuse during the software life cycle.
  • Explore how to introduce the preceding into various curricula.
  • Identify the audience and roadblocks for reuse concepts.
  • Compile lists of education resources and references.

   There is also some activity regarding the development of a reuse capability
model (RCM) [12.44]. This is a ‘‘self-assessment and planning aid for im-
proving an organization’s reuse capability’’ and is being addressed by the
Software Productivity Consortium (SPC). Studies have also focused on reuse
inhibitors, as well as the best of reuse practices [12.45]. Statistics regarding
reuse initiatives have been cited as follows [12.46]:

  • 14–68% productivity increase
  • 20% reduction in customer complaints
  • 25% less required time to repair and overall schedule
                                       12.3   SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS   363

  • 50% reduction in integration time
  • 20–35% increases in quality
  • 20% less training costs
  • 400% return on investment[!]

   Clearly, judging from these potential benefits, if organizations can make
reuse work, they will increase software development productivity and make
them more competitive in the marketplace.
   In addition to the initiatives in the Department of Defense and its related
contractors, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has
undertaken an Advanced Technology Program (ATP) in the area of ‘‘com-
ponent-based software.’’ A news release from the U.S. Department of Com-
merce [12.47] announced the component-based software program as ‘‘a
five-year, $150 million program to develop the technologies necessary to en-
able systematically reusable software components.’’ Selected NIST contracts
under this ATP program involved:

  • Automation of dependable software generation with reusable components
  • Component integration: an architecture-driven approach
  • Scalable business application development components and tools
  • Component-based reengineering technology

   From the preceding, it can be seen that there is a great deal of force behind
software component reuse and considerable effort is likely to be expended to
improve and refine software reuse. This author has also looked in some detail
at software reuse and has suggested a reengineered software acquisition pro-
cess that involves the reuse of entire developer off-the-shelf systems [12.48].


12.3.4   Development Methods
The Defense Science Board report strongly recommends that software be
developed more in accordance with commercial practices. This also implies
the use of commercial development methods, at least with respect to the use
of commercial standards and specifications.
   Returning also to Chapter 10, we see the suggestion in Military Standard
498 that there are three well-defined development strategies: (1) grand design,
(2) incremental, and (3) evolutionary. The bottom line is that the latter two
are preferred approaches, depending on the circumstances. We also note the
trend in the direction of evolutionary acquisition of systems (see Section
12.2.9).
   A more complete array of software development methods was examined
by the Air Force’s Software Technology Support Center in Ogden, Utah
[12.49], namely:
364      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


  • Software Development Models:
    —Waterfall
    —Incremental
    —Spiral
  • Software Development Techniques:
    —Prototype
    —Cleanroom
    —Object-oriented

Strengths and weaknesses of these various approaches were explicitly cited.
It was also indicated that the evolutionary approach was not considered, due
to the variation in its meaning in the literature.
   By noting the preceding, as well as other investigations of alternative de-
velopment approaches, it is seen that the situation is in a state of flux, with
new ideas and variations on a theme being proposed and analyzed. This in-
vestigatory trend will continue as we try to find a process that has the de-
monstrable productivity increases that we seek. The reader with a special
interest in these alternatives that have not been discussed here (e.g., clean-
room, object-oriented) is encouraged to examine the extensive literature on
these subjects.


12.3.5    Acquisition Practices
Acquisition practices of software systems are related to the following topics
already discussed:

  • Military Standard 498
  • Acquisition trends for systems, including acquisition reform
  • The move toward commercial practices
  • Various software development approaches
  • Reuse of software

The bottom line is that software system acquisition practices are changing,
and the expectation is that continuous modifications in current practices are
likely to be on our agenda, judging from our history, well into the twenty-
first century.
    Two of the most recent trends with respect to software acquisition can be
identified as

  • The emergence of a software acquisition capability maturity model
    construction
  • Simulation and modeling for software acquisition (SAMSA)
                                       12.3   SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS    365

    For the former, a structure parallel to the Software Engineering Institute
(SEI) capability maturity model is being developed, along with key process
areas (KPAs) that relate to the software acquisition process. In the latter area,
a notable effort is that of Boehm and Scacchi at the University of Southern
California [12.50] who indicate that ‘‘there are substantial opportunities to
rethink how the acquisition of software-intensive systems should occur in
ways that address the recurring problems.’’ SAMSA activity is predicated on
the notion that it is important to make the acquisition of future software-
intensive systems more agile. This can be achieved by reengineering the var-
ious software processes across their overall life cycle. SEI’s vision for this
type of effort is embodied in an approach called VISTA (Virtual Information
SysTem Acquisition). VISTA refers to a process whereby ‘‘an evolving series
of ever more complete and operational systems versions are acquired through
a series of short acquisition life cycles.’’ The VISTA approach is based largely
on the construction of models and simulations of software development life
cycles. Readers with a further interest in this trend should contact the authors
cited before.
    A significant approach to trying to improve our overall ability to build and
field software systems is embodied in GSAM—Guidelines for Successful Ac-
quisition and Management of Software Intensive Systems [12.51]. GSAM at-
tempts to articulate success paths, and thereby mitigate against ‘‘repeated
inappropriate or unsuccessful practices.’’ These paths might also be called
‘‘lessons learned’’ as well as ‘‘best practices.’’ We note from a previous dis-
cussion of the work of the Defense Science Board in 2000 [12.40] that best
practices also represented an area of special focus in that context. GSAM also
suggests some key principles, as summarized below:

  1. Focus on the real customer.
  2. Talk about the program content and not its politics.
  3. Understand the full life cycle of the program and its needs.
  4. Determine baseline requirements and the scope of the project as soon
     as possible.
  5. Tackle the program as a series of small steps in order to achieve incre-
     mental successes.
  6. Assume meaningful measurements for cost, schedule, and quality
     management.
  7. Identify and manage key program risks.
  8. Capture and utilize data and best practices from earlier programs.
  9. Emphasize and sponsor improvement efforts, and assure that managers
     ‘‘walk the talk.’’

12.3.6   I-CASE (Integrated Computer-Aided Software Engineering)
For a number of years, software vendors have provided tools for software
engineers under the general title of computer-aided software engineering
366    SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


(CASE). The purpose of such tools, of course, has been to increase the pro-
ductivity of software engineering projects. The Air Force’s Software Tech-
nology Support Center (STSC) has been cataloging and analyzing these tools,
for which a representative list is provided in Exhibit 12.4. Formal reports
from the STSC on these tools have included the categories of

  • Requirements analysis and design
  • Software estimation
  • Source code static analysis
  • Reengineering
  • Documentation
  • Project management
  • Test preparation, execution, and analysis
  • Software engineering environments

   Starting around 1990, the DoD formally entered the CASE arena by spon-
soring a program known as Integrated Computer-Aided Software Engineering
(I-CASE). They issued a request for proposal (RFP) to industry for the pur-
pose of developing a suite of I-CASE tools. The Air Force’s Gunter Air Force
Base in Alabama became the agent for the I-CASE procurement. As of 1991,
the I-CASE development environment was described [12.52] as a central data-
base repository encyclopedia with connectivity to a variety of tools for:

  • Requirements analysis and specifications
  • Project management
  • Quality assurance
  • Design
  • Testing
  • Prototyping
  • Code generation
  • Configuration management
  • Cross development

  Exhibit 12.4: Selected Computer-Aided Software Engineering
  (CASE) Tools
             Name of Tool                               Vendor
  BACHMAN/Analyst                        Bachman Information Systems
  CARD tools                             CARDTools Systems Corp.
  Corvision                              Cortex Corp.
  Design Aid II                          Yourdon/CGI Systems Inc.
  EasyCASE Professional                  Evergreen CASE Tools, Inc.
                                     12.3    SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS   367

             Name of Tool                                Vendor
  Excelerator Series                        Intersolv
  IEW/Workstations                          Knowledgeware Federal Systems
  Integrated Systems Engineering            LBMS, Inc.
     Toolset
  Information Engineering Facility          Texas Instruments
  ISE Eiffel                                Interactive Software Engineering
                                               Inc.
  Maestro II                                Softlab Inc.
  MAGEC RAD System                          Magec Software
  Micro Focus Cobol Workbench               Micro Focus
  MicroSTEP                                 Syscorp International
  Natural Engineering Series                Software AG of North America
  Objectmaker                               Mark V Systems
  Objectory                                 Objective Systems
  Oracle CASE                               Oracle Corp.
  Paradigm Plus                             Protosoft, Inc.
  POSE                                      Computer Systems Advisors
  ProKappa                                  Intellicorp, Inc.
  Prokit Workbench                          McDonnell Douglas Information
                                               Systems
  Promod CASE Tools                         Meridian Software Systems
  RDD-100                                   Ascent Logic Corp.
  RTM                                       Marconi Systems Technology
  RTrace                                    Protocol/Zycad Corp.
  Silverrun                                 Computer Systems Advisors
  Softbench                                 Hewlett-Packard
  Software Engineering Toolkit              Caset Corp.
  Software Through Pictures                 Interactive Development
                                               Environments
  Statemate                                 i-Logix, Inc.
  Sterling Developer                        Sterling Software
  System Architect                          Popkin Software & Systems, Inc.
  System Developer I                        Cadware Inc.
  superCASE                                 Advanced Technology International
  Synon/2E                                  Synon, Inc.
  TAGS                                      Teledyne Brown Engineering
  Teamwork                                  Cadre Technologies, Inc.
  TreeSoft                                  ⫹Software
  Visible Analyst Workbench                 Visible Systems Corp.

Other key features of I-CASE included open systems, Ada as a development
language, and evolutionary development.
   The contract for I-CASE was ultimately won by Logicon in 1994 from the
Air Force’s Standard Systems Center. The contract had a face value of over
368      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


$670 million over a ten-year period. The overall notion was to build a standard
set of I-CASE tools that could be used throughout the DoD and its contractors.
I-CASE has three essential parts:

  1. A software engineering environment
  2. An operational test environment
  3. A run-time environment

Logicon brought its I-CASE product to the marketplace using the name
LOGICORE.
   I-CASE represents a major investment by the DoD to help solve the soft-
ware development problem. As of 1995, the DoD issued a statement by the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Command, Control, Communications, and
Intelligence—C3I) reflecting its commitment to I-CASE [12.53]:

  This statement confirms the Department’s commitment to the I-CASE initiative
  and the need to aggressively exploit the advantages available now through the
  Air Force I-CASE contract. The contract is available to DOD components and
  any Federal Agency wishing to procure the I-CASE software engineering en-
  vironment (SEE) or tools. . . .

It appears that I-CASE or some derivative thereof will be an increasingly
strong force with respect to how we execute the complex tasks of software
engineering.

12.3.7    Architecting
In the Defense Science Board report [12.39] on acquiring defense software
commercially, considerable attention was focused on software system archi-
tectures. As the report points out, a software architecture consists of:

  • Software system components
  • The relationship between the components
  • Rules for their composition (constraints)

In the same vein, documentation of a software architecture would contain, as
a minimum:

  • System functionality
  • Software system components
  • Interfaces, standards, and protocols
  • An execution model consisting of:
      —data flows
      —control flow
                                       12.3   SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS    369

    —critical timing and throughput considerations
    —error handling

A good software architecture was considered a ‘‘prime enabler of flexibility
and reuse’’ and might reduce the costs of changes and upgrades by as much
as 30–50% per year. Solid architectures were also seen as a key tool for:

  • Evolutionary development (see Section 12.3.4)
  • Early involvement of users with functional capability
  • Ability to include changing commercial technology
  • Reuse
  • Assisting in the areas of requirements changes and product line man-
    agement

Of course, a software architecture must be viewed within the context of an
overall systems architecture (see Chapter 9), a point that was not strongly
emphasized in the DSB report.
   An overview article on software architectures claimed that there is appro-
priate and renewed interest in this subject [12.54]. This revival of interest has
led many researchers to reconsider basic questions, such as the following:

  • What is a software architecture?
  • Are there generic forms of architectures?
  • Are there sets of preferred architectures?
  • What is the process whereby an architecture is developed?
  • How can we promote the use of good architecting principles in both
    government and industry?

A variety of cases were cited in which the preceding and other software
architecture issues were considered by, for example, the Air Force, (e.g., the
CARDS and PRISM programs), industry, and the Software Engineering In-
stitute (SEI) at Carnegie-Mellon University, with the latter apparently taking
a lead role in these matters. However, other parts of the government are
stepping up to this challenge. An example is the Defense Information Systems
Agency (DISA) that set forth a technical architecture framework for infor-
mation management [12.55]. This framework provided ‘‘guidance for the ev-
olution of the DOD technical infrastructure’’ with respect to information
management rather than providing a specific system architecture. The frame-
work, known as TAFIM, was presented in a series of volumes, namely:

  Volume 1: Overview
  Volume 2: Technical Reference Model
  Volume 3: Architecture Concepts and Design Guidance
  Volume 4: DoD Standards-Based Architecture Planning Guide
370      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


  Volume 5: Support Plan
  Volume 6: DoD Goal Security Architecture
  Volume 7: Information Technology Standards Guidance
  Volume 8: DoD Human Computer Interface

Efforts of this type move us all in a positive direction in terms of developing
a better understanding of the issue of software and information system
architecting.
   Finally, with respect to software architecting, we have two topics that have
already been discussed in previous sections of this book. The first has to do
with the architecting of systems, and the point is made that the same proce-
dures for architecting systems are applicable to software architecting. Chapter
9 addresses these points, as does Section 12.2.4 of this chapter, dealing in
part with the C4ISR Architecture Framework [12.16]. In addition, the Ap-
pendix illustrates how a software system may be architected. The second point
is related to the IEEE standard that is concerned with architectural descrip-
tions [12.56]. Although that standard does not demonstrate how to architect
a software system, it does introduce the important notion of architectural
views of software systems. These views, as per the three important system
views as articulated by the C4ISR Framework, provide insight into the ulti-
mate architecture and, by means of reverse engineering, it may be possible
to infer a legitimate software architecting process. Until this is demonstrated,
however, it is suggested that the reader follow the architecting process defined
in Chapter 9.


12.3.8    Reengineering
The motivation for reengineering of software systems lies in the fact that
there is a large amount of legacy system software that has to be updated,
upgraded, and ‘‘reengineered.’’ Reengineering is also associated with the need
to maintain these legacy systems. The Air Force’s Software Technology Sup-
port Center (STSC), discussed before, has had a reengineering initiative
[12.57] whose ‘‘goal is to encourage reengineering technology transfer and
adoption.’’ Part of the STSC’s approach is represented by its Software Reen-
gineering Assessment Handbook, which deals with three processes:

  1. Reengineering strategy selection
  2. Cost analysis
  3. Management and priority setting

The STSC has also formulated a nine-step reengineering preparation process
consisting of the following activities:
                                       12.3   SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TRENDS    371

  1. Evaluation of needs
  2. Formation of the reengineering team
  3. Definition of the development/maintenance environment
  4. Creation of a set of metrics
  5. Analysis of the legacy systems
  6. Creation of an implementation plan
  7. Ensuring that the test-bed is current and complete
  8. Analysis of available reengineering tools
  9. Training

Note that this process is preparatory to the main reengineering activities.
Readers with a further interest in this, as well as in other software engineering
subjects, should get on the mailing list for CrossTalk, the STSC’s Journal
[12.57].
   Another important report [12.58] shows the relationship between reengi-
neering and reverse engineering, containing 200 references in these fields.
Definitions of important terms are cited by reference [12.59] as:

  Legacy Systems. Software systems that are 10–25 years old and often in poor
  condition
  Reverse Engineering. A process that identifies components and their interre-
  lationships as well as creating new representations in another form

In effect, the process of reverse engineering takes existing software code and
converts it into specifications, design descriptions, and software components.
Given this set of results, it is then possible to ‘‘forward engineer’’ the system
into a new implementation, to include specific code in another language. The
goal is to perform both reverse and forward processes in an automated man-
ner. Conceptually, then, old COBOL code could by such a process be con-
verted into C or Ada code. This type of transformation clearly has many
benefits if performed accurately and without too much code redundancy. Six
objectives of reverse engineering are cited [12.60] as supporting:

  1. Software reuse
  2. Documentation
  3. Information recovery
  4. Maintenance reduction
  5. Platform migration
  6. Migration to a CASE environment (see Section 12.3.6)

   Thus, reengineering and reverse engineering of software are not the same,
but reverse engineering is one way to implement reengineering. Research
372      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


activities in both areas are very active and represent an important trend within
the overall topic of software engineering.


12.3.9    Other Trend Areas
In addition to the preceding rather long list of trends in software engineering,
we can expect strong and continuing activities with respect to the following:

  • The development of new software metrics
  • More widespread use and extensions of SEI’s basic capability maturity
      model
  • Standards for software development and engineering
  • Further illumination of the relationship between systems engineering and
      software engineering
  • Academic programs that blend theory and practice in a more effective
      manner

The last item suggests that there may not be sufficient integration of the ways
in which academia and industry approach or look at the field of software
engineering. To be sure, the two have different purposes and goals. But one
may argue that their roles may not be well enough related so that each will
support the other. In this regard, an article in Computer magazine [12.61]
asked (and tried to answer) the question: Where is software headed? One
conclusion was that there was an apparent chasm between academia and in-
dustry and that ‘‘the two groups share radically different views on where
software is headed.’’ Whatever these differences, some of the topics of interest
for the future are:

  • Object-oriented programming and design
  • Software productivity tools
  • Rapid application development
  • Algorithms
  • Worldwide-Web tools
  • Graphical user interfaces (GUIs)
  • Multimedia software engineering
  • Formal methods
  • Group communications

The preceding sections and list are ample testament to the breadth and rich-
ness of the field of software engineering. The reader is also referred to an
Encyclopedia of Software Engineering [12.62] to further explore the subjects
discussed here, as well as other related topics.
                                        12.4   PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS     373

12.4     PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS

12.4.1    General Management Trends
Every project is executed in some context, whether it be in industry, govern-
ment, or academia. This organizational setting thus has some influence on the
project, establishing an environment of constraint, facilitation, or some com-
bination thereof. In this respect, general management trends can impact what
the project personnel are able to do and what they cannot do.
   A dozen general management trends that are of note include:

   1. Movement toward decentralization
   2. Increased span of control
   3. Deeper empowerment
   4. More training, at all levels
   5. Increased use of integrated product teams (IPTs)
   6. A focus on business process reengineering (BPR)
   7. Continuous improvement (from Total Quality Management)
   8. Less loyalty between employer and employee
   9. A move toward the ‘‘systems approach’’ [12.63]
  10. Recognition of ‘‘core competencies’’
  11. Building of a shared vision for the enterprise
  12. Sharper customer focus

    Space limitations do not permit the exploration of all these general man-
agement trends, although some are revisited in the next chapter. Suffice it to
say that the Project Manager and Chief Systems Engineer should be aware
of these areas and what is happening with respect to each within their orga-
nization. As an example, if training is alive and well in their organization,
they have to consider the training needs for their project and schedule their
people so as to take advantage of this type of opportunity. In a similar vein,
if the enterprise is active in business process reengineering, it might be useful
to provide inputs as to the internal processes that have to be streamlined to
support the project. This might include processes in accounting, contracts,
human resources, and the like. Finally, if the organization subscribes to the
notion of deeper empowerment, then one issue might be how to more strongly
empower the personnel on the particular project in question. The reader in-
terested in this area should consult the vast literature on the general subject
of management.


12.4.2    Project Management Tools
There are numerous software tools available to support the Project Manager
and the team. These tools tend to focus on scheduling, and most of them also
374      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


provide cost aggregation and budgeting capabilities. The Air Force’s STSC
has compiled a very complete list of such tools [12.64] with considerable
information about each tool. The Center has cataloged them in three cost
categories: (A) cost less than $300, (B) cost between $300 and $2,500, and
(C) cost greater than $2,500. As one would expect, the capabilities of the
tools increase as does the price, but a lower-cost tool can be adequate for
most smaller projects. A selected list of such tools is provided in Exhibit
12.5, utilizing the cost data in the referenced STSC report. This author has
used several tools in category (B); they are extremely cost-effective. The types
of features that one might look for in selecting a tool, aside from price,
include:

  • Gantt charting
  • Program evaluation and review technique (PERT) charting
  • Operating system/platform
  • Work breakdown structure
  • Task responsibility matrix
  • Resource allocation
  • Resource leveling
  • Resource limiting
  • Resource conflict analysis
  • Cost aggregation
  • Standard reporting
  • Customized reporting
  • Ease of use
  • Vendor support

  Exhibit 12.5: Selected List of Project Management Tools
                                                                          Cost
      Project Management Tool                  Vendor                   Category
  Advanced ProPath                   SoftCorp, Inc.                        A
  Critical Path Project              Dynacomp, Inc.                        A
    Manager
  Fast Track Resource                AEC Management                        A
                                       Systems Inc.
  InstaPlan                          MicroPlanning                         A
                                       International
  M2M                                MC2 Engineering Software              A
  Milestone                          Digital Marketing Corp.               A
  Harvard Project Manager            Software Publishing Co.               B
  Microsoft Project                  Microsoft                             B
                                       12.4   PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS       375

                                                                       Cost
  Project Management Tool                      Vendor                Category
  Micro Planner                     Micro Planning                        B
                                      International
  Project Scheduler                 Scitor Corp.                          B
  Syzygy                            Syzygy Development, Inc.              B
  Time Line                         Symantec Corp.                        B
  Artemis Prestige                  Lucas Management                      C
                                      Systems
  Open Plan                         Welcom Software                       C
  Promis                            Cambridge Management                  C
                                      Systems Inc.
  Qwiknet Professional              Project SW &                          C
                                      Development Inc
  SLIM-Control                      Quantitative Software                 C
                                      Management
  Viewpoint                         Computer Aided                        C
                                      Management Inc.

In addition to the classical set of project management tools, software has come
on the scene under the category of Groupware, which, as the name implies,
is intended to support an entire project team. As an example, Lotus Notes
was one of the best-known and best-selling packages of this type. It is safe
to assume that both project management and Groupware tools will be avail-
able indefinitely to support project and systems engineering teams. Both the
Project Manager and the Chief Systems Engineer should decide on the support
tools that the team requires as soon as possible after the project start date.
Considerable efficiencies can be gained by the active use of project manage-
ment and Groupware tools. As a consequence, they are most highly recom-
mended for a project team.


12.4.3   Two Department of Defense (DoD) Initiatives
The sheer size and complexity of DoD progams and projects make them an
excellent showcase for project management issues and trends. Improvements
in project management, especially in the software arena, have the potential
for improving products and processes and, at the same time, saving literally
billions of dollars. In very large organizations, in both government and in-
dustry, this is more easily said than done.
   One noteworthy initiative within the DoD is its Practical Software Mea-
surement (PSM) program, which is meant to establish a ‘‘foundation for ob-
jective project management’’ [12.65]. It also purports to achieve objectivity
by focusing in particular upon measurement—what to measure and how. The
376      SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


U.S. Army has played a major role in formulating PSM, which ‘‘was devel-
oped to help meet today’s software management challenges.’’ Here again, we
see an emphasis upon software as it plays an increasingly important role in
building and fielding our large systems. PSM is applied for the most part at
the project level, but it is claimed that the same basic principles can be used
to extend PSM to the organizational and enterprise levels.
   Since PSM is focused on measurement, it prescribes a set of measurement
principles that need to be taken into account in software programs. Some of
these principles are:

  • Measurement requirements are dependent upon project issues and
      objectives.
  • Software measurement is defined by the software process of the
    developer.
  • It is important to have an independent analysis capability.
  • Software measurement needs to occur over the entire life cycle.

The PSM Guide addresses three main topics: (1) tailoring the software mea-
sures as appropriate to the project in question, (2) applying the software
measures so that the data can be interpreted in terms of useful project infor-
mation and decisions, and (3) implementing a measurement process that is
effective within the specific organization.
   A second project management type of initiative within the DoD is related
to the ‘‘earned value analysis’’ (EVA) described in Chapter 4. In 1996, the
DoD recognized guidelines produced in an industry standard that dealt with
Earned Value Management Systems [12.66]. This replaced earlier views of
EVA and set forth some thirty-two criteria to be used in EVA. Since EVA
has been accepted on many large programs in industry as well as government
as a useful way of tracking cost, schedule, and performance (work actually
accomplished), the reader with a further interest in this trend should examine
the cited reference and standard and the appropriate offices within the DoD.


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

12.1 Define and describe ten categories of software tools that can be used
     to support
     a. systems engineering
     b. software engineering
12.2 Obtain a copy of the latest IEEE standard on systems engineering and
     contrast it with Military Standard 499B.
12.3 Obtain a copy of the latest ISO standard on software engineering and
     contrast it with Military Standard 498.
                                                                 REFERENCES      377

12.4 Write a five-page report on the current state of practice in software
     reuse.
12.5 Write a five-page report on the current state of practice in Integrated
     Computer-Aided Software Engineering (I-CASE).
12.6 Evaluate the relative capabilities of three project management software
     tools.
12.7 Write a five-page report that explains and evaluates the most recent
     position of the Department of Defense (DoD) relative to the architect-
     ing of systems.
12.8 Write a five-page report that explains and evaluates the most recent
     status of the Capability Maturity Model(s) for systems and software,
     including the integrated models.


REFERENCES

12.1  Systems Engineering (1994). The Journal of the National Council on Systems
      Engineering (NCOSE) 1(1), Sunnyvale, CA. (Note: NCOSE has changed its
      name to INCOSE, 2033 Sixth Ave. #804, Seattle, WA 98121-2546.)
12.2 ‘‘Systems Engineering in the Global Market Place’’ (1995). NCOSE 5th Annual
      International Symposium, St. Louis, July 22–26.
12.3 Eisner, H., J. Marciniak, and R. McMillan (1991). ‘‘Computer-Aided System
      of Systems (S2) Engineering.’’ IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,
      and Cybernetics, Charlottesville, VA., October 13–16.
12.4 Eisner, H., R. McMillan, J. Marciniak, and W. Pragluski (1993). ‘‘RCASSE:
      Rapid Computer-Aided System of Systems (S2) Engineering.’’ NCOSE 3rd An-
      nual International Symposium, Arlington, VA, July 26–28.
12.5 Kuhn, D., and S. Garcia (1994). ‘‘Developing a Capability Maturity Model for
      Systems Engineering.’’ Best Presentations of the NCOSE 4th Annual Interna-
      tional Symposium, San Jose, CA, August 10–12.
12.6 Garcia, S. (1994). SE-CMM Model Description, Release 2.04, SEI-94-HB-4.
      Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie-Mellon University.
12.7 Pierson, H. (1995). ‘‘Comparison of NCOSE Interim Model & SE-CMM,’’ Vir-
      ginia Center of Excellence for Software Reuse and Technology Transfer, April
      11. Presented as part of NCOSE Notes from the Network 3(4).
12.8 Systems Engineering Capability Model (SECM), EIA / IS 731, (1998). Washing-
      ton, DC: Electronic Industries Association, Engineering Department.
12.9 L. Ibrahim, et al., (1997). The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Integrated
      Capability Maturity Mode (iCMM)l, Version 1.0, Washington, DC: Federal Avi-
      ation Administration, November.
12.10 Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie-Mellon University, Website: www.
      sei.cmu.edu
12.11 Rechtin, E. (1991). Systems Architecting. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
378     SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


12.12 Rechtin, E., and M. Maier (1997). The Art of Systems Architecting. Boca Raton,
      FL: CRC Press.
12.13 Rechtin, E. (1994). ‘‘Foundations of Systems Architecting,’’ Systems Engineer-
      ing 1(1): 35–42.
12.14 Rechtin, E. (1994). ‘‘The Systems Architect: Specialty, Role and Responsibil-
      ity.’’ Best Presentations of the NCOSE 4th Annual International Symposium,
      San Jose, CA., August 10–12.
12.15 First Annual Workshop on Engineering of Systems in the 21st Century: Facing
      the Challenge, Focus Group Reports (1994). Sponsored by the Office of Naval
      Research and Naval Surface Warfare Center, Department of the Navy, Freder-
      icksburg, VA, June 28–30.
12.16 C4ISR Architecture Framework, Version 2.0 (1997). Washington, DC: U.S. De-
      partment of Defense, Pentagon, December 18; see also Website:
      www.c3i.osd.mil
12.17 C4ISR Architecure Working Group (AWG) (1998). Final Report. Washington,
      DC: U.S. Department of Defense, Pentagon, April 14; see also Website: www.
      c3i.osd.mil
12.18 Public Policies & Priorities: 1995–1996 (1995). Washington, DC: American
      Association of Engineering Societies.
12.19 Statement of the AAES on The Role of the Engineer in Sustainable Development:
      Sustainable Technologies and Processes (1995). Washington, DC: American
      Society of Engineering Societies.
12.20 Sage, A. (1992). Systems Engineering. New York: John Wiley.
12.21 Sage, A. (1992). Systems Management for Information Technology and Software
      Engineering. New York: John Wiley.
12.22 Armstrong, J., and A. Sage (1995). An Introduction to Systems Engineering.
      New York: John Wiley.
12.23 Sage, A., and W. Rouse (1999). Handbook of Systems Engineering and Man-
      agement, New York; John Wiley.
12.24 Sage, A. (1994). ‘‘The Many Faces of Systems Engineering,’’ Systems Engi-
      neering 1(1): 43–60.
12.25 Cochran, M., et al. (1995). A Tailorable Process for Systems Engineering, Soft-
      ware Productivity Consortium Report SPC-94095-CMC. Herndon, VA: Soft-
      ware Productivity Consortium.
12.26 Eisner, H. (1988). Computer-Aided Systems Engineering. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
      Prentice Hall.
12.27 Conference on Tools & Methods for Business Engineering, (1995). Sponsored
      by Enterprise Reengineering (7777 Lesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA), Arlington,
      VA, May 16–17.
12.28 Center of Excellence in Computer-Aided Systems Engineering (CECASE),
      J. Holtzman, Director, Lawrence, KS.
12.29 Lamonica, F. (1994). ‘‘Rome Laboratory System Engineering Research and De-
      velopment Program,’’ CrossTalk (April): 4–7.
12.30 Federal Computer Week (1995). July 3; and Washington Technology.
12.31 Secretary of Defense Memorandum on Military Specifications and Standards
      (1994). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
                                                                 REFERENCES      379

12.32 Acquisition Reform: DOD Begins Program to Reform Specifications and Stan-
      dards (1994). Report to Congressional Committees, GAO / NSIAD-95-14. Wash-
      ington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office.
12.33 Blueprint for Change: Report of the DoD Process Action Team on Specifications
      and Standards (1994). Washington, DC: Office of the Under Secretary of De-
      fense. Reprinted by the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Technical In-
      formation Service, AD-A278-102.
12.34 Joint Logistics Commanders Guidance for Use of Evolutionary Strategy to Ac-
      quire Weapon Systems (1995). Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Systems Management
      College Press.
12.35 The Defense Acquisition System, DoD Directive 5000.1 (2000); Operation of
      the Defense Acquisition System, DoD Directive 5000.2 (2000); Mandatory Pro-
      cedures for Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPS) and Major Auto-
      mated Information Systems (MAIS) Acquisition Program, DoD Directive
      5000.2-R (2000). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
12.36 Gansler, J. (2000). The Road Ahead. Washington, DC: Department of Defense,
      Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, June.
12.37 Sage, A., and C. Lynch (1998). ‘‘Systems Integration and Architecting,’’ Systems
      Engineering 1. (3).
12.38 The National Software Council, John J. Marciniak, President. Kaman Sciences
      Corporation, Alexandria, VA [(703) 329–7368].
12.39 Report of the Defense Science Board Task Force on Acquiring Defense Software
      Commercially (1994). Washington, DC: Office of the Under Secretary of De-
      fense for Acquisition and Technology.
12.40 Report of the Defense Science Board (DSB) Task Force on Defense Software
      (2000). Washington, DC: Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acqui-
      sition and Technology, November.
12.41 The Standish Group. CHAOS Report; see also Website: standishgroup.com,
      1999.
12.42 Druyun, D. (1994). ‘‘Software Reuse Incentive Policy,’’ CrossTalk (January): 5.
      (Druyun was the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition) at
      the time.)
12.43 Levine, T. (1994). ‘‘Report of the Working Group on Reuse Education,’’
      CrossTalk (December): 21–25.
12.44 Davis, T. (1994). ‘‘The Reuse Capability Model,’’ CrossTalk (March): 5–9.
12.45 Hills, F. (1994). ‘‘Study Points Way to More Effective Software Reuse,’’
      CrossTalk (May): 23–24.
12.46 Sodhi, J., and M. Smith (1994). ‘‘Marching Toward a Software Reuse Future,’’
      CrossTalk (September): 20–24.
12.47 ‘‘Commerce Department Announces 41 Awards for Advanced R&D in Four
      Key Technologies,’’ (1994) U.S. Department of Commerce News (October):
      1–2.
12.48 Eisner, H. (1995). ‘‘Reengineering the Software Acquisition Process Using
      Developer Off-the-Shelf Systems (DOTSS),’’ 1995 IEEE International Confer-
      ence on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Vancouver, BC, October 22–25.
12.49 Sorensen, R. (1995). ‘‘A Comparison of Software Development Methodolo-
      gies,’’ CrossTalk (January): 12–17.
380     SYSTEMS / SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND PROJECT MANAGEMENT TRENDS


12.50 Boehm, B., and W. Scacchi (1995). Simulation and Modeling for Software Ac-
      quisition (SAMSA). Los Angeles: University of Southern California, ATRIUM
      Laboratory, Information and Operations Management Department, School of
      Business Administration.
12.51 Guidelines for Successful Acquisition and Management of Software-Intensive
      Systems (GSAM), Vol. 1—Version 3.0 (2000), Department of the Air Force,
      Software Technology Support Center, May; see also Website: web2.
      deskbook.osd.mil
12.52 Tomlin, B. (1991). ‘‘Integrated Computer-Aided Software Engineering.’’ Soft-
      ware Technology Support Center Conference, April 16, Hill AFB, Ogden, UT.
12.53 Paige, E. (1995). ‘‘DOD Commitment to I-CASE,’’ CrossTalk (May): 6.
12.54 Kogut, P., and P. Clements (1994). ‘‘The Software Architecture Renaissance,’’
      CrossTalk (November): 20–23.
12.55 Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) (1994). Department of Defense
      Technical Architecture Framework for Information Management, volume 1,
      Overview, Version 2.0. Washington, DC: Department of Defense (June 30).
12.56 Draft Recommended Practice for Architectural Description, IEEE 1471 (1999).
      New York: Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), December.
12.57 Sittenhauer, C., M. Olsem, and J. Balaban (1995). ‘‘Software Reengineering at
      the STSC,’’ CrossTalk (January): 6–8.
12.58 Urban, J., H. Joo, and Y. Wu (1995). ‘‘Software Reverse Engineering and Reen-
      gineering.’’ Report prepared for Rome Laboratory, RL / COEE, Griffis AFB,
      New York.
12.59 Chikofsky, E., and J. Cross (1990). ‘‘Reverse Engineering and Design Recovery:
      A Taxonomy,’’ IEEE Software 7(1).
12.60 Frazer, A. (1992). ‘‘Reverse Engineering: Hype, Hope or Here?,’’ in P. A. V.
      Hall, ed., Software Reuse and Reverse Engineering in Practice. London: Chap-
      man & Hall.
12.61 Lewis, T., et al. (1995). ‘‘Where Is Software Headed?’’ Computer 28 (August):
      20–32.
12.62 Marciniak, J., ed. (1994). Encyclopedia of Software Engineering. New York:
      John Wiley.
12.63 Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline. New York: Doubleday.
12.64 Berk, K., D. Barrow and T. Steadman (1992). ‘‘Project Management Tools Re-
      port.’’ Ogden, UT: Software Technology Support Center, Hill AFB.
12.65 Practical Software Measurement (PSM); see Website: www.psmsc.com, 1998.
12.66 Significant Changes Underway in DoD’s Earned Value Management Process
      (1997), Washington, DC: GAO / NSIAD - 97 - 108, U.S. Government Account-
      ing Office (GAO), May.
                  13
INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT




13.1    INTRODUCTION

The previous chapters have been organized so as to explore the two primary
areas of project management, and systems engineering and its management.
Interrelationships between these two primary areas have been mentioned in a
variety of places in this book but perhaps have not been sufficiently empha-
sized. In fact, essentially all systems engineering activities occur within some
type of program or project context. So the real world connects them whether
or not any commentary about them does so. And many commentaries, par-
ticularly the collection of extant books, tend to deal with project management
or systems engineering, but not both. Indeed, one of the key purposes of this
book is to bring together these two interrelated subjects under one cover. This
chapter moves even further in terms of the interconnectedness between project
management and systems engineering management. This is done by explicitly
considering the matter of integrative management in this final chapter.
   Integrative management is defined as a set of practices whereby people,
processes, tools, and systems are brought together into harmonious inter-
operation so as to maximize their efficiency and effectiveness. The latter, in
turn, are further defined as follows [13.1]:

       Efficiency: The capability of producing desired results with a minimum of
          energy, time, money, materials, or other costly inputs
       Effectiveness: The capability of bringing about an effect or accomplishing
          a purpose, sometimes without regard to the quantity of resources con-
          sumed in the process


                                                                                381
382    INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT


It is a fundamental responsibility of management to seek these conditions and
to act as a prime facilitator. The key word is ‘‘integrated,’’ so we are looking
for interoperability, wholeness, and organic strength. This means paying at-
tention to an overall strategy for integrative management, as well as devel-
oping detailed tactics to implement such a strategy. As a management activity,
above all, it means paying attention to the interactions between people, the
systems that they are in, and the systems that they are trying to build.
    We see integrative management at work in an organization when we are
able to observe the following:

  • Strong and effective teams
  • Commitment to ‘‘getting the job done’’
  • Deep interest in the technical issues
  • Constructive problem solving
  • Corporate support for the needs of the project
  • Little or no complaining
  • Short and productive meetings
  • Rapid flow of information
  • Effective computer support
  • Involved and happy people

Although these do not guarantee integrative management, they are strong
indicators. The following sections explore in greater detail the various do-
mains and contexts of integrative management, including:

  • Managers as integrators
  • Teams as integrators
  • Plans as integrators
  • The systems approach as integrator
  • Methods and standards as integrators
  • Information systems as integrators
  • Enterprises as integrators


13.2   MANAGERS AS INTEGRATORS

In Chapter 1, we introduced the project organization and the project trium-
virate—the Project Manager (PM), the Chief Systems Engineer (CSE), and
the Project Controller (PC). The project organization chart, shown in Figure
1.2, indicated that all three members of the triumvirate have significant re-
sponsibilities and, in fact, are usually managers. This management team
serves as the primary integrative factor for the project. If the three persons
are working together in an integrative fashion, then the project members will
                                               13.3   TEAMS AS INTEGRATORS   383

usually follow their example. If there is less than complete trust and infor-
mation exchange, this, too, will be conveyed to project staff, and a different
model of behavior may be established.
   A key attribute of the triumvirate is that of being able to communicate. A
dozen essentials of an effective communicator have been described in Exhibit
6.1 in Chapter 6. Among the items listed is to be able to ‘‘synthesize and
integrate.’’ In this context, integration refers mainly to thinking in terms of
how pieces of information, as well as human behavior interact and might be
brought together in a harmonious way. Appropriate communications itself
serves as an integrator. It conveys information in a ‘‘holistic’’ manner so that
people on the project can see and experience the interrelationships between
information and people. Because one of the principal forums for communi-
cations is in the context of a team, the matter of teams as integrators is
considered in the next section.


13.3   TEAMS AS INTEGRATORS

The management team, represented by the Project Manager, Chief Systems
Engineer, and Project Controller, although critical to the notion of integrative
management, is not the only team on a project. Examining the project orga-
nization (Figure 1.2) more closely reveals that at least eight(!) additional
teams are suggested by the chart. These include the following:

  • The team of Chief Systems Engineer and the lead engineers in each of
    the six supporting disciplines
  • The six teams represented by the lead engineers in the six disciplines
    together with the personnel working in those areas
  • The team consisting of the Project Controller as team leader and the
    personnel heading up the work teams in the areas of scheduling, costing,
    personnel assignments, facilities, and contract liaison

These teams represent opportunities for adopting an integrative style such that
all members of the project know, understand, and sign up to the goals and
objectives of the project. In short, all of these subteams have to behave in the
manner described in some detail in Chapter 6. If conscientious team behavior
patterns are the norm, then a major step toward integrative management has
been taken.
   Suggestions for building a team that will support and facilitate integrative
management were set forth in Exhibit 6.2. Especially key items in terms of
integrative management include:

  • Encouraging participative, possibly consensual, behavior
  • Integrating
  • Coordinating
384    INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT


  • Facilitating
  • Communicating

Adherence to these notions will go a long way toward building an overall
integrative management team.
   Another important idea with respect to team behavior and integrative man-
agement is that of ‘‘integrated product teams’’ (IPTs). IPTs bring together (in
a team) all the people who have an influence on how a product is to be
developed and sold. Often, the context for an IPT is a new product for a
company so that it is clear that, as a minimum, the following functional areas
have to be represented in the IPT:

  • Management
  • Marketing and sales
  • Research and development
  • Engineering
  • Production
  • Finance and accounting
  • Contracts

Because all relevant functions are part of the process, IPTs are also at times
referred to as multidisciplinary teams, multifunctional teams, cross-functional
teams, or work groups. The latter have been examined in detail, including
their characteristics and beneficial consequences [13.2].
   Another aspect of the IPT is that the preceding representation occurs at
the very outset of a project. This is in distinction to earlier practices that
tended to operate serially. The latter often led to reengineering a product
when, for example, the production folks threw the design back over the wall
to engineering with the claim that the design was not producible! The IPT,
operating over the full life cycle of a product, was able to identify and rec-
oncile possible problems very early and obviate the need for excessive rework
and iterations. The IPT notion is also considered a part of concurrent engi-
neering, which is addressed later in this chapter and is included as one of the
thirty elements of systems engineering (see Exhibit 7.3). It also has been
reported on quite extensively in the literature, particularly with respect to
manufacturing processes.


13.4   PLANS AS INTEGRATORS

Plans are descriptions of perspectives and agreed-on future activities. As such,
they are integrative because they convey the project agenda to all project
personnel as well as other corporate staff people. A documented plan indicates
                                                 13.4   PLANS AS INTEGRATORS    385

the project intent and gets everyone tuned to the same set of goals, objectives,
and approach. A plan gets everyone focused in the same direction.
   It is of interest to cite three types of plans here, namely:

  1. The project plan
  2. The systems engineering management plan (SEMP)
  3. The software development plan (SDP)

  The project plan, from Chapters 2 and 3, contains seven elements:

  1. Needs, goals, objectives, and requirements
  2. Task statements, a statement of work, and a work breakdown structure
  3. The technical approach to the project
  4. A project schedule
  5. Organization, staffing, and a task responsibility matrix
  6. The project budget
  7. A risk analysis

This plan should be conveyed to all project personnel, although there is often
resistance to such an action. By doing so, however, everyone has an oppor-
tunity to see the ‘‘game plan’’ and to understand how he or she fits into it.
By being explicit about what is understood about the project, including budg-
ets and perceived risks, there is an opportunity for people to try to find so-
lutions to problems and to possibly bring new ideas to the attention of project
management. The project plan also has to be updated from time to time so
that it represents the best and most recent view of the project.
   Unlike the project plan, the SEMP focuses exclusively on systems engi-
neering activities. An outline of the contents of a SEMP, within the framework
of Military Standard 499B, was provided in Exhibit 2.4. Although the project
plan and the SEMP have some elements in common, that is, cost and schedule
information, the SEMP also addresses the key issues of:

  • The overall systems engineering process
  • How technical performance measurement is to be achieved
  • Reviews that are scheduled to occur
  • The role of technology, with emphasis on transition
  • Technical integration teams

The last item, in particular, fosters integrative thinking and action and is
described in detail in what follows [13.3]:

  Technical Integration Teams. The contractor shall describe how the various in-
  puts into the systems engineering effort will be integrated and how multidisci-
386    INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT


  plinary teaming will be implemented to integrate appropriate disciplines into a
  coordinated systems engineering effort that meets cost, schedule and perform-
  ance objectives. The contractor shall include: (a) how the contractor’s organi-
  zational structure will support team formation; (b) the composition of functional
  and subsystem teams; and (c) the products each subsystem and higher level
  teams will support (e.g., teams organized to support a specific product in the
  work breakdown structure (WBS), ‘‘team of teams’’ utilized for upper level WBS
  elements).

We note the emphasis on the key concepts of integration, multidisciplinary
teaming, and coordinated effort. The notion of teams here reinforces the dis-
cussion of teams as an integrative element in the preceding section of this
chapter.
   With respect to the Software Development Plan (SDP), Military Standard
498 [13.4] contains a Data Item Description (DID) that describes the purpose
of an SDP as follows:

  The Software Development Plan (SDP) describes a developer’s plans for con-
  ducting a software development effort. The term ‘‘software developer’’ in this
  DID is meant to include new development, modification, reuse, reengineering,
  maintenance, and all other activities resulting in software products.
  The SDP provides the acquirer insight into, and a tool for monitoring, the pro-
  cesses to be followed for software development, the methods to be used, the
  approach to be followed for each activity, and project schedules, organization,
  and resources.

Clearly, the SDP is a key document with respect to the software development
effort, itself one of the thirty elements of systems engineering. As noted
before, this plan conveys to the team, management, and the customer how
the software development is to be accomplished. As such, it is an integrative
point of reference for all software development activities and how they fit
into the overall systems engineering effort.
   The three plans, although extremely important, are not the only plans that
are called for on many projects. Examples of other plans, called for in Military
Standard 498, include

  • A software installation plan
  • A software test plan
  • A software transition plan

as well as various manuals, descriptions, and reports. Here again, project
management is encouraged to distribute these documents as widely as possible
to gain the integrative effect that is produced when the entire project team
knows what is happening and what progress is being made.
                                  13.5   THE SYSTEMS APPROACH AS INTEGRATOR      387

13.5   THE SYSTEMS APPROACH AS INTEGRATOR

The systems approach as well as the thirty elements of systems engineering
(see Chapter 7), also have an integrative influence, both explicitly and im-
plicitly. By identifying the thirty elements, all activities can be viewed in the
context of how they affect, and are affected by, the other elements. For ex-
ample, when carrying out the reliability-maintainability-availability (RMA)
and integrated logistics support (ILS) elements, the engineers must be cog-
nizant of the architecture design and synthesis element as well as several
others.
   Three of the thirty elements of systems engineering, however, are more
sharply related to integrative management, namely:

  • Integration
  • Interface control
  • Concurrent engineering

   Integration, in a systems engineering context, refers to the connecting of
pieces of hardware and software to make larger builds. In this framework, we
are integrating structures, whether they be chunks of hardware or program
code. Successful integration requires that all the interfaces be correct so that
the pieces, in fact, are able to interoperate in the intended manner. Many
projects and systems engineering efforts have failed because of major inte-
gration problems.
   A related element is that of interface control. In this case, we make explicit
the need to examine and control all interfaces as a singular element of systems
engineering. By doing so, we are also assisting in the process of integrative
management because we are systematically examining all interfaces and at-
tempting to assure that successful integration is achieved. It is also a means
whereby potential problems are uncovered before they create havoc with the
integrated system, including the backtracking and reengineering of major
parts of the system.
   Concurrent engineering, another of the thirty elements of systems engi-
neering and discussed in Chapters 7 and 9, has been formally defined as
[13.5]:

  A systematic approach to the integrated, concurrent design of products and their
  related processes, including manufacture and support . . . intended to cause the
  developers, from the outset, to consider all elements of the product life cycle
  from concept through disposal, including quality, cost, schedule, and user
  requirements.

The emphasis for concurrent engineering is on the word ‘‘concurrent,’’
strongly supporting parallel activities that bring all the required disciplines
388     INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT


together at all stages of the life cycle of a system. It is also clearly related to
the notions of IPTs, cross-, multifunctional, and multidisciplinary teams. The
reader with a further interest in concurrent engineering is referred to the many
books as well as a bibliography [13.6] on this subject.
   An overview of the systems approach was presented in Section 1.4 of
Chapter 1. This approach, embedded in the processes of systems engineering,
is a major factor in integrative management.


13.6   METHODS AND STANDARDS AS INTEGRATORS

Both methods and standards tend to support the achievement of integrative
management. Because they normally set forth well-considered ways of doing
business and are widely distributed, they are read by many researchers and
practitioners. This leads to their incorporation into the processes and proce-
dures of a large number of enterprises. This, in turn, promotes a common
understanding and vocabulary regarding best practices. This, of course, is an
ever-evolving set of activities as we discover new and better ways of building
systems.
   A few of the methods that have had such effects include

  • Structured analysis for systems
  • Capability maturity modeling (CMM)
  • Total Quality Management (TQM)
  • Business process reengineering (BPR)

Of course, by formalizing the processes and elements of project as well as
systems engineering management, as represented here, the notion of integra-
tive management is also supported.
    The standards that we have discussed in this book also tend to enhance
integrative management. These have included military standards (e.g., Mili-
tary Standards 499B, 498, and others) as well as commercial standards (e.g.,
those produced and promulgated by the international standards organization
[ISO]; the Electronic Industries Association [EIA]; and the Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers [IEEE]). Often, the requirements and speci-
fications for new systems cite these standards; it therefore becomes important
for industry to be aware of their provisions and meaning. Again, this builds
common ways of looking at the systems development process across the in-
dustry. In turn, this supports and facilitates integrative management.


13.7   INFORMATION SYSTEMS AS INTEGRATORS

Information systems, aside from serving as critical elements in any enterprise
in such domains as accounting, inventory control, proposal preparation, mar-
                                         13.8   ENTERPRISES AS INTEGRATORS   389

keting and sales, have had the salutary effects of bringing people closer to-
gether and reducing the time it takes for a broad range of communications.
Communication networks, in particular, interconnect computers that previ-
ously were in stand-alone configurations. This interconnection capability is
itself integrative by its very nature.
   Networks used by organizations include local-area networks (LANs), wide-
area networks (WANs), and metropolitan-area networks (MANs). With the
introduction of the Internet, exchanges of information with the world at large
has been greatly enhanced. Being able to sit at home or in the office and have
access to vast amounts of information has, indeed, constituted a revolution in
human and organizational behavior.
   A related example is the relatively simple technology associated with e-
mail. Previous early morning behavior within an organization included getting
the mandatory cup of coffee and sitting down to plan the activities of the day.
In today’s interconnected world, the early hours are often taken up with going
through one’s e-mail messages and responding to them. To that extent, we
are now all ‘‘on call’’ most of the time between the capabilities of our voice
mail and our electronic mail systems.
   Integrative management has also been supported by a class of software
known as Groupware, as referred to earlier in Chapter 12. This type of soft-
ware is used in meetings between groups of people so as to assist in a variety
of group processes ranging from tactical problem solving to strategic plan-
ning. Systems of this type have been available from Ventana Systems, IBM,
and others. Groupware is sometimes also referred to under the general cate-
gory of group decision support systems (GDSSs).
   Integrative behavior and exchange of information have also been facilitated
by previously discussed domain-specific information systems such as systems
and software engineering environments. An example is the I-CASE (inte-
grated computed-aided software engineering) initiative presented in Chapter
12. In this situation, the integration is specifically focused on the interoper-
ability of several software tools that support software engineering. Through
this type of technical information integration, it is presumed that the inter-
connectedness and productivity of software teams will be increased.
   Clearly, entry into the new ‘‘information age’’ has great potential for en-
hancing integrative behavior and management. It appears likely that we will
continue to receive great benefits from our information systems in terms of
the rapid conveyance of large amounts of information in extremely short
periods of time. It is important, however, to assure that the human side of
our organizations is not trampled in the process.


13.8   ENTERPRISES AS INTEGRATORS

The project and its systems engineering activities are both embedded in some
type of enterprise, whether it be in industry, government, or academia. If that
390     INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT


enterprise behaves in an integrative fashion, then a conducive environment is
established within which the project is executed. If not, there is usually a
negative flow-down to the project and its internal operations. A negative en-
vironment puts additional pressures on the managers within the project. Some
of the issues with respect to the overall project environment have been dis-
cussed in Section 1.6 of Chapter 1.
   Experience has shown that a critical factor in terms of integrative manage-
ment is top management. In particular, it must encourage, support, and exhibit
team behavior. As suggested by a President and Chief Executive in industry
[13.7], ‘‘teamwork starts at the top.’’ Some of the points made in this regard
include:

  • The single most important quality is to build effective teams.
  • Teamwork is a critical success factor.
  • Important contributions are made by individuals in a variety of functional
    areas.
  • The example for integrative teamwork must come from the top.

Although the top of an organization appears to be somewhat removed from
a particular project, it has its definite effects, either for the good or otherwise.
   Another example that exemplifies integrative management may be drawn
from management literature, as previously alluded to in Chapter 1. This is
Senge’s ‘‘learning organization’’ [13.8], wherein five disciplines are empha-
sized:

  1. Building of a shared vision
  2. Personal mastery
  3. Mental models
  4. Team learning
  5. Systems thinking (the fifth discipline)

The last two are of special importance in terms of integrative management.
Team learning carries with it at least two important ideas. The first is the
significance of teams as a critical element of successful project execution.
This point has been reiterated many times in this book. The second idea is
that of learning. The organization itself must adopt a position of continuous
learning to keep up with its business and remain current (or ahead of the
pack) in its critical technology areas. A company that is not learning soon
falls behind its competition and begins to lose its key people. The trouble
often is that organizations ‘‘don’t know what they don’t know.’’ This is a
situation to be guarded against through the use of seminars, workshops, col-
loquia, and bringing ‘‘new blood’’ into the company. A particularly cogent
exploration of the roles of dialogue and culture in organizations [13.9] is
suggested reading in addition to Senge’s book.
                                                          13.9   SUMMARY    391

    Systems thinking is basically the same as the systems approach referred to
in this chapter as well as other parts of this book. According to Senge, this
fifth discipline serves as an integrator of the other disciplines. As Senge in-
dicates, ‘‘by enhancing each of the other disciplines, it continually reminds
us that the whole can exceed the sum of its parts.’’ Integrative management
seeks that same goal.
    As we look at the environment external to the project itself, we must also
not lose sight of the customer. Integrative management means that the cus-
tomer is a crucial part of the equation and that all project and systems engi-
neering tasks are ultimately traceable to the needs and requirements of the
customer. More than that, the customer is not a static concept; rather, customer
focus brings a vital and dynamic force to bear on the project. Interactions on
a day-to-day basis with the customer usually yield a better process and a
better product. The ‘‘customer is king’’ slogan brings accountability to each
and every project member, often in ways that transcend internal management
oversight.
    Finally, integrative management implies a connectedness to the community
within which the enterprise operates. As ‘‘no man is an island,’’ no company
should keep itself removed and isolated from its community. Involvements
with the community foster a condition of well-being and also serve as a
positive example to everyone in the company. Such involvements may include
any or all of the following:

  • Contributions to charitable causes and organizations
  • Support for educational institutions
  • Science project sponsorships
  • Co-op programs
  • Memberships in local professional organizations
  • Chamber of commerce support
  • Sponsorship of special events and sports teams

   Community connectedness supports a ‘‘world waiting to be born,’’ as sug-
gested by M. Scott Peck [13.10]. It is a basic truth for the individual and also
a fundamental value for the organization.


13.9   SUMMARY

This final chapter has provided some insight into integrative management
whereby project management and systems engineering management are
brought together into a harmonious and mutually supportive framework. The
major contributors to integrative management are summarized in Figure 13.1.
   Our final summary is a set of some dozen suggestions as to how to achieve
integrative management. In particular, one should attempt to ensure that:
392
                                                              Systems            Methods &           Information
      Managers       Teams                 Plans                                                                   Enterprises
                                                              approach           standards             system

        Project       Project               Project              Systems             Methods            LANs,        Top
        manager       teams                 plan                 engineering            Structured      WANs,        management
        Chief         IPTs                  Systems              elements               analysis        MANs         The
        systems       Crossfunctional/      engineering          Integration            Capability      Internet     learning
        engineer      multifunctional       management           Interface              maturity        E-Mail       organization
        Project                             plan                 control                                             Customers
                      Multidisciplinary                                                 TQM
        controller                          Software             Concurrent                                          Community
                                            development                                 BPR
                                                                 engineering
                                            plan
                                                                                     Standards
                                            Other
                                            plans                                       Mil. std.
                                                                                        499B
                                                                                        Mil. std.
                                                                                        498
                                                                                        ISO
                                                                                        IEEE
                                          Figure 13.1. Contributors to integrative management.
                                                   QUESTIONS / EXERCISES   393

   1. Managers have and exhibit appropriate integration and synthesis skills.
   2. There is effective communications at all levels.
   3. Divisive behavior is not tolerated.
   4. Integrated teams are established and listened to.
   5. Plans are coherent, informative, updated, and widely disseminated.
   6. The systems approach is encouraged and used.
   7. Appropriate methods and standards are employed.
   8. Internal and external information systems are up to date and in good
      operating condition.
   9. The enterprise adopts the principles and practices of a ‘‘learning
      organization.’’
  10. Strong customer contact, dialogue, and commitment is maintained.
  11. The enterprise is connected to the community at large.
  12. Top management actively supports all of the preceding.


QUESTIONS/EXERCISES

13.1 Identify and discuss six indicators of integrative management, other
     than those listed at the beginning of this chapter.
13.2 Identify and discuss six actions that an organization can take to achieve
     integrative management, other than those listed at the end of this
     chapter.
13.3 Cite three consistent patterns of behavior of your boss that
     a. support integrative management
     b. do not support integrative management
13.4 Investigate and write a three-page paper regarding the documented op-
     eration and benefits of integration product, cross-functional or multi-
     disciplinary teams.
13.5 Discuss, in four pages, how each of the following might support in-
     tegrative management:
     a. structured analysis for systems
     b. capability maturity modeling (CMM)
     c. Total Quality Management (TQM)
     d. business process reengineering (BPR)
13.6 Describe five actions that top management should take to encourage
     integrative management in a company.
13.7 If you served as president of a large company, identify and explain ten
     specific steps you would consider taking in order to achieve integrative
     management.
394     INTEGRATIVE MANAGEMENT


13.8 Write a five-page report elaborating upon the topic of systems integra-
     tion (see Chapter 12), as well as its relationship to integrative
     management.


REFERENCES

13.1  Mondy, R. W., and S. R. Premeaux (1993). Management: Concepts, Practices,
      and Skills. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
13.2 Bowen, D. (1995). ‘‘Work Group Research: Past Strategies and Future Oppor-
      tunities,’’ IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 42(1).
13.3 Systems Engineering, Military Standard 499B (1991). Washington, DC: U.S.
      Department of Defense.
13.4 Software Development and Documentation, Military Standard 498 (1994).
      Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense.
13.5 The Role of Concurrent Engineering in Weapons System Acquisition, Report
      R-338. Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense Analyses.
13.6 Pennell, J., and M. Slusarczuk (1989). An Annotated Reading List for Concur-
      rent Engineering, Document D-571. Alexandria, VA: Institute for Defense
      Analyses.
13.7 Serpa, R. (1991). ‘‘Teamwork Starts at the Top,’’ Chief Executive 66: 30–33.
13.8 Senge, P. (1990). The Fifth Discipline. New York: Doubleday.
13.9 Schein, E., ‘‘On Dialogue, Culture and Organizational Learning,’’ Engineering
      Management Review 23(1): 23–29.
13.10 Peck, M. Scott. (1993). A World Waiting to Be Born. New York: Bantam Books.
APPENDIX: SYSTEMS
ARCHITECTING—CASES




A.1   INTRODUCTION

Chapter 9 presented the basic principles of systems architecting with the fol-
lowing key elements, a subset of the thirty elements of systems engineering:

  • Requirements analysis/allocation
  • Functional analysis/allocation
  • Architecture design/synthesis
  • Alternatives analysis/evaluation
  • Technical performance measurement
  • Life-cycle costing
  • Risk analysis
  • Concurrent engineering

In this appendix, we show some short case studies of systems architecting to
more clearly demonstrate the process and some of the requisite outputs. These
cases are drawn from assignments given in graduate courses in systems en-
gineering at The George Washington University. This author gratefully ac-
knowledges the efforts and insights of a variety of students in the graduate
program in systems engineering [A.1].
   The cases presented simulate the architecting process rather than going
through all elements in detail. In particular, the technical performance mea-
surement element is limited because it is usually a long and difficult procedure
to truly assess all important elements of performance, including trade-off stud-

                                                                            395
396     APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


ies and sensitivity analyses. In one of the cases, sensitivities were analyzed,
utilizing a decision support system that is particularly well-suited to an ex-
amination of how parameters vary and cause changes in the overall architec-
ture evaluations.
   The instructions given for the development and assessment of architectures
were rather broad. The first assignments started with the definition of require-
ments, which was left for the students to formulate. After considerable dis-
cussion, these requirements were responded to with the synthesis of
alternative architectures. The procedure (presented in Section 9.5.3) recom-
mended was to develop three architectures:

  1. A low-cost, minimum-effectiveness alternative
  2. A ‘‘baseline’’ alternative
  3. A high-performance (high-cost) alternative

Not all alternatives mapped precisely into these three situations, but in all
cases, at least three alternatives were defined. From this point, the alternatives
were evaluated based on a well-defined set of evaluation criteria. Weighting
and ranking ‘‘systems’’ were most often set forth as a means of carrying out
the evaluations. In some cases, systems engineering elements beyond the
scope of architecting were also considered.
   Some systems turned out to be software-based, with varying functionalities
and host computers. The four cases described in the remainder of this appen-
dix deal with:

  1. A logistics support system
  2. A decision support system for software defects
  3. A systems engineering environment (SEE)
  4. An anemometry system


A.2   A LOGISTICS SUPPORT SYSTEM (CASE 1)

The system being architected is LEAPS, a Logistics Evaluation, Analysis, and
Planning System. The Level 1 functional decomposition of the system is
shown in Figure A.1. This decomposition places in evidence the eight major
functional areas for LEAPS. The general requirements for the system, some-
times also called system requirements, are:

  • DOS PC-Based (target machine: 386, 25-MHz processor, 80-Meg hard
    drive, mouse)
  • Event-driven (activities initiated based on completion of prior activities)
                                    A.2   A LOGISTICS SUPPORT SYSTEM (CASE 1)    397


                                     LEAPS




        User           Trade-off           RAM
                                                           Graphics
      interface        analysis           analysis

                                  Cost                                 Data
             Scheduling                        Documentation
                               estimation                           management

                    Figure A.1. Level 1 functional decomposition.



  • Windows-compatible
  • ‘‘Transparent’’ access to commercially available packages
  • Flexibility required for growth to meet expanding user demands

The requirements specific to the individual functional areas are listed in Ex-
hibit A.1.
   The alternative architectures to meet the stated requirements are shown in
Table A.1. We note that as we move from Alternative 1 to 3, we increasingly
rely on commercial software to implement the stated functional capabilities.
   The evaluation of the three alternatives is depicted in Table A.2. This figure
shows the following weighted scores:

  Alternative 1: Score ⫽ 4.71
  Alternative 2: Score ⫽ 6.20
  Alternative 3: Score ⫽ 6.10

Thus, there is a preference for Alternative 2, but the composite score is not
a great deal higher than that for Alternative 3.
   This evaluation process was accomplished through pairwise comparisons,
followed by a manual consistency check. Schedule considerations were de-
veloped in relative terms under the following ground rules:

  • Using existing commercial packages ⫽ 1 time unit
  • Modifying commercial packages ⫽ 3 time units
  • Developing new software components ⫽ 8 time units

   A preliminary costing was carried out to develop the numbers in Table A.2
under the two categories of acquisition and maintenance cost. The four key
performance evaluation criteria were:
398   APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


  Exhibit A.1: Functional Requirements—LEAPS
  • User interface:
    —Provide a uniform look and feel for all functional operations
    —Provide ready access to all functional capabilities
  • Scheduling:
    —Handle all life-cycle phases (20–30 years)
    —Generate project start and completion dates based on the completion
      of program milestones
  • Trade-off analyses:
    —Handle unique aspects of integrated logistics support elements
    —Address other supportability-related factors (i.e., environmental
      impacts/limitations)
    —Support development of alternative courses of action
  • Cost estimation:
    —Address all life-cycle phases for all system components (ground,
      space, air)
    —Accommodate proven cost-estimating experience, cost-estimating re-
      lationships, and new cost-estimating requirements
    —Support formalized cost formats (i.e., Big 6)
  • RAM analysis:
    —Include ‘‘canned’’ desk-top RAM models and access to external mod-
      els and simulations
    —Accept user-developed RAM models
  • Documentation:
    —Include templates for standard logistics reports
    —Provide user capability to develop templates for special report and
      study formats
  • Graphics:
    —Provide graphical representation of analysis results (RAM, trade-off,
      cost estimating)
    —Provide user capability to develop specialized graphics as desired
  • Data management:
    —Maintain milestones data with the linkages to program activities
    —Provide access to logistics support analysis records
    —Link cost data to system components (through work breakdown struc-
      tures and logistics control numbers)
      TABLE A.1       Alternative to Function Mapping—LEAPS
                         User                          Trade-Off        Cost        RAM                                           Data
                       Interface      Scheduling       Analysis    Estimation      Analysis   Documentation   Graphics         Management
      Alternative 1     Build      Build               Build       Build           Build       MS Word        MS Power Point   Build
                                                                                                                               Paradox for
      Alternative 2     Build      Modify MS Project   MS Excel    Build           MS Excel    Power Word     MS Power Point
                                                                                                                               Windows
                                                                   Modify ground
      Alternative 3     Build      MS Project          MS Excel                    MS Excel    MS Word        MS Power Point   MS Access
                                                                   and space
      Note: Ms ⫽ Microsoft.




399
400
      TABLE A.2     Alternative Evaluation—LEAPS
                                              Alternative 1                             Alternative 2                           Alternative 3
      Cost 0.55
         Acquisition 0.44      9    1     3      1    3       7   7   1     9   5   7      1    7       7   7   7   9   9   7      5    7       7   7   7
        Maintenance 0.11       9    3     3      1    3       7   7   3     9   5   7      1    7       7   7   7   9   7   7      5    7       7   7   7
      Schedule 1.12
         Acquisition 0.09      7    1     3      1    3       9   9   1     7   5   9      1    9       9   9   7   7   9   9      3    9       9   9   7
        Maintenance 0.03       7    3     3      1    3       9   9   3     7   5   9      1    9       9   9   7   7   7   9      3    9       9   9   7
      Performance 0.33
        Ease of Use 0.16       7    9     9      9    9       9   7   9     7   7   9      9    9       9   7   5   7   5   9      5    9       9   7   7
        Speed 0.02             5    9     9      9    9       9   5   9     5   7   9      9    9       9   5   7   5   5   9      3    9       9   5   7
        Data sharing 0.05      5    9     9      9    9       7   7   9     5   5   7      9    7       7   7   5   5   3   7      1    7       7   7   5
        Consistency 0.10       7    9     9      9    9       9   9   9     7   5   9      9    9       9   9   3   7   3   9      1    9       9   9   7
       Alternative score                          4.71                                      6.20                                    6.10
      Raw scores are measures of goodness: least good ⫽ 1; most good ⫽ 9.
      Total score reflects weightings indicated.
                              A.3   A SOFTWARE DEFECTS ASSESSMENT SYSTEM (CASE 2)                401

  1. Ease of use
  2. Speed
  3. Data sharing
  4. Consistency

   In this case, a separate risk analysis and definition of possible future im-
provements (preplanned product improvements—P3I) were also part of the
case. These were supplemented by an analysis that included a market assess-
ment, a calculation of internal rate of return (IROR) for the product, the
formulation of schedules, and a first-order look at sales (revenues), costs, and
the estimated break-even point.



A.3   A SOFTWARE DEFECTS ASSESSMENT SYSTEM (CASE 2)

The software defects assessment system provides the software manager with
an automated decision-support tool to assist in the software maintenance pro-
cess by prioritizing software defects both accurately and efficiently. The sys-
tem is called SD-DSS (Software Defects—Decision Support System).
   The top-level functional identification for this system is shown in Figure
A.2, which shows the various requirement areas under the following four
major functional categories:



                                                 SD-DDS




    Data                       Model                     Dialog                     System
 management                  management                management                requirements

   Variety of data              Model building            GUI I/F                  Performance
   Extraction capability        Modeling                  User I/F with data       Capacity
                                manipulation              and models base
   DBMS access                                                                     Reliability
   function                     Model maintenance         Support many user
                                                          outputs                  Maintainability
   Data dictionary              Modeling access
                                functions                 Robust Help facility
   Control
                                Model usage               Track dialogs
                                                          Flexibility and
                                                          adaptiveness

                           Figure A.2. Top-level functional identification.
402    APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


  1. Data management
  2. Model management
  3. Dialog management
  4. System requirements

Exhibit A.2 provides an overview of requirements for each of these functional
areas.
    Given these functional areas and requirements in each area, the next step
is to structure alternative architectures for such a system. Three alternatives
are depicted in Exhibit A.3. In broad terms, the alternatives reflect different
choices in terms of host hardware and the associated software that would
normally be attendant to different computer configurations.
    The evaluation of the three alternatives is represented in Table A.3. This
‘‘comparison matrix’’ lists the evaluation in three categories: (1) cost, (2)
functionality, and (3) system. Each of these categories is broken down so that
it is then possible to assess each alternative at a lower level of detail. Expan-
sion of the subcriteria in terms of ideas as to how to make the calculations
is shown in Table A.4.
    With respect to the category of cost, the following points are relevant:

  • Total life-cycle cost was based on the following components over a ten-
    year period:
    —Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation (RDT&E): engineering
      design, software development, and documentation
    —Production and Construction: Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hard-
      ware and software and facility modifications
    —Operations & Maintenance (O&M): system operations, maintenance
      personnel, activation, and materiel support
    —Retirement and Disposal: retirement personnel, transportation, and
      handling
  • Parametric cost estimation:
    —Constructive Cost Model (COCOMO) used for RDT&E and O&M
      costs
  • Bottom-up unit cost estimation used for production, construction, retire-
    ment, and disposal costs

A summary of life-cycle costs (LCC) over a ten-year period is provided in
Table A.5. The percent of costs by cost category is also listed in the far-right
column.
   The system architect assessed all evaluation categories with the assistance
of a commercial software package known as Expert Choice [A.2], as illus-
trated in Figure A.3. Functionality measures were analyzed by performing
                    A.3   A SOFTWARE DEFECTS ASSESSMENT SYSTEM (CASE 2)   403

Exhibit A.2: Functional Requirements—SD-DSS
 Data Management Requirements
• The system shall collect/extract software-defect-related data from the
  following sources for inclusion into the DSS database management sys-
  tem (DBMS):
  —Automated configuration management system
  —Financial/accounting system
  —Personnel system
  —Software reliability information (i.e., metrics)
• The system shall provide the basic data manipulation functions such as
  select, update, delete, and insert. The query capability shall support ad
  hoc query and report generation capability.
• The system shall provide a catalog of all data with definitions and the
  ability to provide usage information on those data.
• The system shall provide comprehensive data security, providing protec-
  tion from unauthorized access, recovery capabilities, archival capabilities,
  etc.
  Model Management Requirements
• The system shall allow users to create models that will structure and
  evaluate the qualitative and quantitative factors involved in prioritizing
  software defects.
• The system shall create models easily and quickly, either from scratch
  or from existing models contained in the model base.
• The system shall allow users to manipulate models to include sensitivity
  analysis, ‘‘what if’’ analysis, goal seeking, and cost-benefit analysis.
• The system shall generate a directory of models for use by different
  individuals of the organization.
• The system shall manage and maintain the model base with management
  functions analogous to database management: store, access, run, update,
  link, catalog, and query.
• The system shall track models, data, and application usage.
  Dialog Management Requirements
• The system shall have a user-friendly graphical user interface.
• The system shall be able to interact with several different dialog styles.
• The system shall be able to accommodate a variety of input devices.
• The system shall be able to present data with a variety of formats and
  output devices (i.e., color graphics, three-dimensional presentations, and
  data plotting).
• The system shall provide ‘‘help’’ capabilities, diagnostics, training, and
  suggestion routines to assist to user.
• The system shall be able to capture, store, and analyze dialog usage to
  facilitate improving the dialog system.
• The system must provide flexibility and adaptiveness to accommodate
  different problems and technologies.
404    APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


  Exhibit A.2: (continued)
    System Requirements
  • Performance:
    —The system must have an overall end-user response time of five
      seconds.
  • Capacity:
    —The system must be able to accommodate up to fifteen concurrent
      users at three geographic locations.
    —The database must be able to store summary defect information for
      up to 1M defects.
    —The model base must be able to support up to 1500 models.
  • Reliability:
    —The system availability must be greater than 90%.
  • Maintainability:
    —Preventive maintenance must be scheduled during weekday off-hours
      and weekends.


pairwise comparisons. The results in terms of overall scores for the three
alternatives were as follows:

  Alternative 1: Score ⫽ 0.361
  Alternative 2: Score ⫽ 0.334
  Alternative 3: Score ⫽ 0.305

   An illustrative risk analysis was carried out for SD-DSS with the results
as shown in Exhibit A.4. Note that risks were considered in the categories of
overall funding, cost, schedule, administrative, and technical.
   System enhancements were analyzed under the systems engineering ele-
ment of preplanned product improvement (P3I), with the following results:

  • Enhance SD-DSS with a knowledge acquisition system (i.e., an expert
    system) consisting of:
    —A knowledge base
    —An inference engine
    —A blackboard (workboard)
    —A user interface
  • Enhance SD-DSS with an expert critiquing subsystem consisting of:
    —An executive
    —An evaluator
    —A transformer
    —An elicitor
                   A.3   A SOFTWARE DEFECTS ASSESSMENT SYSTEM (CASE 2)   405

Exhibit A.3: SD-DSS Alternatives
  Alternative 1
  Classical Time-Sharing Monolithic Architecture
• Software:
  —Centralization of all three functional areas onto monolithic platform
  —Functional management areas designed various COTS application
     packages and customization
     —Data management: DB2 with Query Management Facility
     —Model management: Application System, Lotus/M
     —Dialog management: Data Interpretation System
• Hardware:
  —Partitioned IBM mainframe or dedicated AS400 series machine
  —Graphics terminals
  Alternative 2
  Local Area Network (LAN)-Based Workstation System Architecture
• Personal workstations connected to a minicomputer in client-server ar-
  rangement:
  —Workstations handle the interface, high-speed graphics display devices,
     and some of the data-reduction function
  —File server handles the data management and the bulk of the analysis
• Software:
  —Functional management areas designed with various COTS application
     packages and customization
     —Data management: Oracle
     —Model management: Criterium, Oracle, Lotus/M
     —Dialog management: Sun Solaris 2.0
  —UNIX OS and Novelle UNIXware NOS
• Hardware:
  —Sun SPARCserver 10 File/Application Server
  —Sun SPARCstation Workstation
  Alternative 3
  LAN-Based PC Network with File Server Architecture
• Total PC solution where information from the corporate database is
  downloaded to the PC LAN environment and then delivered to the
  PCs
406     APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


  Exhibit A.3: (continued)
  • Software:
    —Functional management areas designed with various COTS application
      packages and customization:
      —Data management: Borland’s Paradox 4.5
      —Model management: Expert Choice, MS Office for Windows
      —Dialog management: MS Visual Basic 3.0
    —DOS 5.0 OS with Windows 3.1 and Novelle Netware 3.11 NOS
  • Hardware
    —Pentium, 66-MHz PC File Server
    —486DX2, 33-MHz PC Workstation


  • Enhance SD-DSS to handle the overall defect resolution process by add-
      ing configuration management functionality.
  • Add technology upgrades with new COTS hardware and software as they
      become available.

    This case study of a software defects tracking and assessment system thus
focused on the elements of requirements definition, alternatives evaluation,
life-cycle costing, risk, and P3I. Special attention was paid to the sensitivity
of the alternatives selection by utilizing the Expert Choice commercial soft-
ware package and displaying these sensitivities in real time. This simulated
system architecting process provided fertile ground for exploring both vari-
ations and extensions of the basic process. Exercises of this type are neces-
sarily limited, but provide an excellent overview of key steps that are critical
to systems architecting.



A.4    A SYSTEMS ENGINEERING ENVIRONMENT (CASE 3)

A systems engineering environment (SEE) basically provides an automated
information center in which a team can carry out the thirty elements of sys-
tems engineering. Developing such an environment is considerably more than
an academic exercise. As an example, the Rome Laboratory of the Air Force
has a program to structure an SEE known as Catalyst [A.3, A.4]. This is
being formulated as a comprehensive environment for a systems engineering
team. The Navy also has been interested in systems engineering, having re-
quested information and proposals from industry on the broad subject of the
engineering of complex systems [A.5]. Subordinate areas of interest to the
Navy under this program have included:
      TABLE A.3       Comparison Matrix—SD-DSS
                                                                                               System
      Criteria                           Subcriteria: Measures               Alternative 1   Alternative 2   Alternative 3
      Cost                  RDT&E ($K)                                          200             380             287
      Cost                  Prod / Con ($K)                                    1563             330             103
      Cost                  O&M ($K)                                            780            1500            1080
      Cost                  Retire ($K)                                          50              50               50
      Functionality         Data: collection / extraction                     Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Data: data manipulation                           Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Data: data dictionary                             Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Data: security                                    Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Model: model creation                             Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Model: sensitivity                                Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Model: management                                 Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Dialog: consistency                               Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Dialog: styles                                    Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Dialog: flexibility / adaptability                Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Dialog: help                                      Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      Functionality         Dialog: I / O devices supported                   Subjective      Subjective      Subjective
      System                RMA: availability (MTBF / MTBF ⫹ MTTR)                0.92            0.98             0.9
      System                RMA: schedule maintenance (mean time in hours)        2               6               10
      System                Performance (seconds)                                 1.2             0.76             1.9
      System                Capacity: Saturation (no. of users)                  46              38               22
      System                Capacity: DBMS (defect records in millions)          10               6               5
      System                Capacity: Models (models in thousands)             2500            2000            1500




407
408
      TABLE A.4        Ideas on Calculating Evaluation Criteria—SD-DSS
         Criteria                   Subcriteria: Measures          Ideas on Calculating Evaluation Criteria       Alternative 1   Alternative 2   Alternative 3
      Cost               RDT&E ($K)                             Prefer lower RDT&E costs over life cycle            200             380             287
      Cost               Prod / Con ($K)                        Prefer lower prod / con costs over life cycle      1563             330             103
      Cost               O&M ($K)                               Prefer lower O&M costs over life cycle              780            1500            1080
      Cost               Retire ($K)                            Prefer lower retirement costs over life cycle        50              50              50
      Functionality*     Data: collection / extraction          Prefer ability to handle more information             0.114           0.481           0.405
                                                                  sources
      Functionality*     Data: data manipulation                Prefer robust ad hoc query & report gen.               0.126           0.458           0.416
                                                                  facility
      Functionality*     Data: data dictionary                  Prefer robust DD facility                              0.33            0.33            0.334
      Functionality*     Data: security                         Prefer design with comprehensive security              0.652           0.235           0.113
      Functionality*     Model: model creation                  Prefer robust model creation facility                  0.126           0.458           0.416
      Functionality*     Model: sensitivity                     Prefer sophisticated sensitivity analysis              0.169           0.387           0.444
      Functionality*     Model: management                      Prefer robust model management                         0.169           0.387           0.444
      Functionality*     Dialog: consistency                    Prefer less variation in menu design                   0.5             0.25            0.25
      Functionality*     Dialog: styles                         Prefer support higher number of dialog styles          0.126           0.458           0.416
      Functionality*     Dialog: flexability / adaptability     Prefer open systems architecture design                0.126           0.458           0.416
      Functionality*     Dialog: help                           Prefer accurate and informative help                   0.169           0.387           0.444
      Functionality*     Dialog: I / O devices supported        Prefer higher number of different I / O devices        0.139           0.435           0.426
                                                                  supported
      System             RMA: availability (MTBF /              Prefer higher system availability                      0.92            0.98            0.9
                           MTBF⫹MTTR)
      System             RMA: schedule maintenance (mean time   Prefer shorter maintenance time                        2               6              10
                           in hours)
      System             Performance (seconds)                  Prefer shorter end-user response time                  1.2             0.76            1.9
      System             Capacity: saturation (no. of users)    Prefer larger number of users                         46              38              22
      System             Capacity: DBMS (defect records in      Prefer higher number of records                       10               6               5
                           millions)
      System             Capacity: models                       Prefer higher number of models                     2500            2000            1500
      *Indicates pairwise comparisons performed.
      TABLE A.5    LCC Matrix—SD-DSS
      Design   Cost Category                  FY93   FY94   FY95   FY96   FY97   FY98   FY99   FY00   FY01   FY02   Costs (K)   %LCC
      Alt 1    1. Research & development      $100   $100                                                             $200        7.71
               2. Production & construction   $185   $178   $150   $150   $150   $150   $150   $150   $150   $150    $1,563      60.28
               3. Operations & maintenance                  $180   $120    $80    $80    $80    $80    $80    $80     $780       30.08
               4. Retirement and disposal                                                                     $50       $50       1.93
               Total (actual K$)              $285   $278   $330   $270   $230   $230   $230   $230   $230   $280    $2,593     100.00
               Total (present K$)             $259   $230   $248   $184   $143   $130   $118   $107    $98   $108    $1,625
      Alt 2    1. Research & development      $180   $200                                                             $380       16.81
               2. Production & construction   $255    $75                                                             $330       14.60
               3. Operations & maintenance                  $240   $180   $180   $180   $180   $180   $180   $180    $1,500      66.37
               4. Retirement and disposal                                                                     $50       $50       2.21
               Total (actual K$)              $435   $275   $240   $180   $180   $180   $180   $180   $180   $230    $2,260     100.00
               Total (present K$)             $395   $227   $180   $123   $112   $102    $92    $84    $76    $89    $1,481
      Alt 3    1. Research & development      $127   $160                                                             $287       18.88
               2. Production & construction    $50    $53                                                             $103        6.78
               3. Operations & maintenance                  $240   $120   $120   $120   $120   $120   $120   $120    $1,080      71.05
               4. Retirement and disposal                                                                     $50       $50       3.29
               Total (actual K$)              $177   $213   $240   $120   $120   $120   $120   $120   $120   $170    $1,520     100.00
               Total (present K$)             $161   $176   $180    $82    $75    $68    $62    $56    $51    $66     $975




409
                                                                         AVAIL --- System availability




410
                        RDT&E
                                                                         CAPACITY --- Capacity
             TOT LCC    PROD/CON                                         COL/ETR --- Collect/extract functionality
                        O&M                                              CONSIST --- Consistency of interface
                        RETIRE                                           CREATION --- Model creation functionality
                                                                         DATA --- Data management functions
                                        COL/ETR                          DATA MAN --- Data manipulation functionality
                                                                         DMBS --- Number of records for software defects
                        DATA            DATA MAN
                                                                         DD --- Data dictionary functionality
                                        DD                               DIALOG ---Dialog management functions
                                        SECURITY                         FLEX/ADP --- Flexibility and adaptiveness to accommodate
                                                                              new technology
                                        CREATION                         FUNCTION --- Functionality
             FUNCTION   MODEL           SENSITIVE            ALT1        HELP --- Help capabilities, diagnostics, training, etc.
                                                             ALT2        I/O DEV --- Input/output devices supported
      GOAL                              MANAGE                           MANAGE --- Model management functionality
                                                             ALT3        MODEL --- Model management functions
                                        CONSIST                          MODELS --- Number of decision support models
                                        STYLES                           O&M --- Operations and maintenance costs
                        DIALOG          FLEX/ADP                         PERFORM --- Performance measured by response time in
                                                                             seconds
                                        HELP                             PROD/CON --- Production and construction costs
                                        I/O DEV                          RDT&E --- Research development test & evaluation
                                                                         RETIRE --- Retirement and disposal costs
                                        AVAIL                            RMA --- Reliability, maintainability, availability
                        RMA             SCHED                            SATUR --- Saturation point in number of users
                                                                         SCHED --- Scheduled maintenance
                        PERFORM                                          SECURITY --- Comprehensive data security protection
             SYSTEM
                                        SATUR                            SENSITIVE --- Sensitivity functionality
                        CAPACITY        DBMS                             STYLES --- Dialog styles supported
                                        MODELS                           SYSTEM --- System characteristics
                                                                         TOT LCC --- Total life cycle costs of the system

                                 Figure A.3. Evaluating criterias using expert choice—SD-DSS.
                          A.4   A SYSTEMS ENGINEERING ENVIRONMENT (CASE 3)   411

  Exhibit A.4: SD-DSS Risk Assessment
    Program Risks
  • Funding: Medium
    —Reduction of corporate fiscal resources
    —Risk mitigation: business process improvement effort to reduce costs
  • Cost/Schedule Risk: Medium
    —Similar corporate programs realized 10% cost and schedule growth
    —Risk mitigation: prototyping, user engineering during design, and util-
       ization of corporate metrics program
  • Administrative: Low
    —Experienced and stable development team in place
    Technical Risks
  • Code & Unit Testing: Medium
    —Development of three software modules (builds)
    —Risk mitigation: maximal use of COTS SW, structured programming
       techniques, and early implementation of CASE Tools
  • Integration Testing: Medium
    —Integration of three software modules (builds)
    —Risk mitigation: CASE tools and early introduction of test plans
  • Transition/Activation: Medium
    —Uploading of software defected data from external sources
    —Risk mitigation: early introduction of real defect data into the code &
       unit test and integration test phases


  • System information capture
  • System understanding, guidance, and synthesis
  • System reengineering
  • Process
  • Integration

Thus, there is strong and continuing interest in developing systems engineer-
ing as well as an automated environment that facilitates the practice of sys-
tems engineering. One approach to the formulation of an SEE follows.
   The objectives set forth for the SEE were:

  • To enable a more effective and efficient design of large-scale systems
  • To provide a facility/center with CASE expertise
  • To provide tools for managing complex representations and data
  • To allow different teams to simultaneously work on the various elements
    of system design
412     APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


The high-level functional requirements of the SEE are shown in Figure A.4,
with the key requirements under each in Exhibit A.5. Three architectures were
set forth, as represented in Exhibit A.6. The mapping of the three architectures
against the functional areas is shown in Table A.6.
   Two different evaluation methods were employed to assess the merits of
the three architectures. The evaluation matrices for these methods are shown
in Table A.7. The methods differ in the weights assigned to the evaluation
criteria; the second method led to the calculation of a ‘‘cost-benefit ratio.’’ A
1–3–5–7–9 scale was utilized for the technical criteria. Results for the three
alternatives are as follows:

      Alternative 1: All Macintosh computers
  • Technical score ⫽ 6.2 (Method 1); 5.7 (Method 2)
  • Cost ⫽ 190 units
  • Benefit-to-cost ratio ⫽ 0.03

      Alternative 2: All PC (DOS) computers
  • Technical score ⫽ 7.0 (Method 1); 6.0 (Method 2)
  • Cost ⫽ 170 units
  • Benefit-to-cost ratio ⫽ 0.0353

    Alternative 3: Macintosh ⫹ DOS computers
  • Technical score ⫽ 5.9 (Method 1); 7.5 (Method 2)
  • Cost ⫽ 340 units
  • Benefit-to-cost ratio ⫽ 0.0221

By examining the two methods of evaluation, it was possible to see how the
final evaluations change as different procedures are followed. This examina-
tion of sensitivities provided a broader perspective regarding how final ar-
chitectural alternatives might be evaluated to derive a preferred architecture.



                                         SEE




                   Performance        Logistics and        Test and         Operational
Requirements
                     analysis          integration        evaluation         evaluation
                                                                                and
                                                                           reengineering

                Figure A.4. High-level functional requirements of a SEE.
                     A.4   A SYSTEMS ENGINEERING ENVIRONMENT (CASE 3)   413

Exhibit A.5: SEE Requirements
  Requirements
• Needs/goals/objectives
• Mission engineering
• Requirements analysis
• Functional analysis
• Functional allocation
• Specification development
  Performance Analysis
• Alternative evaluation
• System design/analysis
• Scheduling
• Life-cycle costing
• Technical performance measurement
• Program/decision analysis
• Risk analysis
• RMA
  Logistics and Integration
• Interface definition and control
• Integration logistics support
• Integration
• Configuration management
  Test and Evaluation
• Quality assurance
• Requirements traceability
  Operational Evaluation and Reengineering
• Operations
• Operational evaluation
• Modeling:
  —Prototyping
  —Mathematical models
  —Simulation models
414   APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


  Exhibit A.6: Alternative Architectures—SEE
    Architecture 1
  • All Macs
  • Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, Powerpoint)
  • SE tools:
    —IDEF
    —System Architect
    —Oracle
    —Expert Choice
    —Microsoft Project
    —SLIC
    —RTM
    —Extend
    Architecture 2
  • All PCs
  • Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, Powerpoint)
  • SE tools:
    —CORE
    —Design IDEF
    —System Architect
    —DBMS: Oracle
    —Expert Choice
    —@Risk
    —Foresight
    —RTM
    —GPSS/H
    —MATLAB
    Architect 3
  • Hybrid (MACs, PCs, and workstations)
  • Microsoft Office
  • SE tools:
    —CORE
    —RDD-100
    —Design IDEF
    —System Architect
    —DBMS: Oracle
    —Expert Choice
    —@Risk
                                       A.5   AN ANEMOMETRY SYSTEM (CASE 4)   415

  Exhibit A.6: (continued)
      —NETSIM
      —Foresight
      —Microsoft Project
      —SLIC
      —Extend
      —RTM
      —GPSS/H
      —MATLAB
      —Demo


A.5    AN ANEMOMETRY SYSTEM (CASE 4)

This system architecting dealt with a severe climate anemometry system
(SCAS) and was the only case of the four that was hardware-based. A top-
level functional decomposition for this system is shown in Figure A.5. The
requirements for each of the decomposed elements were defined in consid-
erable detail, and are not presented here because the definition and evaluation
of alternatives were particularly well-executed. Table A.8 shows three alter-
native designs, represented as (1) an as-is design, (2) a moderate upgrade,
and (3) a major upgrade. We note that each element of these alternatives is
set forth at the second level of functional decomposition, all shown in one
figure.
    The evaluation framework for this system is presented in Table A.9. Here
we see the three system alternatives mapped against a set of evaluation criteria
listed in the following six categories:

  1. Performance
  2. Human factors
  3. Maintainability
  4. Cost
  5. Risk
  6. Other

The evaluation was carried out at the subcriterion level, with both a weighting
and rating set of numerics. Values were normalized to the ‘‘as-is’’ case. As
shown in the table, the total scores for the three alternatives are:

  1. As-is: score ⫽ 100
  2. Moderate upgrade: score ⫽ 128.44
  3. Major upgrade: score ⫽ 125.67
      TABLE A.6     Requirements Traceability Matrix—SEE
                                                    Architecture 1   Architecture 2      Architecture 3




416
      Requirements
         Needs / goals / objectives                 IDEF             CORE, IDEF          RDD-100, CORE, IDEF
         Mission engineering                        IDEF             CORE, IDEF          RDD-100, CORE, IDEF
         Requirements analysis                      IDEF             CORE, IDEF          RDD-100, CORE, IDEF
         Functional analysis                        IDEF             CORE, IDEF          RDD-100, CORE, IDEF
         Functional allocation                      IDEF             CORE, IDEF          RDD-100, CORE, IDEF
         Specification development                  IDEF             CORE, IDEF          RDD-100, CORE, IDEF
      Performance analysis
         Alternative evaluation                     LDW              Expert Choice       Expert Choice
         System design analysis                     Object-Time      System-Developer    TeamWork
         Scheduling                                 Fast Track       Microsoft Project   Microsoft Project
         Life-cycle costing                         COCOMO           COCOMO              COCOMO, PRICE
         Technical performance                      Lisa-2B          Lisa-2B             Lisa-28
      Measurement
         Program / decision analysis                Decide           Expert Choice       Expert Choice
         Risk analysis                              @Risk            @Risk               @Risk
         RMA                                        RELAX            RPP                 SLIC
      Logistics and integration
         Interface definition and control           OMEGA            SLIC                SLIC
         Integrated logistics support               OMEGA            SLIC                SLIC
         Integration                                OMEGA            SLIC                SLIC
         Configuration management                   OMEGA            SLIC                SLIC
      Test and evaluation
         Quality assurance                          TRACE            MATRIX              RTM
         Requirements traceability                  TRACE            MATRIX              RTM
      Operational evaluation &
      reengineering
         Operation                                  MODSIM II        Demo                Demo
         Operational evaluation                     MODSIM II        Demo                Demo
      Modeling
         Prototyping                                Demo             Demo                Demo
         Mathematical models                        IThink           MATLAB              MATLAB
         Simulation models                          Extend⫹BPR       GPSS                NETSIM
      TABLE A.7             Architecture Selection——SEE
                                                    Architecture 1                                    Architecture 2                                   Architecture 3
                                                   (All Macintosh)                                      (All PC)                                       (MAC & PC)

      Evaluation Criteria   Weight Require. Perf. Anal. Log. & Int. T&E   OE & Reeng. Require. Perf. Anal. Log. & Int. T&E OE & Reeng. Require. Perf. Anal. Log. & Int. T&E OE & Reeng.

                                                                                                Method 1

      Cost                    35%        7          7            7   7             7        9              9           9   9        9        3          3               3   3        3
      Speed                    5%        3          5            5   5             5        5              7           5   5        7        7          7               5   7        9
      Ability to handle       10%        5          5            5   7             7        5              7           5   7        7        7          7               7   7        9
        large problems
      Ability to handle       10%        5          5            5   5             5        5              5           5   5        5        7          9               7   7        7
        growth in users
      Ability to meet new     10%        5          5            5   5             5        5              5           5   5        5        7          9               7   9        7
        requirements
      Capability to meet       5%        5          6            5   5             5        7              7           7   7        7        9          9               9   9        9
        new applications
      Operability             15%        7          7            7   7             7        5              5           7   7        5        5          7               5   7        5
      Currency of             10%        5          7            5   5             7        7              7           5   7        7        5          5               5   7        5
        software
      Total                  100%
        Total score                               6.2                                                      7                                          5.9
           (benefit)
      Total cost                                  190                                                  170                                            340

                                                                                                Method 2

      Speed                   10%        3          5            5   5             5        5              7           5   5        7        7          7               5   7        9
      Ability to handle       15%        5          5            5   7             7        5              7           5   7        7        7          7               7   7        9
        large problems
      Ability to handle       15%        5          5            5   5             5        5              5           5   5        5        7          9               7   7        7
        growth in users
      Ability to meet new     15%        5          5            5   5             5        5              5           5   5        5        7          9               7   7        7
        requirements
      Capability to meet      10%        5          5            5   5             5        7              7           7   7        7        9          9               9   9        9
        new applications
      Operability             20%        7          7            7   7             7        5              5           7   7        5        5          7               5   7        5
      Currency of             15%        5          7            5   5             7        7              7           5   7        7        5          5               5   7        5
        software
      Total                  100%
        Total score                               5.7                                                      6                                          7.5
           (benefit)




417
      Total cost                                  190                                                   170                                           340
      Benefit-to-Cost                            0.03                                              0.035294                                      0.022059
        Ratio
418        APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


                                         Severe climates
                                       anemometry system




  Atmospheric     Mechanical     Environmental       Power        Indoor/outdoor   Data handling
    sensing        service          service          service       transmission


       Wind        Instrument          Ice             Main
                                                                       Power         Collection
       speed         housing         control          supply

        Wind       Instrument                      Regulation/                       Processing/
      direction                                                       Signal
                   orientation                     conditioning                        storage

   Barometric                                        Backup          Physical        Reporting,
    pressure                                          power          linkages        distribution
                                                                                     and display

                   Figure A.5. Top-level SCAS functional decomposition.



We thus see that both upgrades represent significant improvements over the
as-is alternative, according to the evaluator.
   The architect then displayed some of the results in graphical form. Figure
A.6 shows a cost-effectiveness plot using an effectiveness metric based on
the criteria of performance, human factors, and maintainability. This graph
distinctly indicates a ‘‘knee-of-the-curve’’ phenomenon. There is a large gain
in effectiveness for relatively little cost increase in moving from the as-is
alternative to the moderate upgrade. The major upgrade carries with it a large
cost increase for only a modest increase in effectiveness. A rather imaginative
next step for the architect was to examine the relationship between effective-
ness and risk, as illustrated in Figure A.7. Although risk increases monoton-
ically in moving from the as-is to the major upgrade, there is almost no
‘‘knee-in-the-curve’’ as compared with the previous figure.


A.6      SUMMARY

This appendix illustrated the systems architecting process by briefly present-
ing four basic case studies of

  1. An automated logistics evaluation, analysis, and planning system
  2. A software defects decision support system
  3. A systems engineering environment (SEE)
  4. An anemometry system

In all cases, students elected to develop the system requirements, define three
alternative architectures that would satisfy those requirements, evaluate the
alternatives by a weighting and rating system, and examine other system
      TABLE A.8       Alternative System Architectures—SCAS
                                                                                                 System Alternatives Described
                                                                                                      by Functional Area
      Functional Areas                                                     AS-IS                   Moderate Upgrade                    Major Upgrade
      1. Atmospheric sensing   1.1 Wind speed sensing          COTS pitot tube                  COTS pitot tube,            COTS pitot, radio transducer
                                                                                                  transducer
                               1.2 Wind direction sensing      Shaft drive                      Shaft drive                 Shaft drive
                               1.3 Pressure sensing            COTS pitot tube                  COTS pitot tube,            COTS pitot, radio transducer
                                                                                                  transducer
      2. Mechanical service    2.1 Instrument housing          Machined aluminum                Add molded composite        Lightweight, more compact, formed-
                                                                assembly                          outer coating               machined composite body
                               2.2 Orientation positioning     Wind-vaned / COTS bearings       Reduction in tail boom      High precision bearing & balancing
                                                                                                  length
      3. Environmental         3.1 Ice control                 Calrod htrs. / thermocouples /   Add digitized computer      Onboard microprocessor control heat
         service                                                 analog feedback temp.            temp. control               temp. sens. units / heat pipes
                                                                 control
      4. Power service         4.1 Main power supply           Commercial feed—220 / 110        Commercial feed—220 /       Commercial feed—220 / 110 V
                                                                 V                                110 V
                               4.2 Power regulation / cond.    COTS conditioners / lightning    Add ground-fault            Add interrupters and custom lightning
                                                                 rods / fuses                     interrupters                arrest system
                               4.3 Backup power                Battery—for instruments          Gas generator w /           High-power, high-reliability diesel
                                                                 only                             interruption sensor /       generator with autoswitching
                                                                                                  switcher (COTS)
      5. I / O transmission
                               5.1 Power transmission          Stranded wire harnesses          Stranded wire harness       Custom slip rings
                               5.2 Signal transmission         Foil-shielded wire harnesses     Coaxial wire w / slip       2-way radio only—no wiring
                                                                                                  rings
                               5.3 Physical linkages           Shaft / conduit, press. tubes    Shaft / smaller conduit /   Minimal shaft for physical support &
                                                                                                  shielded transducer        power only
                                                                                                  wire
      6. Data handling         6.1 Data collection             Potentiometer / indoor           Magnetic position           Optical position sensors / In-head
                                                                 pneum. diff’l. press. cell       sensors / in-head           electrical press. Cell & transducer
                                                                 & barograph                      electr. press. cell &
                                                                                                  X-ducer
                               6.2 Data processing / storage   Manual data-base entry           Automatic computer-         Automatic computer control
                                                                                                  controlled
                               6.3 Reporting, dist., display   Physical meters / devices /      GUI / modem access to       Advanced customized DBMS / packet




419
                                                                 manual reporting                 data views COTS             radio network
                                                                                                  DBMS
      TABLE A.9     Evaluation Framework—SCAS




420
                                                                        System Alternative Scores
                                                        As-Is                  Moderate Upgrade                 Major Upgrade
                                        Weight
      Evaluation Criteria                (%)     Raw    Norm    W⫻N     Raw         Norm      W⫻N        Raw       Norm         W⫻N
      Performance
                                         33      —       —       —      —            —            —      —           —           —
      Vaning function / stability         6             1.00     6.00               1.50          9.00              2.25        13.50
      Avg. power consumption              5       3     1.00     5.00   2.5         1.20          6.00    2         1.50         7.50
        (kW)
      Impact resistance /                 3             1.00     3.00               0.95          2.85              0.85         2.55
        robustness
      Speed of data processing            3             1.00     3.00               4.00      12.00                 4.00        12.00
      Data availability                   3             1.00     3.00               3.00       9.00                 4.00        12.00
      System availability                 5      .995   1.00     5.00   .997        1.00       5.01      .997       1.00         5.01
      System reliability                  5      .986   1.00     5.00   .998        1.01       5.06      .990       1.00         5.02
      Useful service life (yr)            3        5    1.00     3.00     7         1.40       4.20        6        1.20         3.60
                          Subtotals                             33.00                         53.12                             61.18

      Human Factors
                                         14      —       —       —      —            —         —         —           —           —
      Ease of use                         4             1.00     4.00               2.00       8.00                 2.50        10.00
      Operator safety                     5             1.00     5.00               1.50       7.50                 1.50         7.50
      Bystander safety                    5             1.00     5.00               2.00      10.00                 2.00        10.00
                            Subtotals                           14.00                         25.50                             27.50

      Maintainability
                                         10      —       —       —      —            —            —      —           —           —
      Freq. of sch. Maintenance           3      2      1.00     3.00   1           2.00          6.00   1          2.00         6.00
      (/ yr)
      Ease of maintenance                 4             1.00     4.00               1.20       4.80                 2.00         8.00
      Complexity of assembly              3             1.00     3.00               1.00       3.00                 1.50         4.50
                         Subtotals                              10.00                         13.80                             18.50
      TABLE A.9     (continued )
                                                                             System Alternative Scores
                                                            As-Is                  Moderate Upgrade                Major Upgrade
                                            Weight
      Evaluation Criteria                    (%)      Raw   Norm     W⫻N     Raw        Norm      W⫻N        Raw      Norm         W⫻N
      Cost
                                              17       —     —        —      —           —            —       —         —          —
      Development cost ($k)                    8       60   1.00      8.00   100        0.60          4.80   250       0.24        1.92
      Production cost ($k, 50                  7      250   1.00      7.00   300        0.83          5.83   500       0.50        3.50
        units)
      Disposal / decomm. cost                  2       10   1.00      2.00    15        0.67          1.33    20       0.50        1.00
      ($k)
                         Subtotals                                   17.00                        11.97                            6.42

      Risk
                                              16      —      —        —      —           —            —      —          —          —
      Cost risk                                5            1.00      5.00              0.50          2.50             0.33        1.65
      Schedule risk                            2            1.00      2.00              0.50          1.00             0.25        0.50
      (Development)
      Performance risk                         3            1.00      3.00              0.85       2.55                0.33        0.99
      Technological risk                       6            1.00      6.00              0.90       5.40                0.10        0.60
                            Subtotals                                16.00                        11.45                            3.74

      Other
                                              10      —      —        —      —           —            —      —          —          —
      Manufacturability                        4            1.00      4.00              0.90          3.60             0.50        2.00
      Market potential / demand                4            1.00      4.00              1.50          6.00             0.75        3.00
      Appearance / aesthetic                   1            1.00      1.00              2.00          2.00             3.00        3.00
        quality
      Expandability / upgradability            1            1.00      1.00              1.00       1.00                0.33        0.33
                          Subtotals                                  10.00                        12.60                            8.33




421
                                        Total Score         100.00                      128.44                        125.67
                                              Rank            3                           1                             2
422                   APPENDIX: SYSTEMS ARCHITECTING—CASES


                                            120.00
       Effectiveness rating (performance,
        human factors, maintainability)
                                            100.00


                                             80.00


                                             60.00


                                             40.00


                                             20.00


                                              0.00
                                                     0                200            400               600          800
                                                                        Cost (in thousands of dollars)
                                                         Figure A.6. Cost-effectiveness analysis—SCAS.




                                            120.00
      Effectiveness rating (performance,
       human factors, maintainability)




                                            100.00


                                             80.00


                                             60.00


                                             40.00


                                             20.00


                                              0.00
                                                 0.00          0.50         1.00    1.50        2.00         2.50   3.00
                                                               Normalized risk rating (relative to "AS-IS" case)

                                                 Figure A.7. Risk versus effectiveness analysis—SCAS.
                                                                 REFERENCES       423

aspects such as risk and preplanned product improvement. The architecting
was carried out both by individuals and in teams. The process of defining
and evaluating alternatives allowed the system architects to range far beyond
a point solution to explore many alternatives. Ultimately, this led to the se-
lection of a preferred system. In a classroom environment, the process was
executed over a fourteen-week period. In the real world, the process often
extends over several years, including the time required to fully develop system
requirements.


REFERENCES

A.1 Students who developed the case studies presented in this chapter are Richard C.
    Anderson (Case 4), S. Gulu Gambhir (Case 3), David A. Grover (Case 1), Robert
    H. Laurine, Jr. (Case 2), and Hassan Shahidi (Case 3). This author thanks them
    again for their diligence, inventiveness, and participation, as well as their per-
    mission to include this material here.
A.2 Expert Choice. Contact Professor Ernest Forman, The George Washington Uni-
    versity, Washington, DC.
A.3 Catalyst Requirements, Annex II, System Specification for the Catalyst System.
    (1992). Rome, NY: U.S. Air Force, Rome Laboratory.
A.4 Comer, E. (1992). ‘‘Catalyst: Automating Systems Engineering in the 21st Cen-
    tury.’’ Proceedings of the Second Annual International Symposium of the National
    Council on Systems Engineering, Seattle, July 20–22.
A.5 Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) (1993). Engineering of Complex Systems.
    Silver Spring, MD: Naval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren Division Detachment,
    White Oak.
INDEX




AAES, 350                                   Basic execution time model, 304–306
Acceptance criteria, 112–113                Binomial distribution, 323–324
Accounting / finance, 25–26                 Bit error rate (BER), 323–324
Acquisition:                                Boehm, B., 294, 300–301, 365
  practices, 353–357, 364–365               Boss, 139–143
  road ahead, 356–357                       Brooks, Jr., F., 310
Alternatives, analysis / evaluation, 198–   Budget, 82–86
     199, 261–264, 282                      Building the project team, 156–160
Anemometry system, 267–293, 415, 418        Business process reengineering, 220
Architecting, 247–282, 347–349, 368–
     370                                    CAIV, 7, 270
                                            Capability maturity, 296–299, 345–347
  cases, 395–425
                                            CASE tools, 365–368
  essential steps, 257–274
                                            C4ISR architecture framework, 253,
  process, 267–273, 395–418
                                                 255–256, 349
Architecture, 197–198                       COCOMO, 300–303
  analysis / evaluation, 261–264            Commercial practices, 359–360
  definition, 273                           Communications, 154–155
  descriptions, 251–254, 273–274              self assessment exercise, 136–138
  design, 197–198, 248–251, 259–261         Computer tools, 210, 365–368
  framework, 255–266                        Concurrent engineering, 208, 267, 387–
  preferred, 273–274                             388
Attributes:                                 Configuration management, 216–217
  leader, 146–149                           Conflict management, 162–164
  project manager, 124–130                  Contingency plan, 111
Augustine, N., 310                          Continuous distributions, 318
Authority matrix, 24                        Contracts, 26, 105–108
Availability, 7, 212–213, 335–336           Convolution, 320


                                                                               425
426     INDEX


Corporate rates, 108–109                  Functional analysis / decomposition, 196–
Correlation, 322–323                          197, 259
Cost:                                     Functional organization structure, 22–24
  analysis / monitoring, 96–114           Function points, 303–304
  considerations, 104–110                 Functions of random variables, 321–322
  effectiveness, 7, 204–205, 272
  estimating relationship, 203–204        Gansler, J., 356
  factor, 85                              Gaussian distribution, 325–327
  graphs, 110                             General accounting office (GAO), 30–33
  information system, 114                 GIGO, 95, 301
  limitations and trades, 109–110         Goals, 69–71, 195
  reporting, 110
Covariance, 322–323                       Hardware engineering, 209
Cumulative distribution function, 318     High performance teams (HPTs), 111
Customers, 29–30, 110, 143–144            Human engineering, 209
Cyclomatic complexity, 307–309            Humphrey, W., 296

                                          I-CASE, 232–233, 365–368
Defense science board, 359–361            IEEE, 256–257
Delegation, 125                           IEEE standards, 55–56, 59–60, 291–293
Density function, 318                     Incentives, 176–178
Deployment, 219                           INCOSE, 342
Detection probability, 276–279, 331–332   Information systems:
Directing, 38, 40–41                         cost, 114
Discrete distributions, 317                  as integrators, 388–389
Disposal of system, 220                   Installation, 219
Documentation, 210–211                    Integrated:
Domain knowledge, 221–222                    logistics support, 211–212
                                             process and product development, 180
Earned value analysis (EVA), 100–104         product teams (IPTs), 178–181
Earned value analysis management, 376     Integration, 213
Education, 353                            Integrative management, 381–393
Effectiveness, 7, 204, 260, 381           Interactions:
Efficiency, 381                              with accounting / finance, 25–26
EIA, 56–58, 292–293,                         with contracts, 26
Eisner, H., 279–280, 311, 343–344            with corporate information office, 28
Enterprises, as integrators, 389–391         with corporate technology office, 28–
Environment, organizational, 22–30              29
Errors, 8, 242–243, 329–331                  with customers, 29–30, 143–144
Evaluation:                                  with functional managers, 25
  criteria, 262–264, 270, 273, 277–278       with human resources, 27
  framework, 261–262                         with management, 24–25
Exponential distribution, 328–329            with marketing / sales, 26–27
                                             supervisor, 139–143
                                             team, 153–181
Failure rate, 241–242, 328–329            Interface control, 209–210
False alarm probability, 276–279, 331–    ISO, 60, 290–291
     332
Firm fixed-price, 110–114                 Joint distributions, 322–323
Frame, J. D., 136                         Jones, Capers, 303
                                                                   INDEX    427

Kile, R., 303                            Operations evaluation, 219–220
                                         Organizational environment, 17–19, 22–
Large-scale organization and                 24, 82
     management issues, 30–34            Organizing, 38, 40
Leadership, 144–149                      Other direct costs (ODCs), 104–105
Learning, from negative, 130–131         Out-of-scope work, 112
Life cycle costing, 201–204, 265–266
Logistics support system (LEAPS), 396–
     401                                 Parallel reliability, 334–335
                                         Parameter dependency diagram, 278–
Maintainability, 212–213                      280
Management:                              Peck, M. S., 391
 conflict, 162–164                       Penalty clauses, 113
 indicators, 299–300                     Personality considerations, 136–138
 integrative, 381–393                    PERT, 79–81, 92–94
 problems, 8–13                          Plan:
Managers:                                  as integrator, 384–387
 as integrators, 382–383                   project, 67–88
 project, 123–149                          systems engineering management
Marciniak, J., 359                            (SEMP), 54–55, 385
Matrix organizational structure, 22–24   Planning, 37–39
McCabe, T., 307–309                      Poisson distribution, 306, 324
Means, 318–319                           Practical software management (PSM),
Mean time between failure (MTBF),             375–376
    241–242                              Preplanned product improvement, 218
Meetings, 157, 165–167                   Presentations, 167–170
Methods, as integrators, 388             Price factor, 85
Metrics, 299–309                         Pritsker, 280
Mil-Std-2168, 288–290                    Probability relationships, 316–329
Mil-Std-498, 286–288                     Problem areas, 8–13, 221
Mil-Std-499A, 49–51                      Process areas, 346–347
Mil-Std-499B, 51–55, 61, 186–188,        Production, 219
    226–227, 264–265, 275                Project:
Mission design process, 188–191            budget, 82–86
Mission engineering, 195                   directing, 38, 40
Modeling, 278–282                          management essentials, 37–41
Monitoring, 38, 40, 92–110                 management tools, 373–375
Motivation, 176–178                        management trends, 373–376
Multiple independent estimates, 301        manager, 123–133
Myers-Briggs type indicator, 133–136       monitoring, 38, 40, 92–110
                                           organization, 17–19, 22–24, 82
NASA, 6, 13, 45–46, 188–191, 228–          organizing, 38, 40
     232, 249–254                          overview, 39
National software council, 358             plan, 67–88
Needs, 68–69, 195                          planning, 37–41, 67–88
Ninety-five percent solution, 274          problems, 8–13
Normal distribution, 325–327               reviews, 48–49, 54
                                           team, 156–160
Objectives, 69–71, 195                     triumvirate, 37
Operations and maintenance, 219            tools, 373–375
428     INDEX


Proposal, 88, 113, 170–176                 Self-evaluation, 131–133
Psychological decision theory, 138–139     Senge, P., 390–391
                                           Sensitivity analysis, 275–278
Quality assurance / management, 216        Series reliability, 333–334
Quantitative relationships, 315–337        Simulation, 278–282
  summary, 336–337                         Situation analysis, 115–120, 158
                                           Situational leadership, 145–146
Radar detection, 276–277, 278–280,         SMERFS, 306–307
     331–332                               Software:
Rate changes, 108–109                         acquisition practices, 364–365
Rayleigh distribution, 329                    architecting, 368–370
RCASSE, 344                                   capability evaluation, 297
Rechtin, E., 248–249, 310, 347–348            capability maturity, 296–299
Reengineering, 219–220, 370–372               case tools, 232–233, 365–368
Reliability, 212–213, 241–242, 304–306,       commandments, 311
     333–335                                  constructive cost model (COCOMO),
Requirements, 71–74, 196, 225–244                300–303
  allocated, 240–243                          defects assessment system, 401–406
  ambiguous, 237–238                          development methods, 363–364
  analysis, 236–244, 259                      development plan, 385–386
  analysis and allocation, 196, 225–244,      engineering, 209, 285–311
     259                                      engineering trends, 358–372
  automation of, 236–237                      function points, 303–304
  derived, 240–243                            key process areas, 297–298
  high-risk, 239                              management indicators, 299–300
  inadequate articulation, 9–10               management strategies, 293–296
  incompatible, 238–239                       metrics, 299–309
  incorrect, 238                              process assessment, 297
  low-performance, 239–240                    reengineering, 370–372
  relationships and traceability, 237         reliability, 304–306, 335
  statements, 230–236                         reuse, 361–363
  traceability, 237                           reverse engineering, 371
  types, 234–235                              standards, 58–60, 286–293
Reserves, 109, 111–112                        ten commandments, 311
Responsibilities:                             trends, 358–372
  chief systems engineer, 20–21               warranties, 113
  project controller, 21–22                Software productivity consortium, 351
  project manager, 19–20                   Specialty engineering, 217–218
Reuse, of software, 361–363                Specification development, 208–209
REVIC, 303                                 Staffing, 82
Rewards, 114                               Standards, 49–62, 286–293
Risk analysis, 86–88, 204–207, 266–267        as integrators, 388
                                           Standish group, 361
Sage, A., 350–351                          Statement of work, 74–76
Scacchi, W., 365                           Sums of variables, 319–321
Scale factors, COCOMO, 302                 Sustainable development, 350
Schedule, 79–81, 92–96                     System, 3–4
SECM, 346                                     acquisition, 45–49, 58
Self-assessment exercise, 132–133             architecting, 247–282, 347–349
                                                                   INDEX       429

  cost-effectiveness, 7, 204–205, 272     integrated product, 178–181
  disposal, 220                           player, 127
  errors, 8, 242–243                    Technical approach, 76, 78–79
  functions, 257–258                    Technical data management, 210–211
  reliability, 333–335                  Technical integration teams, 385–386
  of systems engineering, 342–344       Technical performance measurement,
Systems approach, 13–17, 185–186             199–201, 264–265, 278–280
  as integrator, 387–388                Technical performance parameters, 279
Systems engineering:                    Test and evaluation, 215
  capability maturity model, 345–347    Total quality management (TQM), 216
  definitions, 4–7                      Trade-offs, 275–278
  environments, 351–353, 406–415        Training, 218
  management, 220–221                   Trends, 341–376
  management essentials, 41–45          Triangular distribution, 320
  management plan (SEMP), 54–55,
     385                                Uniform distribution, 327–328
  perspectives, 186–191
  process and management, 41–45         Validation, 213–215
  structure, 350–351                    Variances, 94, 318–319, 321
  thirty elements, 191–221              Verification and validation, 213–215
  tools, 351–353
  trends, 341–358                       Walking away, 114
Systems integration, 357–358            Warranties, 113
                                        Weibull distribution, 333
Task responsibility matrix, 82          Weight, 240–241
Task statements, 74–76                   criteria, 277–278
Team:                                   Wirth, N., 310
  as integrator, 383–384                Work:
  building, 153–181                      breakdown structure, 74–77
  busters, 160–161                       chunking, 112
  interactions, 153–181                  out of scope, 112
