MODELING FOR
 ALL SCALES
     䉬
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
MODELING FOR
 ALL SCALES
      An Introduction to
      System Simulation
                             䉬



                  Howard T. Odum
              Environmental Engineering Sciences
                     University of Florida
                     Gainesville, Florida


                 Elisabeth C. Odum
                 Santa Fe Community College
                     Gainesville, Florida




                 ACADEMIC PRESS
 San Diego London Boston New York Sydney Tokyo Toronto
                   Contents
                           䉬




LOCATIONS OF MODELS xv
PREFACE xvii




                       PART ONE

                    MODELING



                      Chapter One
         MODELING AND SIMULATION

1.1   A Simple System of Storage and the Model TANK 4
1.2   Parts and Wholes 11
1.3   Representing Scale and Energy Hierarchy 11
1.4   Summary of Procedure for Making a Concise
      Model 15


                      Chapter Two
       ENERGY SYSTEMS DIAGRAMMING

2.1 Translating Words into Symbols 20
2.2 Pathways, Force, and Flow 22


                            v
vi                                                             Contents


     2.3   The Circulation of Material 23
     2.4   The Circulation of Money 25
     2.5   Precise Symbols 25
     2.6   Group Symbols 33
     2.7   The Maximum Power Principle 37


                           Chapter Three
                 NUMBERS ON NETWORKS

     3.1   Diagrams with Numbers of One Kind 40
     3.2   Diagrams with Energy Values 44
     3.3   Diagrams with Numbers of More Than One Kind 45
     3.4   Numbers for Flows between Two Storages 47



                            PART TWO

                        SIMULATION


                            Chapter Four
           SIMULATION WITH PICTURE BLOCKS
                    FOR EXTEND

     4.1   EXTEND 52
     4.2   Simulating Preassembled Minimodels 54
     4.3   Create and Simulate a Picture Model 60
     4.4   BioQUEST Models 61
     4.5   Specialized Icon Blocks for EXTEND 62


                            Chapter Five
     SIMULATION WITH GENERAL SYSTEMS
              BLOCKS FOR EXTEND

     5.1 Energy Systems Symbols Preprogrammed as Icon Blocks
         for EXTEND 66
     5.2 EXTEND Models Using General Systems Blocks 68
     5.3 Entering Numbers in Dialog Boxes of GENSYS
         Blocks 70
Contents                                                              vii


           5.4 Entering Numbers for the Start of Simulation 73
           5.5 Graphs from Simulating PC&CYCLE with
               EXTEND 74
           5.6 Simulating the Earth System Model with Energy System
               Blocks 75
           5.7 Building New Models 75


                                  Chapter Six
                   EQUATIONS FROM DIAGRAMS

           6.1 Equations for a Single Storage 78
           6.2 Equations for Step Simulation 81
           6.3 Step Simulation and Continuous Processes 82
           6.4 Equations from Systems Diagrams 84
           6.5 Translating Equations into Energy Systems
               Diagrams 88
           6.6 Mathematical Characteristics of Units 90
           6.7 Mathematics and Networks 91
           6.8 Simulating Equations with EXTEND 93


                                 Chapter Seven
                        CALIBRATING MODELS

           7.1 Procedure for Calibrating a Model 96
           7.2 Calibrating a Model with a Spreadsheet Program 99
           7.3 Calibrating More Complex Models 101


                                 Chapter Eight
                 SIMULATING WITH SPREADSHEET

           8.1 Procedure for Simulation with a Spreadsheet 104
           8.2 Simulating the Model FISH 106


                                 Chapter Nine
                      PROGRAMMING IN BASIC

           9.1 Running a Simulation Model with
               QUICKBASIC 111
           9.2 Simulation with Calculations by Hand 112
viii                                                               Contents


       9.3  Writing a BASIC Program for the TANK
            Model 114
       9.4  Iteration Time 118
       9.5  Factors for Keeping Graphs on Scale 120
       9.6  Program Format and Use of Remarks in
            Programs 121
       9.7  Simulating Exponential Growth with Program
            EXPO 122
       9.8  Simulating Dispersal from Storage with Model
            DRAIN 125
       9.9  Simulating Production, Consumption, and Recycle with
            Model PC&CYCLE 128
       9.10 Useful Modeling and Programming
            Mechanisms 132

                              Chapter Ten
                 SIMULATING WITH STELLA

       10.1 Simulating the TANK Model Using
            STELLA 134
       10.2 Simulating the EXPO Model Using
            STELLA 142
       10.3 Production–Consumption–Recycle Model 145
       10.4 Comparison of Systems Languages 149

                            Chapter Eleven
                     SIMULATING EMERGY
                     AND TRANSFORMITY

       11.1 Concepts 152
       11.2 Procedure for Simulating Emergy and
            Transformity 154
       11.3 Simulation Model EMFISH 155
       11.4 Emergy Storage Model EMGTANK with Depreciation
            Outflow Only 158
       11.5 Emergy in Inflow-Limited Autocatalytic Model
            RENEMGY 160
       11.6 Simulating International Emergy
            Exchange 164
       11.7 Emergy Simulation with EXTEND 164
Contents                                                         ix


                                 PART THREE

                  FUNDAMENTAL MINIMODELS



                                Chapter Twelve
                      MODELS OF PRODUCTION
                          AND RECYCLE

           12.1 Model of Net Production 170
           12.2 External Limiting Factors 174
           12.3 Internal Limiting Factors 177
           12.4 Model of Production and Consumption 181
           12.5 Model of Production and Oxygen in Aquatic
                Ecosystems 184
           12.6 Model of Logistic Autocatalytic Production and
                Recycle 187



                                Chapter Thirteen
                         MODELS OF GROWTH

           13.1 Model of Autocatalytic Growth on a Renewable
                Source 194
           13.2 Slowly Renewable Growth 198
           13.3 Growth on a Nonrenewable Source 201
           13.4 Growth on Two Sources: Renewable and
                Nonrenewable 204
           13.5 Model of Logistic Growth 206



                                Chapter Fourteen
                      MODELS OF COMPETITION
                        AND COOPERATION

           14.1 Model of Competition for a Limited Source 212
           14.2 Model of Two Populations in Exponential
                Growth 215
x                                                               Contents


    14.3 Model of Two Populations in Competitive Interactive
         Growth 219
    14.4 Model of Two Populations That Cooperate 222



                           Chapter Fifteen
       MODELS OF SERIES AND OSCILLATION

    15.1   Model of Prey–Predator Oscillation 228
    15.2   Model of Oscillation at Three Levels 230
    15.3   Model of Switching Oscillation 234
    15.4   Model of Pulse and Recycle 237
    15.5   Model of Energy Applied to Recycle 240
    15.6   Model of the Chaos of One Oscillating Pair Driving
           Another 244



                          Chapter Sixteen
             MINIMODELS OF SUCCESSION
                  AND EVOLUTION

    16.1   Model of Wet Grassland 250
    16.2   Model of Succession 253
    16.3   Model of Excess Resource and Diversity 258
    16.4   Model of Species and Support Area 262
    16.5   Model of Island Speciation and Diversity 265



                         Chapter Seventeen
            MODELS OF MICROECONOMICS

    17.1 Model of Sales with Price Inverse to Supply 272
    17.2 Model of Economic Use of Mined Resources 274
    17.3 Model of Loans, Interest, and Banking 276
    17.4 Model of Production, Consumption, and Circulating
         Money 281
    17.5 Model of Economic Use of Renewable Resources 283
    17.6 Model of the Economic Role of Biodiversity Reserve
         Areas 286
Contents                                                           xi


                                Chapter Eighteen
           MODELS OF MACROECONOMIC OVERVIEW

           18.1 Model of Money-Driven Growth 292
           18.2 Model of Price in Relation to Unsustainable
                Growth 294
           18.3 Model of Textbook Macroeconomics 297
           18.4 Model of an Economy in Relation to Land Use 300


                                Chapter Nineteen
           MODELS OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
                        AND TRADE

           19.1   Model of Trade and Empower 306
           19.2   Effects of a Global Economy on a Nation 308
           19.3   Model of Defense and War 316
           19.4   Model of Globally Shared Information 318


                                Chapter Twenty
            MODELS OF THE GLOBAL GEOBIOSPHERE

           20.1 Model of World Carbon Dioxide 324
           20.2 Model of World Population 328
           20.3 Overview Model of Geological Processes in Earth
                Evolution 332
           20.4 Model of a State Driven by a World Minimodel 335



                                  PART FOUR

                             APPLICATION


                              Chapter Twenty-One
             MODELING PROJECTS AND COMPLEXITY

           21.1 Overview 344
           21.2 LAGOON: An Example of an Initial Project
                Model 347
xii                                                            Contents


      21.3 Complexity of Models 352
      21.4 Judging the Success of Simulation 359


                           Chapter Twenty-Two
                   SIMULATION APPROACHES

      22.1    Spatial Models 364
      22.2    Variation and Statistical Models 370
      22.3    Approaching Models through Mathematics 374
      22.4    Methods for Larger Simulation Programs 376
      22.5    Discrete Processes and Models 380
      22.6    Parallel Processing 382
      22.7    Frontiers and Perspectives 383


                                Appendix A
      PROGRAMMING ENERGY SYSTEMS BLOCKS
          FOR SIMULATING WITH EXTEND

      A.1    Programming Screens 385
      A.2    Arrays Sharing Information among Blocks 386
      A.3    Steps for Programming the Script 388
      A.4    Converting Macintosh Blocks for Windows PCs 398


                                Appendix B
               NOTES ON COMPUTER USE AND
                  BASIC PROGRAMMING

      B.1    QUICKBASIC for PCs and Windows PCs 399
      B.2    PC BASICA 400
      B.3    Macintosh QUICKBASIC 402
      B.4    Macintosh CHIPMUNK BASIC 403
      B.5    Helpful Hints for BASIC Programming 406
      B.6    Use of Sine Waves for Varying Inputs 408
      B.7    Use of an Array to Enter a Series of Inputs 410


                                Appendix C
                    ANSWERS TO ‘‘WHAT IF’’
                   EXPERIMENTAL PROBLEMS
Contents                                          xiii


                            Appendix D
              USE OF ENERGY SYSTEMS SYMBOLS

                            Appendix E
             CONTENTS OF THE CD SUPPLIED WITH
                        THIS BOOK

           REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READING 445
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
           Locations of Models
                                䉬




Model      Simulation program        Chapter        Page

2SOURCE    BASIC                     Chapter 13     204
AUTOCYCL   BASIC                     Chapter 12     187
BANK       BASIC                     Chapter 17     276
BUYPOWER   BASIC                     Chapter 18     291
CASH       BASIC                     Chapter 9      117
CHAOS      BASIC                     Chapter 15     244
CLIMAX     BASIC                     Chapter 16     253
CO-OP      BASIC                     Chapter 14     223
DAYP&C     BASIC                     Chapter 12     181
DESTRUCT   BASIC                     Chapter 15     240
DRAIN      BASIC                     Chapter 6, 9   126
EARTHGEO   BASIC                     Chapter 20     332
EARTHGS    EXTEND                    Chapter 5      75
EARTHPIC   EXTEND                    Chapter 4      57
ECONP&C    BASIC                     Chapter 17     281
ECONUSE    BASIC                     Chapter 17     283
EMEXCHNG   BASIC                     Chapter 19     308
EMFISH     BASIC                     Chapter 11     155
EMGTANK    BASIC                     Chapter 11     158
ENTRADE    BASIC                     Chapter 19     306
EXCLUS     BASIC                     Chapter 14     212
EXPO       EXTEND, BASIC, STELLA     Chapter 5, 9   69, 123, 142
FACTORS    BASIC                     Chapter 12     174
                                                       (continues)



                                xv
xvi                                                     Locations of Models


(continued)

Model         Simulation program      Chapter                Page

FIRE          BASIC                   Chapter 15             234
FISH          EXCEL                   Chapter 7, 8           92, 105
FREEMARK      BASIC                   Chapter 19             308
INFOBEN       BASIC                   Chapter 19             318
INTERACT      BASIC                   Chapter 14             221
INTLIMIT      BASIC                   Chapter 12             177
LAGOON        BASIC                   Chapter 21             347
LOGISTIC      BASIC                   Chapter 13             206
MACROEC       BASIC                   Chapter 18             297
MONEYGRO      BASIC                   Chapter 18             292
NETPROD       BASIC                   Chapter 12             170
NONRENEW      BASIC                   Chapter 13             201
NUTRSPEC      BASIC                   Chapter 16             258
OPENAQ        BASIC                   Chapter 12             184
OSCILLAT      BASIC                   Chapter 15             230
PC&CYCLE      EXTEND, BASIC, STELLA   Chapter 5, 7, 9        69, 128, 145
PEOPLE        BASIC                   Chapter 20             328
PEXPO         EXTEND                  Chapter 4              56
PONDWATR      EXTEND                  Chapter 4              53
PREYPRED      BASIC                   Chapter 15             228
PULSE         BASIC                   Chapter 15, 22         237
RAMP          BASIC                   Chapter 6              82
RENEMGY       BASIC                   Chapter 11             160
RENEW         BASIC                   Chapter 13             194
RESERVE       BASIC                   Chapter 17             286
ROTATION      BASIC                   Chapter 18             300
SALES         BASIC                   Chapter 17             272
SLOWREN       BASIC                   Chapter 13             198
SPECAREA      BASIC                   Chapter 16             262
SPECIES       BASIC                   Chapter 16             265
STATECON      BASIC                   Chapter 20             337
TANK          EXTEND, BASIC, STELLA   Chapter 5, 6, 9        10, 68, 134
TANKSALE      BASIC                   Chapter 17             274
TWOPOP        BASIC                   Chapter 14             215
WAR           BASIC                   Chapter 19             316
WETLAND       BASIC                   Chapter 16             250
WORLDCO2      BASIC                   Chapter 20             324
                       Preface
                               䉬




Modeling and simulation are intellectually creative and quantita-
tively rigorous, mainstream ways of connecting ideas with reality.
The time has come when everyone engaged in intellectual inquiry
needs to model and simulate the phenomena of his or her interest.
Models help us understand how things are organized and func-
tion. Simulating models is a way to learn how systems and their
components grow and change.
   A powerful and rigorous understanding of systems results
when normal verbal thinking is connected to quantitative simula-
tion using the systems diagrams and simulation programs. The
process of representing the fundamentals of science also shows
how similar all the branches of knowledge are, often using similar
functions under different names. Thus, this book helps simplify
knowledge by showing that many of the great variety of processes
and events in our world are special cases of a relatively few
principles commonly found on all scales of size and time.
   Since 1989, versions of this workbook were used at the Univer-
sity of Florida and Santa Fe Community College to introduce
modeling and simulation to students of varied backgrounds. A
diagrammatic ‘‘energy systems’’ language is used to translate
word models into the quantitative models to be used with numeri-
cal data and computers. The diagrams organize any system and
its parts from left to right in order of the natural hierarchy
of energy.

                              xvii
xviii                                                                                Preface


                     By studying systems models and then running the models on
                  the computer, a student gains understanding of how things work.
                  This process provides insight different from that provided by
                  most kinds of study. The dynamic medium of simulation provides
                  time perspective. The computer simulation programs make sys-
                  tems ‘‘come alive.’’
                     As shown in Figure P.1, the diagramming methodology in this
                  book leads students to make models and write equations with
                  less mathematics. Several ways of simulation are given with and
                  without the need to program.



                                                䉬
                                    LEARNING TO PROGRAM

                     A computer simulation program is a set of sequential, logical
                  steps that represent a system process. Simulation programs are
                  often compared to cookbook recipes. Setting out a sequence of
                  statements represents a system in a stepwise language. Learning
                  some computer programming is necessary to understand the time
                  dimension of systems. When you run a program, you can check
                  whether it is correct and does what you think it should.



FIGURE P.1.
Approaches to modeling and
simulation in this book, starting
with word models on the left.
Location by chapter: making
models as energy diagrams;
Chapters 1–3 and 21; writing
equations and calibrating,
Chapters 6 and 7; writing
programs, Chapter 9 and
Appendix A; simulating with
EXTEND, Chapters 4 and 5;
simulating with BASIC,
Chapters 9, 11, and 12–20 and
Appendixes B and C;
simulating with spreadsheets,
Chapter 8; simulating with
STELLA, Chapter 10; and
mathematics approaches,
Chapter 22.
Preface                                                                        xix


             In the early days of computing, most students learned to pro-
          gram as part of their introduction to computers. Unfortunately, in
          recent years, the majority of students have learned to manipulate
          menus of complex software packages, without learning a pro-
          gramming language. In the opinion of many, everyone needs to
          be able to program to be well educated.
             This book teaches BASIC, the simplest programming lan-
          guage. Some form of BASIC is available for most comput-
          ers so that the model programs can be simulated in BASIC,
          QUICKBASIC, VISUALBASIC, etc. The programs for each
          model in the book are listed so the reader can study the lines in
          relation to the diagrams and equations.




                                         䉬
                              USE IN TEACHING

             This book is intended to introduce modeling and simulation
          without requiring a mathematical background. It can be used
          either as a stand-alone introduction to systems modeling and
          simulation or as a companion book for courses in other fields.
          Figure P.1 shows several pathways that can be taken to use
          this book to learn simulation. Select Chapters 1–5 to introduce
          models and elementary simulation. Use Chapters 6–11 to write
          equations and programs from the diagrams. Teach general sys-
          tems concepts by running minimodels from Part III (Chapters
          12–20). Develop a project that applies methods with Chapter
          21. Survey some of the excitement in the varied field of modeling
          and simulation with Chapter 22. Refer to the appendixes for
          details on programming BASIC and EXTEND, the answers to
          the ‘‘What If’’ questions, and a summary of rules for use of
          energy systems symbols.
             This book on simulation is not a general introduction to sys-
          tems, which was the subject of an earlier volume (Odum, 1995,
          Ecological and General Systems, University Press of Colorado,
          Niwot). That book relates models, their diagrams, and their
          mathematics and may be a helpful reference for more ad-
          vanced study.
             Some other introductions to simulation are listed in the refer-
          ences section at the end of the book. The approaches, model
          selection, and programming languages vary.
xx                                                                       Preface



                                    䉬
                             BOOK DISK

        The CD supplied with this book contains versions of the pro-
     grams Chipmunk BASIC and EXTEND, all the simulation pro-
     grams used in this book including BASIC minimodels, the object-
     oriented programs for EXTEND, and spreadsheets used for cali-
     bration and simulation. See the listing Appendix E.



                                    䉬
                      ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

        We thank Mark T. Brown and the many students who used
     models and gave their responses. T. E. Bullock helped us start
     examining this approach in the 1970s. The PEOPLE model
     was developed with Graeme Scott in New Zealand. Developing
     object-oriented blocks for EXTEND started with the BioQUEST
     workshops at Beloit College with John Jungck, Ethel Stanley, and
     Patti Soderberg. Nils Peterson collaborated on the programming.
     The application section, Part IV, was added at the suggestion of
     the publisher’s referee. Ms. Joan Breeze was editorial assistant.

                         Howard T. Odum and Elisabeth C. Odum
                                            Gainesville, Florida
                 PART ONE
                               䉬


       MODELING

Part I introduces modeling concepts, starting with a simple stor-
age tank model and its simulation in Chapter 1. Chapter 2 intro-
duces the energy systems symbols to represent parts and relation-
ships in systems diagrams. The symbols and their use are also
summarized in Appendix D. Chapter 3 explains ways of making
models quantitative by writing numerical values of materials,
money, and/or energy on flow pathways and in storage tanks.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
       Chapter One
                     䉬

MODELING AND
 SIMULATION




1.1 A Simple System of Storage and the
    Model TANK
      Representing Energy Laws
      Simulation of the TANK Model
1.2 Parts and Wholes
1.3 Representing Scale and Energy Hierarchy
      Scales of Modeling and the Macroscope
1.4 Summary of Procedure for Making a
    Concise Model




                       3
A      lthough the universe in which we live is far too complex
for the human mind to visualize in detail all at once, we can
understand simplifications. The simpler concepts by which we
think are often called models. As children early in life we develop
models about the way the world works around us, usually ex-
pressing them in words. For example, in thinking about a water
tank we could say ‘‘the more water we store in a tank the faster
it flows out.’’ In this chapter we explain how to give our word
models a system view, and make them quantitative so that they
can be computer simulated.
    Models represent systems. A system is a set of parts and their
connected relationships. Typical parts of our planet are the lakes,
rivers, oceans, mountains, organisms, people and cities, some
large and some small. Processes connect everything directly and
indirectly to everything else. Our world is really one huge, com-
plex system. But in order for humans to understand it, we have
to simplify it by creating models. To do that, we first put an
imaginary box in our minds around the subjects of our interest,
thus defining a system. Next we draw symbols representing the
outside influences, the inside parts, and the connecting lines that
represent relationships and flows. Then we add numerical values
to make the model quantitative. Finally, we use one of several
methods for simulating the model with a computer. Simulation
usually means letting the computer calculations show what the
model does over time. Let’s consider a simple example of the
process of modeling and simulation.



                                䉬
 1.1 A SIMPLE SYSTEM OF STORAGE AND THE
               MODEL TANK

   Let’s start by modeling a system containing the storage pro-
cess. Although we use water as an example of the medium being
stored, the model applies to any type of storage. First, we draw
a shaded frame with rounded corners as the boundary to define


               4
A Simple System of Storage and the Model Tank                                                      5


                                   a simple system containing a storage tank, an inflow, and an
                                   outflow (Figure 1.1).
                                      Examples of the storage system are sketched in Figure 1.1a,
                                   pictures showing storage containers with inflows and outflow.
                                   Expressed in words, the verbal model states:

                                    Flows of something from outside go into a storage reservoir.
                                    Some of this quantity flows out through another route in
                                    proportion to the quantity stored.




FIGURE 1.1.
Example of an energy systems
diagram—a system containing
storage, inflows, and outflows.
(a) Examples of water tanks
storing water; (b) energy
systems diagram; (c) typical
graph of growth of storage after
starting with an initially small
value. Also see Figure 6.1.
6                                                               Chapter One Modeling and Simulation


                                   The available energy driving the flows comes in with
                                   the inflow, but some is used in the process and disperses from
                                   the system, no longer able to do work.

                                   The model is made more precise by drawing an energy systems
                                   diagram that considers the materials and energy (Figure 1.1b).
                                   The energy systems diagram uses three of the symbols of the
                                   energy systems language listed in Figure 1.2. The system includes




FIGURE 1.2.
Symbols of the energy systems
language. (a) Sources, storages,
and pathway interactions;
(b) composite symbols for
representing units and
processes in the aggregate. To
show exact functions, we must
diagram within these symbols.
A Simple System of Storage and the Model Tank                                                     7




FIGURE 1.2.
(Continued)



                                   connecting flow lines. In Figure 1.1b the inflow from outside
                                   the chosen boundary is shown coming from the circular source
                                   symbol. The storage symbol resembles water tanks that covered
                                   America earlier in the century (Figure 1.1a). Like the other gen-
                                   eral systems symbols, the symbol for storage can represent any-
                                   thing on any scale: water, money, fuels, people, books, whatever.
                                   The symbol can be used for stocks of chemicals at the scale of
                                   microbes or matter on the scale of the planetary processes. We
                                   give the model a name: TANK.
                                      The network picture (Figure 1.1b) is supposed to be read
8                                 Chapter One Modeling and Simulation


    visually from left to right by imagining flows coming into the
    tank, as in the water tank example, and then flowing out in
    proportion to the pressure built up in the tank. The water flowing
    out of the tank continues to the right, flowing past the system
    boundary. The pathway branch that goes down represents the
    used energy ( but no water). More water coming represents more
    storage and causes a greater outflow. If the inflow is constant,
    the water in the tank will increase until the outflows equal inflows
    (Figure 1.1c). After that the water level is constant.



                REPRESENTING ENERGY LAWS

       Because energy accompanies all storages and flows, energy
    systems diagrams are drawn to include the behavior of energy.
    The energy systems diagrams represent energy laws. The first
    energy law (conservation of energy) states that energy flowing
    into a system must either be accounted for in outflows or in
    storage within the system. In the tank model (Figure 1.1b), avail-
    able energy at the source pumps in the water. Energy is stored
    with the water according to its height above the ground. The
    more water, the more available energy is stored. As the water
    flows out, some of the energy is dispersed by friction. According
    to the second energy law dispersed energy cannot do any more
    work and leaves the defined system degraded. In the diagrams,
    dispersed energy (used energy, used-up availability) is always
    shown leaving the system through the heat sink symbol, usually
    drawn with thinner lines. The heat sink has an arrowhead (barb)
    indicating that it cannot run backwards.



            SIMULATION OF THE TANK MODEL

       Next, run a simulation of the TANK model to get the idea of
    simulation. Use one or both of the following procedures.

    Simulating the TANK Model with the EXTEND Program
       Put the disk that comes with this book in your computer and
    load the program EXTEND. Next, use that program’s FILE menu
    to open the file TANK.mox. The program loads a library of
    symbols and uses them to draw a systems diagram of the tank
A Simple System of Storage and the Model Tank                                                        9


                                   model on screen (Figure 1.3a). Then run the simulation with the
                                   RUN menu. A graph similar to Figure 1.1c appears (Figure 1.3b),
                                   confirming the expectation from the verbal thinking.
                                      Bring the diagram window to the front by clicking on it with
                                   the mouse. Double click on the circular source symbol. A dialog
                                   box appears that has a place for the input value. Type in a higher
                                   number. Before you run it, predict what will happen. Then go
                                   to the RUN menu and repeat the simulation. The new graph
                                   levels off at a higher value. Does this agree with your expectation?
                                   With more inflow, the storage and its pressure builds up to a
                                   higher value before the outflow equals the inflow.

                                   Simulating the TANK Model with a BASIC Program
                                     Load QBASIC from PC Windows (Macintosh users can load
                                   CHIPBASIC from the CD-Rom). Use the FILE menu on the screen




FIGURE 1.3.
Views of the computer screen
when the storage model TANK
is simulated by EXTEND.
(a) Screen view of the systems
window with connected icons;
(b) screen display of the
simulated growth.
10                                    Chapter One Modeling and Simulation


     to load the program TANK (file: TANK.bas; CHIPTANK.bas
     for Mac). Use the mouse to click on the RUN command on the
     menu. A graph of storage over time appears on the screen similar
     to that shown in Figure 1.1c. Next, use the LIST command in
     the menu to show the statements of the program. The list of
     numbered statements in Table 1.1 appears on the screen. We
     will explain how to write such programs in Chapter 9. For now,
     you can make a change in the program by retyping a line in the
     program and running the program again to see how the model
     changes its behavior. Increase the inflow J by retyping line 50 to
     read: 50 J ⫽ 4. The curve levels off at a higher level, as you
     might expect.




     TABLE 1.1
     Program in BASIC for the Storage
     Model TANKa




       a
           Without scaling factors.
Representing Scale and Energy Hierarchy                                                                11


                                                                     䉬
                                                    1.2 PARTS AND WHOLES

                                        When we think about a model, we define an arbitrary bound-
                                    ary, usually without considering it consciously, including within
                                    it the phenomenon of interest. With the energy systems language
                                    we place the boundary consciously (in this book a shaded,
                                    rounded rectangle). This defines a whole and the symbols that
                                    we put inside are the parts. Those connected from outside of
                                    the frame are sources and outflows. See the example shown in
                                    Figure 1.1b.
                                        Because of the way science has usually been taught, we most
                                    often look from the whole inward to the parts in order to find
                                    mechanisms of the way the whole works. By doing this, we move
                                    to a smaller scale of time and space, one that may be too small
                                    for the questions raised. For example, in many environmental
                                    affairs, study of the parts of an ecosystem is not as important to
                                    understanding and prediction as studying the ecosystem’s interac-
                                    tions as a part of the economy around it.
                                        Starting with a unit of interest, we can either call it the whole,
                                    put a frame around it, and diagram its parts, or regard it as a
                                    part to be fitted into a model whose frame is part of a larger
                                    system. For example, in Figure 1.4 the hatched unit (Figure 1.4a)
                                    is shown again in Figure 1.4b with its parts diagrammed. In
                                    Figure 1.4c the hatched unit is included in a diagram of the next
                                    larger scale where its role at that level shows in the network rela-
                                    tionships.
                                        Study of models is both analytic and synthetic. Analysis often
                                    means taking something apart to see how things are structured
                                    and processed. Synthesis often means putting parts together to
                                    identify and understand the whole. Modeling can do both at the
                                    same time.



                                                                     䉬
                                               1.3 REPRESENTING SCALE AND
                                                    ENERGY HIERARCHY

                                       Energy systems diagrams are drawn so as to represent the
                                    scales of phenomena and the principles of matter and energy.
12                                                              Chapter One Modeling and Simulation




FIGURE 1.4.
Systems and subsystems.
(a) A selected system (shaded);
(b) model of the components
within the selected system;
(c) the selected system as a
subsystem modeled within a
larger network.



                                  As illustrated with the energy systems diagram of Figure 1.5b,
                                  symbols representing many small-scale units are on the left and
                                  symbols representing larger scale units are on the right. For exam-
                                  ple, in Figure 1.5c, if the system is a pasture, the source on the
                                  left is the inflow of tiny photons of sunlight.
                                     The producer symbol represents the many small blades of
                                  grass, the consumer symbol the medium-sized sheep, and the
                                  block on the right the human users drawing inputs from the
                                  economic sources on a larger scale. The system looks complex
                                  when all the units are viewed together (Figure 1.5a). Better under-
                                  standing results when the components are separated and arranged
                                  in order of scale (Figure 1.5b).
                                     In all systems energy accompanies everything, including flows
                                  and storage of information. Thus, all pathways on an energy
Representing Scale and Energy Hierarchy                                                               13




FIGURE 1.5.
Modeling scale and energy
transformations. (a) Sketch
showing the way items of
different size and scale are often
depicted together; (b) items of
similar scale separated from left
to right in order of increasing
scale; (c) energy systems
diagram of these sources and
components.




                                     systems diagram include energy. According to one of the universal
                                     energy laws (second energy law), when usable energy is trans-
                                     formed into a new form, most of it is degraded and dispersed in
                                     order to create a small amount of the new type. Dispersed energy
                                     cannot do any more work. The dispersal of energy is represented
                                     with the heat sink symbol (Figure 1.2). Notice the flows out the
                                     bottom of the diagram in Figure 1.5c.
                                        In a chain of energy transformations like that shown in Figure
                                     1.5, many joules of energy flowing from the left support fewer
                                     joules of energy in the middle and even fewer joules on the right.
                                     In other words, there is an energy hierarchy that is recognized
                                     by the arrangement of symbols in an energy systems diagram
                                     from left to right.
                                        Energy flows to the right are said to be of higher quality
                                     because more energy of one kind is used to make them. The ratio
                                     of energy of one kind required for the higher quality type is called
                                     the transformity, a concept explained further in Chapter 11.
                                     Transformities increase from left to right, a measure of position
                                     in the energy hierarchy.
14                                Chapter One Modeling and Simulation


        Figure 1.6 shows a diagram commonly used to relate the scale
     of events in time to the scale of phenomena in space. On the
     lower left are things that occupy small territories and have fast
     turnover (short replacement time). The upper right has items of
     large territory and a slow rate of turnover. For example, the
     scale of chemical reactions is on the lower left, the scale of
     environmental and geological processes is in the middle, and the
     scale of astronomical events is at the upper right.



     SCALES OF MODELING AND THE MACROSCOPE

        Because the real world operates simultaneously on many
     scales, models should include all scales pertinent to the phenom-
     ena of interest. There is a tendency, through long habit and the
     desire to simplify, to concentrate on models of one scale. No
     scale is more basic than another, but people concentrating their
     work think of their scale as special. However, limiting the scale
     of view limits understanding, because every scale is part of the
     scale above and composed of the smaller scaled items below. We
     cannot understand one scale without studying its relation to that
     above and below. Control on the longer time scale comes from
     the larger scale to the right, but understanding of parts comes
     from the organization of their relationships. One safe way to
     model is to always include two or three scales in modeling a
     phenomenon of interest.
        When emphasis on looking smaller is carried to the extreme,
     people on one scale deny there is any science at the next larger
     scale. Many people are taught that looking for purpose is not
     scientific, that teleology is bad. However, what is viewed as
     purpose of a unit at one scale is its part in mechanisms of the
     next larger scale. Avoiding purpose is really hiding from the
     larger scale, which controls the longer scale of events.
        Modeling that starts by identifying and studying parts first
     and then connecting them into a system is sometimes called
     bottom-up modeling. Because of the analytic (take apart) empha-
     sis in science education, many people tend to approach models
     from the bottom up. Sometimes this approach includes too many
     parts, not aggregated enough, so that the system becomes too
     complex for easy simulation or understanding.
        Top-down modeling first defines the scale of space and time
     that is of interest because of the problems, questions, and pur-
Summary of Procedure for Making a Concise Model                                                  15




FIGURE 1.6.
Realms of different scale from
chemical reactions to the stars
referred to a diagram where
territory, replacement time, and
transformity increase together.


                                   poses of the study. After the systems attention frame is defined,
                                   a limited number of symbols is added, each representing aggrega-
                                   tion of many smaller parts. When this approach is used, the
                                   models do not get lost in detail. A model is finished and running
                                   sooner. On the other hand, the aggregation may not bring out
                                   everything that is important in that system.
                                       We sometimes refer to top-down modeling as looking through
                                   the macroscope (Odum, 1971). The human mind is good at
                                   changing its scale of mental attention, much like a zoom micro-
                                   scope. Whereas the authors of this book tend to teach top-down
                                   thinking, perhaps good modeling requires zoom perspectives,
                                   some top down and some bottom up. Only with simulation
                                   testing, comparing, and revising with real-world observations
                                   can oversimplifications be corrected to make a model appropriate
                                   (Chapter 21).



                                                                  䉬
                                    1.4 SUMMARY OF PROCEDURE FOR MAKING
                                              A CONCISE MODEL

                                     Let’s review the process of translating a word model into a
                                   more precise form, whether you are working alone or conducting
16                                  Chapter One Modeling and Simulation


     a group session and using a blackboard for this purpose. What
     this procedure does is take the knowledge of individuals or the
     group, which is in verbal form, and collect it into lists. Then the
     words are translated into symbols to form a network diagram
     in energy systems language.

     1. Draw the frame of attention that selects the boundary.
     2. Make a list of all the important input pathways that cross
        the boundary. Put each in a source symbol and place them
        around the frame from left to right roughly in order of trans-
        formity (sun, wind, rain, rivers, tide, fuels, high-quality foods,
        impact chemicals, labor, technical services, information, etc.).
        Label the symbols with the words.
     3. Make a list of components believed to be important. Place
        them within the boundary from left to right in order of trans-
        formity. (For example, ecosystem components in food chain
        order: producers, consumers, etc.) Label the symbols with
        the words.
     4. Make a list of the processes believed important within the
        system defined. Then use these processes to indicate the path-
        ways connecting the symbols. For example, for photosynthesis
        draw pathways to connect the ingredients to a production
        symbol. Label processes of special interest.
     5. Remember that matter is conserved. (Something is conserved
        if the matter flowing in is either accounted for in storages
        within or in outflows.) Therefore, storages and flows of each
        material you put into the model should be examined to see
        if anything is missing. For example, is the water incoming
        from rain and rivers fully accounted for in lake storage, evapo-
        transpiration pathways, and outflows?
     6. Check to see that money flows form a closed loop within the
        frame and that money inflows across the boundary lead to
        money outflows. Use dashed lines to distinguish money flows
        from other flows.
     7. Check all pathways to see that energy flows are appropriate.
        In general, all symbols should have a pathway of degraded,
        used energy going out to the heat sink at the bottom of the
        frame.
     8. If color is used, the following color scheme is suggested:
           Yellow—sunlight, heat flows including used energy flows
           Blue—circulating materials of the biosphere such as water,
           air, nutrients
Summary of Procedure for Making a Concise Model                                                  17


                                        Brown—geological components, fuels, mining
                                        Green—environmental areas, producers, production
                                        Red—consumers (animal and economic), population, in-
                                        dustry, cities
                                        Purple—money
                                  9. If a complex diagram has resulted (more than 25 symbols),
                                     redraw it to make it neat and save it as a useful inventory and
                                     summary of the input knowledge. Because for most purposes a
                                     simpler model is desirable for an overview for policy discus-
                                     sion or for simulation, redraw the diagram with the same
                                     boundary definition, aggregating symbols, and flows to obtain
                                     a model of the desired complexity (perhaps 3 to 10 symbols).
                                     You can combine them, but do not leave out any of the inflows
                                     and outflows.

                                  Often when we show someone the complex diagram, they may
                                  be ‘‘turned off,’’ saying that it is too complex for the time they
                                  have to study it or for a human’s ability to absorb its meaning.
                                  But if you show someone an aggregated diagram they may dismiss
                                  it as simplistic. If you show them both, they can see what has
                                  gone into the model and how simplification may be necessary to
                                  hold human credibility and interest. Then they may join you in
                                  modifications, calibration, testing, and revising.
                                     In Chapter 2 we explain the symbols and their use in more
                                  detail, and in Chapter 3 we explain how to assign numerical
                                  values to the diagrams.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
      Chapter Two
                      䉬

ENERGY SYSTEMS
 DIAGRAMMING




2.1 Translating Words into Symbols
2.2 Pathways, Force, and Flow
2.3 The Circulation of Material
2.4 The Circulation of Money
2.5 Precise Symbols
       Sources
       Storage Symbol
       Inertial Storage
       Interaction Symbol (Production Process)
       Constant Gain Amplifier
       Exchange Symbol
       Heat Sink
       Loop-Limited Converter
2.6 Group Symbols
       Producer
       Consumer
       Box
       Switch, Digital Box
2.7 The Maximum Power Principle



                      19
C     hapter 2 contains details for making energy systems dia-
grams, the first step in this book’s procedure for modeling and
simulation. Rules are given for pathways and the dozen symbols
of the language to represent causal relationships, materials, en-
ergy, money, and information in a system.




                                䉬
   2.1 TRANSLATING WORDS INTO SYMBOLS

   Two groups of energy systems symbols are given in Figure
1.2 and Appendix D ( group symbols and precise symbols). Each
of the group symbols—producer, consumer, switching unit, and
miscellaneous box—represents categories in the same way as
their word descriptions. For example, there are many different
models for the structure and function of producers.
   The precise symbols of the energy language are source, storage,
heat sink, interaction, exchange, constant gain amplifier, and
loop-limited converter. These are used for representing a particu-
lar part of a model and its quantitative relationships. They have
specific energy and mathematical meanings necessary for writing
equations and simulating.
   Influences from outside the system are sources, which are
drawn with a circular symbol placed outside the defined bound-
ary, with a pathway crossing into the system. A source symbol
can be made precise by defining the nature and timing of its input.
   Diagrams are drawn to illustrate the first and second energy
laws and concepts as already explained in Chapter 1. Every
system has to have at least one source symbol for energy input
(and the force to input the resource). Where there is available
energy (energy capable of doing work), ordinary width lines are
used for flow pathways. Outflows that still have energy available
to do work are shown going out the side or the top of the frame.
Only degraded energy goes out the bottom.
   First an overview diagram is made for a word model using


              20
Translating Words into Symbols                                                               21


                                 group symbols. Then an exact model can be made for it by
                                 diagramming details inside with precise symbols. In the process
                                 you make decisions about the structure and functions you want
                                 in the model. For example, let’s draw an energy systems diagram
                                 for the following word model:

                                  Environmental energy sources support producers, and these
                                  support consumers symbiotically. Some of the consumers are
                                  used by humans.

                                 Figure 2.1a represents the model with group symbols. Symbols
                                 for producer, consumer, and miscellaneous box are shown from
                                 left to right. This is the same diagram already used to discuss
                                 the scale and energy hierarchy in Figure 1.5.
                                    Conversely, if the diagram in Figure 2.1a were supplied to
                                 you, it could be verbalized as follows:

                                 Resources on the left stimulate the producer, and its products
                                 go to the consumer from which something is shown going
                                 back to the left to contribute to producers. Human energy
                                 enters on the right, interacting with the consumers to produce
                                 some kind of yield.




FIGURE 2.1.
Highly aggregated diagram
of an ecosystem and its use.
(a) Using group symbols;
(b) details of structure and
functions shown by including
precise symbols from Section
2.5 within group symbols.
22                            Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming


     In Figure 2.1a, the details are unspecified, just as they were
     unspecified by the word descriptions. The exact functions of the
     group symbols are not indicated. Diagrams using groups symbols
     are useful before details are known, or when general kinds of
     relationships are being discussed.
         The diagram of general concepts in Figure 2.1a is made into
     a particular model by using precise symbols to draw details within
     the group symbols (Figure 2.1b). Each group symbol there has
     an inside network showing flows, storages, and interactions. The
     explicit model in Figure 2.1b is only one of the many that could
     fit the model of general categories shown in Figure 2.1a.
         As explained in Chapter 1, symbols on diagrams are arranged
     from left to right according to their position in the energy hierar-
     chy. This makes one person’s diagrams similar to that of another.
     If a flow is becoming more concentrated, as in rains converging
     into streams, the pathway should be drawn from left to right.
     However, if the flow is decreasing its concentration, as with a
     river dispersing into the ocean, or nutrient wastes recycling into
     a forest, then the pathway should be drawn from right to left
     (see Figure 2.3 later in this chapter).



                                     䉬
              2.2 PATHWAYS, FORCE AND FLOW

        Representing the way most systems form structure and pro-
     cess, energy systems diagrams are a network of units (symbols)
     connected with pathway lines (Figure 2.1). A pathway line is
     used for the flow of anything: materials, information, organisms,
     people, or whatever. All the pathways of an energy systems dia-
     grams flow at the same time. Because everything, including infor-
     mation, has some available energy associated with it, there is
     energy flow on all pathways. Figure 2.2 shows types of pathways
     and branches.
        Flows are pushed by ‘‘forces,’’ where the word force has its
     more general meaning that includes physical force, chemical con-
     centration, or any other property that has the energy content
     capable of causing a flow. For example, electrical flow measured
     in amperes is driven by electrical force measured in volts. Diffu-
     sion of chemicals in fluids is driven by the differences of concen-
     trations. A force either comes from outside the system marked
     with a source symbol or from a storage tank within a system.
The Circulation of Material                                                                  23




FIGURE 2.2.
Pathways in energy systems
diagrams.



                                 Where the flow depends only on the force behind it, an arrow-
                              head (barb) is used where the pathway comes to an end, usually at
                              the next symbol (Figure 2.2a). A simple pathway with arrowhead
                              means that the flow is proportional to one driving force (Figures
                              2.2a and 2.2b). This kind of pathway is said to be linear, whereas
                              a pathway that is proportional to other inputs as well is said to
                              be nonlinear.
                                 Where the flow depends on the difference between the force
                              at one end and the back force from the other end, a line is used
                              without a barb, and this pathway may flow in either direction
                              (Figure 2.2f ). Sometimes we put a two-headed arrow next to,
                              but not on, a pathway to indicate that flow reversals occur.
                                 According to the rules of the language, two pathways can
                              merge (Figure 2.2d) if the flows on these pathways carry the
                              same kind of material. Similarly, a pathway that divides as a
                              simple branch represents a splitting of a flow of one kind into
                              two flows of the same kind (Figure 2.2e).



                                                             䉬
                                     2.3 THE CIRCULATION OF MATERIAL

                                 Materials flow on many pathways but not all. For example,
                              flows of sunlight, sound, and heat are pure energy, not accompa-
24                                                        Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming


                                 nied by matter. Materials usually circulate in the same direction
                                 as the accompanying energy. For example, phosphorus is used
                                 in plant production, passed in organic matter to consumers, and
                                 then released and recycled. In Figure 2.3a material flows are
                                 highlighted with heavy lines; the thin lines are energy flows with-
                                 out materials. Another way to represent this difference is to use
                                 color for the materials.
                                    Many materials are conserved, neither created nor destroyed,
                                 while in a system. Diagramming the pathways of material of one
                                 kind is a useful way to represent data on that material (Figure
                                 2.3b). In Figure 2.3b the material pathways are isolated without
                                 changing the shape of the network so that materials can be readily
                                 related to the rest of the system. If that network is drawn on
                                 transparent film, it becomes an overlay.
                                    However, a material diagram should not be made without the




FIGURE 2.3.
Representing material flows
in energy systems diagrams.
(a) Systems diagram for a
whole ecosystem with
phosphorus pathways
emphasized; (b) overlay
of the model in Part a to show
the pathways of phosphorus
only.
Precise Symbols                                                                   25


                  rest of the system because the interactions with the rest of the
                  system are responsible for the flows. Hence, the best procedure
                  is to diagram the whole system first and then use color or an
                  overlay for the materials. For example, phosphorus in an ecosys-
                  tem is driven by photosynthetic production and it by a number
                  of other inputs and various other interactions with animals, circu-
                  lation, and the economy. To understand the phosphorus cycle,
                  the network of other units affecting the phosphorus cannot be
                  omitted.




                                                  䉬
                           2.4 THE CIRCULATION OF MONEY

                     Money usually circulates in the opposite direction from the
                  flows of materials and energy. In energy systems diagrams it is
                  shown with dashed lines (Figure 2.4) connected to its material
                  and energy flow by a diamond symbol. Sometimes network dia-
                  grams in economics show only one pathway for the flow of
                  commodities, while evaluating the flow with money. In energy
                  systems language flows of money are kept separate from the
                  flows of real commodities and services which they buy. Both are
                  drawn. For many short-term models, money is conserved.




                                                  䉬
                                   2.5 PRECISE SYMBOLS

                    The symbols with precisely defined meanings are explained in
                  more detail using Figures 2.5 through 2.8.



                                            SOURCES

                     The circular symbol for outside sources can be made precise
                  by indicating if it is supplying a force or a flow and the pattern
                  of its influence over time. For example, the source of energy from
                  sunlight seasonally may be defined as an inflow of energy that
                  varies seasonally with the pattern of a sine wave (Appendix B).
26                                                           Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming




FIGURE 2.4.
Representing money and
the exchange symbol.
(a) Circulation of money in an
economy with exchange
symbols used for purchase of
products and purchase of
services; (b) various uses of the
exchange symbol.



                                                        STORAGE SYMBOL

                                       The storage tank symbol (Figure 2.5) was used to explain the
                                    simulation of the TANK model (Figure 1.1). The rate of change
                                    of the quantity in the tank is the balance between rates of inflow
                                    and outflow. Every flow into or out of storage must be of the
                                    same type. For example, if water flows into the stored quantity
                                    of water, the outflow pathways have to be water also. The storage
                                    represented by this symbol does not have a limit, and can grow
                                    to any size.
                                       Because a storage tank represents a concentration of some-
                                    thing (energy, materials, structure, information), there has to be
Precise Symbols                                                                                    27




FIGURE 2.5.
Uses of the storage symbol.
(a) Typical use; (b) energy
storage; (c) materials storage;
(d) storage for inertial
acceleration; (e) storage without
depreciation.


                                    some spontaneous dispersal (second energy law). Therefore, a
                                    model of a storage tank should have at least one linear outflow
                                    pathway (flow out proportional to storage) that connects with
                                    the heat sink. The necessary linear pathway is sometimes called
                                    diffusion, dispersal, or depreciation.
                                       When the contents of the storage drain through a linear path-
                                    way, the pathway of dispersal of degraded energy is drawn as a
                                    branch with a thin line to the heat sink. Materials and any
                                    remaining available energy are shown with pathways passing
                                    elsewhere within the system or out a lateral boundary (Figure
                                    2.5c).


                                                       INERTIAL STORAGE

                                       A special kind of storage and pathway is inertial storage (Fig-
                                    ure 2.5d), which exerts a backforce to inputs in proportion to
28                            Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming


     the acceleration. (Acceleration is the change in velocity with
     time.) As long as the input is accelerating, there is an increase in
     backforce, and during that period, flow is resisted and storage
     of energy increases. Later, if the acceleration stops, the storage
     can drive the flow in the same direction of the original accelera-
     tion. An example is the surge of electrical current through a coil
     of wire, which builds up a magnetic field as it resists the surge.
     Another example is the backforce created when a pitcher acceler-
     ates a baseball throw: The backforce is from the energy being
     stored in the baseball’s forward momentum during the short time
     when the arm is accelerating the ball. Another example is the
     resistance to change by people who store information against
     the change while someone is trying to persuade them.



                      INTERACTION SYMBOL
                     (PRODUCTION PROCESS)

        The interaction symbol is for transformations that use two
     or more pathways, each carrying something different, and each
     necessary to a production process (Figure 2.6). The symbol was
     also called a work gate. There is an output of new product. The
     action represented is called a production function. Where there
     is an energy transformation, the symbol normally points from
     left to right. Whatever the function, all the flows into and out
     of the interaction symbol are in proportion to the production
     function.
        The most common kind of interaction is a product of the forces
     on the input pathways. However, other kinds of interactions may
     occur such as dilution (division), shown in Figure 2.6d. That
     arrangement means that the production is proportional to the
     left input divided by the force from the right. For example, the
     concentration of plankton in a pool (left input) is changed to a
     lower concentration by the dilution of water (right input). In
     other situations the left input is decreased in proportion to the
     right input, an action that subtracts in producing the output
     (Figure 2.6e).
        Inflows have different transformities and the inputs are ar-
     ranged on the symbol from left to right in order of transformity
     (Figure 2.6b). The highest transformity is sometimes regarded
     as a control feedback, usually coming from the right. The lowest
     transformity is the one with the most energy coming in from the
Precise Symbols                                                                                 29




FIGURE 2.6.
Uses of the interaction symbol.
(a) Product interaction;
(b) transformity position;
(c) three product inputs;
(d) divisor action;
(e) subtracting action.



                                  left, whereas the production output is intermediate in quantity
                                  of energy and transformity. For more on transformity see Chap-
                                  ter 11.



                                              CONSTANT GAIN AMPLIFIER

                                     With the symbol for the constant gain amplifier (Figure 2.7)
                                  control comes from the force on one pathway, but most of the
                                  energy for the productive output comes by a pathway from a
                                  different source (Figure 2.7a). For example, the sound of a sing-
30                                                         Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming




FIGURE 2.7.
Use of constant gain amplifier
symbol including the example
of reproduction at a constant
specific rate. (a) Typical use;
(b) reproduction example.


                                  er’s voice into a microphone provides the control with small
                                  energy, but the booming amplified output is made possible by
                                  an electrical power supply. Another example is the reproduction
                                  of organisms in which a small amount of energy in high-quality
                                  information is supplied as seeds or eggs, but the energy for a
                                  larger population comes from a food supply (Figure 2.7b).
                                     The constant gain amplifier symbol is defined with the output
                                  a constant factor of the input (constant gain), which assumes
                                  that the main energy supply is unlimited. Of course, no energy
                                  supply is unlimited if the demand on it is too great. Thus, the
                                  symbol is only useful over the range in which energy is not
                                  limiting. It is the appropriate way to diagram population models
                                  that treat reproduction as intrinsic (not limited by energy) (Fig-
                                  ure 2.7b).


                                                     EXCHANGE SYMBOL

                                     Figure 2.4 shows the symbol for exchange of one flow for
                                  another. Usually money is exchanged for a commodity or service.
                                  The diamond-shaped symbol indicates they are coupled accord-
                                  ing to a price. Where the transaction is a small one, the price
Precise Symbols                                                                    31


                  may come from a market outside the system. Where the flows
                  represent most of the market, the price is determined from the
                  ratio of the flows. Included in Figure 2.4 is barter, in which
                  two commodities are exchanged. If the business transaction is
                  substantial, you can show a heat sink below the exchange symbol.
                  Usually, however, the work of the transaction is done by the
                  units at either end of the transaction, and their heat sinks include
                  the energy dispersed by the process


                                            HEAT SINK

                     The heat sink (Figure 1.2), showing energy dispersion, was
                  explained in Chapter 1. The second law requires that there be a
                  heat sink symbol at the bottom of each systems diagram. It
                  represents the dispersal of the energy and its export as used
                  energy.
                     Where the availability (ability to do work) is lost because the
                  energy has been degraded to about the same concentration as
                  that outside the frame, we call it ‘‘used energy’’ and use thinner
                  lines to show the dispersal of this energy down to the heat sink.
                  Many pathways have frictional processes and other losses of
                  available energy. To draw these pathways correctly, heat dis-
                  persal branching to the heat sink is required.
                     Some people confuse the heat sink with the electrical symbol
                  for ground used in electrical engineering. (The electrical ground
                  symbol for flow of electrons in and out of the environment has
                  no arrowhead, and the flow can go either up or down.) However,
                  the heat sink has an arrowhead pointing down and out of the
                  frame to represent the second energy law. Because the heat sink
                  represents second law depreciation, flow through a heat sink is
                  irreversible and can only go in one direction: from concentrated
                  energy with availability to dispersed, unusable energy.


                                LOOP-LIMITED CONVERTER

                     The short loop-limited symbol in Figure 2.8a represents the
                  loop subsystem in Figure 2.8b in which the amount of material
                  being recycled is constant. Because the material can only recycle
                  so fast in the closed loop, the output diminishes as the input is
                  increased (Figure 2.8c). In 1913 this performance was discovered
32                                                          Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming




FIGURE 2.8.
Use of the loop-limited symbol.
(a) Symbol; (b) inside limiting
material cycle, which is implied
when the symbol is used;
(c) diminishing returns on
output as input force is
increased.




                                   for an energy inflow interacting with a recycling enzyme. We
                                   sometimes call this symbol the Michaelis–Menten module,
                                   named after the authors of the enzyme study. For simulation of
                                   this unit, see the model INTLIMIT in Chapter 12.
                                      The loop-limited symbol is appropriate where pure energy
                                   flows are used by units with an internal cycle. For example, in
                                   the first step of photosynthesis light interacts with chlorophyll,
                                   which is a type of photovoltaic cell, to make plus and minus
                                   charges. These are then connected to reactions that make oxygen
                                   and organic matter and in the process the chlorophyll is reset to
                                   receive more energy.
Group Symbols                                                                                    33

                                                                  䉬
                                                    2.6 GROUP SYMBOLS

                                      The group symbols introduced with Figure 1.2b are described
                                   further in Figures 2.9 through 2.12, where several typical inside
                                   designs are given for each.



                                                           PRODUCER

                                      The bullet-shaped producer symbol (Figure 2.9) usually im-
                                   plies a unit with a production process, often with a storage
                                   symbol. It can be used as an outline symbol (Figure 2.9a) with




FIGURE 2.9.
Use of the producer symbol.
(a) Unspecified details;
(b) production as a
transformation of one input
such as linear production;
(c) production a product of
two input forces; (d) production
with autocatalytic use of two
inputs.
34                            Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming


     details unspecified or with precise symbols inside to represent
     structure and function.
         In Figure 2.9b flow is in proportion to the driving force,
     producing organic matter in proportion to concentration of light.
     It is appropriate to use this simplification for photosynthesis if
     the other factors usually considered are constant. In Figure 2.9c
     use is in proportion to the interactive product of two input forces
     (example: photosynthesis in proportion to the product of nutrient
     concentration and light intensity). In Figure 2.9d use is propor-
     tional to input forces and feedback from its own storage (exam-
     ple: phytoplankton producing in proportion to nutrient concen-
     tration, light intensity and stored biomass). The unit stores the
     products and exports some.




                              CONSUMER

        The hexagon-shaped consumer symbol (Figure 2.10), like that
     for the producer, usually includes a production process and often
     a storage. Where a consumer is using input from a producer, the
     consumer is drawn to the right. The production process in the
     producer symbol is often called primary production and that in
     the consumer secondary production.
        Figure 2.10a does not have any details specified. Figure 2.10b
     shows a flow in proportion to driving force (example: microbes
     consuming in proportion to available sugar). Figure 2.10c has
     consumption in proportion to the interactive product of two
     input forces (example: decomposition of organics in proportion
     to the product of organic concentration and oxygen concentra-
     tion). In Figure 2.10d use is proportional to input forces and
     feedback from its own storage (example: zooplankton growing
     in proportion to food and oxygen concentration).
        The names producer and consumer can be applied on many
     scales. For example, plants in a forest ecosystem produce food
     for wildlife consumers. But if the frame of attention is placed
     over a larger scale of landscape, the production of forest wood
     is purchased and used by human consumers. The production
     symbol is usually used for the process using the primary energy
     (on the left in the diagrams). For example, in a model of manufac-
     turing, industrial production is the first process.
Group Symbols                                                                                   35




FIGURE 2.10.
Use of the consumer symbol.
(a) Unspecified details;
(b) consumption as a
transformation of one input
such as a linear process;
(c) consumption a product
of two input forces;
(d) consumption with
autocatalytic use of two inputs.



                                                                BOX

                                      It has long been customary to regard the rectangular box as
                                   a miscellaneous symbol (Figure 2.11). In cases where the perfor-
                                   mance and structure within the box are unknown, it is called a
                                   black box. If the performance and structure within the box are
                                   known, but for purposes of diagramming this complexity is not
                                   shown, it is called a white box. We often use the box for a unit
                                   that does not really fit the idea of producer or consumer. For
                                   example, commerce in the human economy is intermediate be-
                                   tween production units and consumers. Details that might be
36                                                           Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming




FIGURE 2.11.
Use of the miscellaneous box
symbol. (a) As an unspecified
component; (b) to indicate a
force derived from a flow; (c) to
indicate a sensor deriving force
from a storage (without
appreciable drain from the
storage).



                                    used within the box are those also used for producer and con-
                                    sumer symbols (Figures 2.9 and 2.10). The box in Figure 2.9 is
                                    used to represent production simplified as a linear process. The
                                    one in Figure 2.10 represents consumption simplified to a lin-
                                    ear process.
                                       Use a small box on a pathway to send out a force proportional
                                    to the flow (Figure 2.11b). Also use a very small box on a storage
                                    (Figure 2.11c) to deliver a force to a pathway without drawing
                                    much from the storage. These arrangements to deliver a force
                                    without much flow are force sensors.



                                                     SWITCH, DIGITAL BOX

                                       The switching box is used where there are on/off processes
                                    (Figure 2.12). Whereas most of the energy language symbols
                                    have outputs that increase or decrease with a continuous range
                                    of values dependent on their inputs, the switching box has discon-
                                    tinuous actions. Sometimes switching actions are said to be digi-
                                    tal, whereas the word analog is used for those control units with
                                    a continuous range of values. The switching box, like other group
                                    symbols, is not clear about what switching actions occur until
                                    the detail is supplied.
                                       Details can be diagrammed either with standard logic symbols
                                    (not shown here) or written as logic statements in words (Figure
                                    2.12). For example, the overflow of a river occurs (switch turns
                                    on) when the water level becomes higher than the bank (Figure
The Maximum Power Principle                                                                        37




FIGURE 2.12.
Use of the digital switching
box. (a) Unspecified details;
(b) containing an outside
controlled on/off switch;
(c) flow when threshold
exceeded; (d) flip-flop action.


                                  2.12c). Another example is fire that turns on when biomass
                                  reaches a threshold and there is also a pulse of fire-starting heat.
                                  In this case fire does not turn off until a low biomass threshold
                                  is reached. This switching mechanism is called a flip-flop (Fig-
                                  ure 2.12d).



                                                                  䉬
                                        2.7 THE MAXIMUM POWER PRINCIPLE

                                    Regarded by many as a fourth energy law, the maximum
                                  power principle can be stated as follows:
38                                                     Chapter Two Energy Systems Diagramming




FIGURE 2.13.
Autocatalytic production.
(a) Configuration in energy
systems language;
(b) accelerating growth.



                              Because designs with greater performance prevail, self-
                              organization selects network connections that feed back
                              transformed energy to increase inflow of resources or use them
                              more efficiently.

                              One example is the autocatalytic production process, in which
                              a stored quantity feeds back to interact as a multiplier with the
                              input (Figure 2.13). For example, the more leaves a plant pro-
                              duces (stored as structure), the more sunlight is caught (by means
                              of feedback interaction) to make more leaves. This is an example
                              of a configuration that reinforces performance and sustainability.
                                 If the availability of the input energy is constant and the pro-
                              duction is greater than the depreciation of the storage, the produc-
                              tion and the storage grow faster and faster (Figure 2.13b).
                                 Another reinforcing design is the feedback of materials recycl-
                              ing for reuse (Figure 2.3). Recognizing and diagramming maxi-
                              mum power designs is an important part of modeling.
     Chapter Three
                     䉬

   NUMBERS
 ON NETWORKS




3.1 Diagrams with Numbers of One Kind
      Adding and Subtracting Flows
      Steady State
      Turnover Time (Replacement Time)
      Representing Conservation of Matter
3.2 Diagrams with Energy Values
3.3 Diagrams with Numbers of More Than
    One Kind
      Zones Separated by Interactions
3.4 Numbers for Flows between Two
    Storages




                     39
P     roviding numbers to the flows and storages makes models
quantitative. Assigning numerical values to network diagrams
represents concepts, summarizes data, demonstrates turnover
rates, aids comparisons, and provides the values for calibrating
simulation equations. Chapter 3 explains different ways to use
numbers on energy systems diagrams consistent with principles
for energy and matter processing.
   A systems diagram can be used to show the flows and storages
of materials, energy, money, population, or almost anything else.
The numbers can be those based on your ideas or those observed
in research. With numbers on the diagram you can see at a glance
where storages and flows are large or small and where units are
turning over rapidly or slowly. Numerical systems diagrams are
a good way to summarize systems quantitatively.




                               䉬
3.1 DIAGRAMS WITH NUMBERS OF ONE KIND

   To represent the flows and storages of a material substance,
numbers on a diagram are of the same kind. For example, a
diagram can be drawn in which all the numbers are flows and
storages of phosphorus in grams per square meter (Figure 3.1).
Biogeochemical studies often use quantitative systems diagrams
to show the average flows of one type of chemical substance.
Other examples are flows of people, money, and information.
   To keep all the causal interactions in view (as explained in
Chapter 2), all the pathways of the systems should be retained
on a diagram even when it is being used to represent the numerical
values for one kind of material. Values are only on the pathways
and in storages containing the one kind of material being consid-
ered. On an evaluated materials diagram, there are no numbers
on the heat sink pathways at the bottom since these are only for
the flow of degraded energy.


              40
Diagrams with Numbers of One Kind                                                                  41




FIGURE 3.1.
Systems diagram with numbers
of one kind, the flows of
phosphorus.




                                           ADDING AND SUBTRACTING FLOWS

                                       To add or subtract, numerical values have to be of the same
                                    kind (i.e., energy, phosphorus, water, population, etc.). As ex-
                                    plained with Figure 2.2, flows of the energy systems language add
                                    when pathways join (Figure 3.2a). Flows subtract in a diverging
                                    branch as shown in Figure 3.2b, where a flow of 100 per hour is
                                    shown split into branching flows of 80 per hour and 20 per hour.
                                       When two flows of the same kind converge into the same
                                    storage tank, their flows are additive, contributing to what is
                                    already stored there (Figure 3.2c). Outflows from a storage sub-
                                    tract from the quantity stored there (Figure 3.2d).



                                                          STEADY STATE

                                       In Figure 3.3a the flow per unit time into the storage (100 per
                                    hour) is greater than that in the outflow (30 per hour). There is
                                    a net increase in the storage per unit of time. In other words,
                                    the stored quantity grows. In contrast, in Figure 3.3b the numeri-
                                    cal value of the inflows (100 per hour) is equal to that of the
                                    outflows. Therefore, the quantity in storage does not increase
42                                  Chapter Three Numbers on Networks




FIGURE 3.2.
Examples of numbers
representing one kind of flow
and the configurations in which
numbers add or subtract.
(a) Joining pathways where the
numbers add; (b) split which
subtracts flow; (c) storage where
converging pathways add;
(d) storage where outflows
subtract from storage.




FIGURE 3.3.
Placing numbers on pathways
and within the storage symbol
for the single storage model.
(a) Inflows do not equal
outflows; (b) steady state with
inflows equal to outflows;
(c) inflow of colored water
displacing steady-state storage
in one turnover time.
Diagrams with Numbers of One Kind                                                                   43


                                    or decrease even though there are inflows and outflows. This
                                    condition is called a steady state (also sometimes called a dy-
                                    namic equilibrium).



                                         TURNOVER TIME (REPLACEMENT TIME)

                                       Turnover time is the time required for a flow (quantity flowing
                                    per unit time) to replace the stored quantity. For example, visual-
                                    ize a tray of water (storage) in a steady state with inflow equal
                                    to outflow (Figure 3.3c). Start with clear water in the tray. Then
                                    as new, colored water flows in from the left, the clear water
                                    gradually moves out to the right. The time required for the col-
                                    ored water to replace the clear water is the turnover time. There-
                                    fore, turnover time equals the stored quantity divided by a
                                    flow rate:

                                          Turnover time ⫽ (stored quantity)/(flow per time).

                                    In the example (Figure 3.3c) the turnover time is equal to:

                                             (1000 liters)/(100 liters per hour) ⫽ 10 hours.

                                    As suggested with the scale diagram (Figure 1.6), small units
                                    have fast turnover times, and large units have slow turnover
                                    times. Estimates of turnover times help you see which parts of
                                    a numerical systems diagram system are small, operating rapidly,
                                    and which parts are large and slow.
                                       For example, examining the numbers in Figure 3.1 shows the
                                    recycle of water replacing the phosphorus in water 40 times in
                                    a year, whereas the flow of phosphorus (40/yr) requires 2.5 years
                                    to replace the storage of phosphorus in organics (100). Number
                                    of turnovers per time is the reciprocal of the time to turnover
                                    (replacement time). For the phosphorus flow through the wa-
                                    ter storage with 40 turnovers per year, the replacement time is
                                    1/40 ⫽ 0.025 years.
                                       Because one storage may have several flows in and out at
                                    different rates (Figure 3.1), there are as many turnover times for
                                    a storage as there are pathways in or out. You can calculate an
                                    overall turnover time by dividing the total storage by the sum
                                    of flow rates.
44                                 Chapter Three Numbers on Networks


       Turnover times are sometimes useful for calibrating models
     where data are not available because people have commonsense
     knowledge of how long it takes to replace something (example:
     dog, house, grocery stock).



       REPRESENTING CONSERVATION OF MATTER

        Because matter is neither created nor destroyed in ordinary
     processes, a diagram may be used to represent all the matter
     inflowing, being stored, and outflowing. We call the diagram
     with numbers a budget diagram. For example, Figure 3.1 is a
     budget diagram for phosphorus. According to the principle of
     conservation of matter, the numbers inflowing have to equal
     those going into storage plus those outflowing. For chemical
     elements like phosphorus we may easily keep track of the element
     whether it is free in the environment or combined in molecules.
     Phosphorus in Figure 3.1 is free on the left and bound as organic
     molecules in central storage.
        Representing more complex matter (molecules and more com-
     plex substances) is not so easy because the matter under study
     may be chemically changed, losing identity in chemical recombi-
     nations, becoming part of something with a different name. For
     example, numbers for the flows of water into and out of an
     ecosystem include rain, runoff, transpiration, and percolation to
     groundwater, but some water is decomposed in photosynthesis,
     changing the total water quantity slightly.



                                    䉬
          3.2 DIAGRAMS WITH ENERGY VALUES

        Because all pathways are accompanied by some energy flow,
     and all storages have some stored energy, numerical values of
     energy flows and storages can be placed on all the pathways of
     an energy systems diagram (Figure 3.4).
        Writing steady-state values on an energy systems diagram
     makes a useful energy budget diagram. According to the principle
     of conservation of energy (first energy law), energy is neither
     created nor destroyed. Energy inflows equal that stored within
     the system plus that outflowing. If the numbers are intended to
Diagrams with Numbers of More Than One Kind                                                    45




FIGURE 3.4.
Energy systems diagram of an
ecosystem in steady state with
numbers representing energy
flows and storages and the
conservation of energy.




                                 represent the principle of conservation of energy, then numbers
                                 on pathways to represent energy inflowing must equal those
                                 going into storage and those outflowing. At steady state, values
                                 in tanks are constant, and flows in and out of each storage tank
                                 must balance. Figure 3.4 is an example of numbers for energy
                                 flows in a steady state. Even though systems vary daily, season-
                                 ally, and from year to year, long-term averages of flows may
                                 balance and be used to make a useful budget diagram.
                                    Where a storage tank represents pure energy storage (example:
                                 heat, kinetic energy, sound) without accompanying matter, de-
                                 preciation is represented by a pathway direct from tank to heat
                                 sink. If the storage also contains matter, then the depreciation
                                 pathway has two branches, one to the heat sink and one for the
                                 materials going elsewhere. In Figure 1.1 the depreciation loss is
                                 combined with the energy dispersal of the outflow pathway.



                                                                䉬
                                     3.3 DIAGRAMS WITH NUMBERS OF MORE
                                               THAN ONE KIND

                                    Numbers representing more than one kind of unit are often
                                 placed on the same diagram (Figure 3.5). For calibration pur-
46                                                                Chapter Three Numbers on Networks




FIGURE 3.5.
Energy systems diagram with
several kinds of numbers as is
appropriate for flows in or out
of each storage.




                                  poses, the units (mass, volume, numbers, energy, etc.) used for
                                  the cluster of flows around one storage tank can be different from
                                  those used for another. This is the kind of numerical diagram used
                                  to calibrate equations for simulation in Chapter 7.
                                     However, those flows that join or branch have to be of the
                                  same kind (as already explained), and those flows that enter or
                                  leave a storage have to be of the same kind as the quantity stored.
                                  In Figure 3.5 the numbers on pathways in and out of the storage
                                  tank on the left are flow rates for phosphorus. The numbers in
                                  and out of the organics storage are rates of flow of organic
                                  matter. The numbers in and out of the animal storage are flow
                                  rates for animal production and losses. The diagram is composed
                                  of several clusters of numbers, each of a different kind. To avoid
                                  confusion on systems diagrams with numbers, write the units
                                  (joules, grams, liters, individuals, etc.) as in Figure 3.5. For the
                                  pure energy flows (sunlight and heat sink flows in Figure 3.5),
                                  an energy unit has to be used.


                                        ZONES SEPARATED BY INTERACTIONS

                                     The clusters of pathways and storage, each of a different type,
                                  join through interaction symbols. As explained with Figure 2.6,
                                  production processes usually use two or more inputs of different
                                  kinds, generating a product of a third kind, and heat sink flow
Numbers for Flows Between Two Storages                                                            47


                                  of a fourth type. When different kinds of units are used in the
                                  same diagram as in Figure 3.5, the interaction symbols separate
                                  the clusters of numbers of different kind. In Figure 3.5 phospho-
                                  rus units are in the upper left, organics in the middle and consum-
                                  ers to the right. Energy values are shown on the pure energy
                                  pathways (sunlight and heat sink outflows).



                                                                  䉬
                                         3.4 NUMBERS FOR FLOWS BETWEEN
                                                 TWO STORAGES

                                     Normally, a flow between two storages has some kind of
                                  energy transformation, and thus the pathway should show the
                                  transformation process on the pathway. For example, a small
                                  box is used in Figure 3.1. Several kinds of tank-to-tank pathways
                                  are included in Figure 3.6 with examples of pathway numbers.
                                     If numbers are being assigned for one kind of material (Section
                                  3.1), then the value coming out of the first tank and that going
                                  into the second tank can be the same (Figure 3.6a). If numbers
                                  are being assigned for energy only (Section 3.2), then the number
                                  outflow from the first tank branches with energy going into the
                                  next tank and into the heat sink (Figure 3.4). If numbers are
                                  being assigned separately for each tank (preparing for calibration,
                                  Section 3.3), then the numbers for tank outflow can be different
                                  from those for inflow to the next tank (Figure 3.6b).
                                     A simple line with a heat sink is appropriate for a frictional
                                  or diffusion type of process (Figure 3.6a). For example, with
                                  water flowing in a pipe, the energy from its driving pressure is
                                  dispersed by friction into dispersed heat.
                                     In Figure 3.6b the simple box represents the transformation
                                  of organic matter being decomposed, yielding output of inorganic
                                  nutrients to the next tank and used energy to the heat sink. The
                                  simple box (without interaction of other inputs) is appropriate
                                  for a simple model where other factors are constant.
                                     The interaction in Figure 3.6c represents the decomposition
                                  pathway, or organic matter interacting with oxygen to produce
                                  nutrients and dispersed heat.
                                     A common error is drawing a pathway from one storage tank
                                  to another without indicating the usual transformation process
                                  (pathway box or interaction) and the heat sink. There is always
48                                                                  Chapter Three Numbers on Networks




FIGURE 3.6.
Pathways between two storages.
(a) A flow in which available
energy is degraded as with
friction or diffusion; (b) a flow
with an energy transformation
along the way; (c) a flow with
an interaction transformation
along the way; (d) a transfer of
something unchanged from one
storage to another (where
energy dispersal is negligible).




                                    some processing such as movement in space. For purposes of
                                    simplification it is correct to use the simple pathway (Figure 3.6d)
                                    if you are making the assumption that the magnitude of the
                                    transformation is negligible relative to other values in the model.
                                    That assumption requires the flow to pass the content of one
                                    storage tank to the other without change and the two storages
                                    to contain something of the same kind. For example, very little
                                    energy is involved when dead leaves stored on a tree fall to the
                                    ground to become dead leaves stored as litter.
                 PART TWO
                               䉬


   SIMULATION

Part II introduces ways of simulating systems models after they
are diagrammed and made quantitative. Simulation shows what
happens as a result of network designs and numerical values.
Simulation plots graphs that show system behavior.
   Chapters 4 and 5 simulate systems models with prepro-
grammed symbol blocks for the program EXTEND. Connecting
the icons on the computer screen automatically arranges mathe-
matical operations. Chapter 4 uses pictorial blocks. Chapter 5
uses general systems blocks. Appendix A explains how to pro-
gram additional blocks.
   We explain how to write equations from energy systems dia-
grams in Chapter 6 and calculate the coefficients (calibration) in
Chapter 7. Calibrated equations are used to simulate models
with several methods in Chapters 8, 9, and 10. Simulation is
with spreadsheets in Chapter 8, BASIC programming in Chapter
9, and STELLA in Chapter 10. Chapter 11 introduces emergy
(spelled with an ‘‘m’’) and its simulation.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
       Chapter Four
                    䉬

SIMULATION WITH
 PICTURE BLOCKS
   FOR EXTEND



 4.1 EXTEND
 4.2 Simulating Preassembled Minimodels
       PONDWATR
       PEXPO
       EARTHPIC
 4.3 Create and Simulate a Picture Model
 4.4 BioQUEST Models
 4.5 Specialized Icon Blocks for EXTEND




                    51
S     imulation makes systems models come alive. With the com-
puter program EXTEND,* models are simulated by arranging
icon blocks on the screen and connecting them with a mouse.
The program does the rest, plotting a graph of properties with
time. This chapter uses pictorial icons in which all the equations
and most of the numbers are hidden in the preprogrammed
blocks. Simulation is introduced by running prearranged minimo-
dels. These models, the library of symbol blocks, and a version
of EXTEND are included on the disk provided with this book.



                                   䉬
                           4.1 EXTEND

    EXTEND is a user-friendly computer program for simulating
systems models for PC and Macintosh computers. It uses prepro-
grammed blocks that are connected by the user to form systems
models on the computer screen (examples: Figure 1.3a and Figure
4.1b). Each block is represented on screen by an icon (small
picture). Groups of related blocks are stored together in computer
files called libraries. After EXTEND is loaded on your computer,
you can use its menu to load a library of icon blocks. Then you
can pull down blocks from the library to the screen and use a
mouse to connect the blocks to form a model. You connect each
block you want to plot to the plotter icon. The model can be
given a name and saved on a disk. Double clicking the mouse
on each icon causes its dialog box to appear, a small box for
typing in appropriate numbers. Then you use the simulation
menus to run the simulation. A window appears on the screen
plotting graphs. Graphs can be printed or the whole screen saved
to the computer ‘‘clipboard’’ for printing later.
    The usual way to use EXTEND is to represent equations by

   * EXTEND 4 is available from Imagine That, 6830 Via del Oro, Suite 230,
San Jose, CA, 95119-1353. Telephone: 408.365.0305. Email: extend@
imaginethatinc.com⭈Web Site:http://www.imaginethatinc.com



                52
EXTEND                         53




FIGURE 4.1.
Model of simple storage
arranged for EXTEND.
(a) Energy systems diagram;
(b) screen of EXTEND with
picture version of the model
(PONDWATR); (c) dialog box
for the storage symbol;
(d) simulation graph.
54                                              Chapter Four Simulation with Picture Blocks for EXTEND


                                    connecting blocks from the icon block libraries supplied by Imag-
                                    ine That, the EXTEND company in San Jose, California (see Chap-
                                    ter 6). However, the pictorial icon blocks used in this chapter and
                                    the next were specially programmed by the authors to introduce
                                    simulation without the user being concerned with equations.



                                                                      䉬
                                                      4.2 SIMULATING
                                                 PREASSEMBLED MINIMODELS

                                        To begin, let’s use the book disk to load EXTEND, our library
                                    of pictorial blocks called PICTLIB, and several prearranged
                                    minimodels (in the IntrModl folder). On PC computers, library
                                    files have the extension ‘‘lix’’ (example: PICTLIB.lix); pre-
                                    arranged model files have the extension ‘‘mox’’ (example:
                                    TANK.mox). Follow the procedure in Table 4.1, which lists the
                                    steps for loading the program, icon block library, and mini-
                                    models; setting numerical values; and running the simulation.
                                        Consider first the fundamental process of storage, its energy



TABLE 4.1
Procedures for Running EXTEND Models

1. Place the book disk in your CD drive. Open the EXTEND program by clicking on the EXTEND icon
   with the mouse.
2. Use the LIBRARY menu to open the library that has the blocks for the models you plan to simulate. If
   the computer asks you to find the appropriate library, locate the file in the folder for EXTEND
   libraries.
3. Use the FILE menu to select and open a prearranged model (or a new screen if you are arranging a
   new model—see Table 4.2). Double click on the model you want to run. A picture screen will appear.
       If you have not loaded the library of icon blocks, opening the model usually causes the appropriate
   library to open (step 2).
4. To change numerical values, double click on the icons. Dialog boxes appear in which you can type
   new numbers.
5. To run the simulation, use the RUN menu. One or more screens appear on which those quantities are
   plotted that were connected to the plotter on screen.
6. To set the time of the run, use the setup screen in the RUN menu.
7. To read quantities from a graph, move the mouse line across the graph to the point you want to read.
   The time and various quantities appear across the top of the table below the graph.
8. To add new icons to the model, see Table 4.2.
9. To print the model or plotter screens, use the Print option in the FILE menu.
Simulating Preassembled Minimodels                                                                         55


TABLE 4.2
Procedures for Arranging EXTEND Models

 1. Place the book disk in your CD drive. Open the EXTEND program by clicking on the EXTEND
    icon with the mouse.
 2. Use the LIBRARY menu to open the library that has the blocks for the model you plan to assemble.
    If the computer asks you to find the appropriate library, locate the file in the folder for EXTEND
    libraries.
 3. Use the FILE menu to open a new model. A blank window will appear.
 4. Pull down the LIBRARY menu, select the library, and by dragging the mouse to the right of its name,
    select Open Library Window. A long narrow strip appears on the left showing the icons and names
    of the blocks in that library.
 5. Move the blank screen to the right of the icon strip. Use the mouse to click and drag icon blocks
    from the strip to the blank screen, starting with a plotter.
 6. You can also access blocks directly from the LIBRARY menu. Use the LIBRARY menu to select the
    needed library. While still holding the mouse down, move the arrow to the right and down the list to
    the icon you want and let it go. The icon block will appear on your screen.
 7. To arrange blocks for your model, move the mouse cursor over a block until the arrow becomes a
    hand. Then click and hold the cursor on the block to move it around the screen.
 8. To send data from one block to another, put the cursor over the output connector of one block.
    When it becomes a pen, hold it down to draw a line connecting the flow from that block to another.
    When the line is correctly connected, the line becomes thick. A bad connection remains dashed.
 9. Connect flow (Fl) outputs only to flow (Fl) inputs, and force (Fc) outputs only to force (Fc) inputs.
10. To erase a line, move the point of the mouse arrow to the line and click. When the line becomes
    thick, press the delete key on the keyboard.
11. To erase a block, move the mouse over it until the mouse cursor becomes a hand. Click once to
    highlight it. Then press the delete key on the keyboard.
12. Connect the blocks to match your energy systems diagram. Place the plotter on the right, and connect
    outputs of the blocks to the plotter input.
13. Double click on each icon to bring up its dialog box. Type numbers in the dialog box of each block.
14. To set the length of time for the simulation, pull down the Simulation Setup option from the RUN
    menu. This brings up the simulation time dialog page where you can type in the time span.
15. Also use the simulation setup in the RUN menu to enter the time interval (dt) to be covered in each
    computer iteration. Use 1 unless the plots show scrambled and blended lines indicating a chaotic
    artifact. In that case try smaller values (0.1, 0.05, 0.01, etc.).
16. When you have a plot on the screen, set the vertical scales. Use the mouse to click at the top of the
    scale, which opens a small box in which you type the upper value. Click at the bottom of the scale to
    get another box where you can enter a zero. You can type one scale on the left and a different scale
    on the right end of the plot.
17. To change the scale for a plot from the left y axis to the right y axis, click on the     tool in the plot
    window. Click the       tool and it will shift its assignment to the opposite side.   indicates that the
    quantity will be plotted on the right axis.
18. To add titles in the data table shown under a graph, click on the        tool in the plot window, and
    type labels in the boxes that appear.
19. To save your model, use Save As in the FILE menu, which provides a box for you to type in a file
    name and indicate folder location.
56              Chapter Four Simulation with Picture Blocks for EXTEND


     systems diagram in Figure 4.1a, and a pondwater example con-
     taining an inflow, a storage, and a quantity-dependent outflow.
     Look at the model and run the simulation. Then run ‘‘What If ’’
     experiments. Try to predict what will happen before you run
     the program.



                             PONDWATR

         Using EXTEND, click FILE menu to open the model POND-
     WATR (in the IntrModl folder), a process that also loads the
     library PICTLIB. Figure 4.1b shows the computer screen with
     three icons (Spring, Pond, and Plotter). The icons on screen show
     water flowing from a spring into a pond. Tiny squares are connec-
     tors: outputs black and inputs clear. Built within the pond icon
     is a hidden outflow process. This pictorial model has the storage
     and pathways of the energy systems diagram above it (Figure
     4.1a). Double click on the spring and pond icons to bring up
     dialog boxes to see how conditions are already set for simulation.
     The box for the spring has space to type the flow rate. Figure
     4.1c is the dialog box for the pond icon. Simulate the model by
     using the Run instruction on the RUN menu. The resulting plot
     grows and levels (Figure 4.1d).

     ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the
     EXTEND Program PONDWATR

     4.2–1 What happens with a run if the flow rate from the water
           source is reduced to a small value?
     4.2–2 What happens with a run if the outflow rate is set to zero?
           (Double click on dialog box of the pond.)
     4.2–3 What happens if the pond is started with a high stor-
           age, 200?



                                 PEXPO

        Figure 2.13 introduced a system of autocatalytic growth on
     an unlimited energy source (design with feedback to multiply by
     the input force). This system has accelerating growth. Load and
     run PEXPO, a pictorial version of this exponential growth model.
     When loaded to the screen (Figure 4.2a), the model has an icon
Simulating Preassembled Minimodels                                                                    57




FIGURE 4.2.
Model of exponential growth
of a city using pictorial icons.
(a) Systems diagram using
pictorial icon blocks; (b) graph
of simulation.


                                     for a city (Assets) feeding its services back to an icon for produc-
                                     tion (Fuel Use) and use of fossil fuels. The more assets in the
                                     city, the more fuel is pumped from the icon Constant Available.
                                     The graph resulting from simulation (Figure 4.2b) has steeply
                                     accelerating growth.

                                     ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the
                                     EXTEND Program PEXPO
                                     4.2–3 Triple the starting value of assets in the dialog box of the
                                           city assets block. How does the curve compare with the
                                           one with the smaller starting value?
                                     4.2–4 What happens if the concentration of available energy in
                                           the dialog box of the source is reduced to 10,000?


                                                               EARTHPIC

                                        A model of the earth metabolism for EXTEND is provided
                                     in energy systems language (Figure 4.3a) and with pictorial icons
58                                           Chapter Four Simulation with Picture Blocks for EXTEND




FIGURE 4.3.
EARTHPIC model of the earth’s
biosphere. (a) Energy systems
diagram; (b) model on screen of
EXTEND showing arrangement
of picture icon blocks; (c) 10-
year simulation with carbon
dioxide in oscillating steady
state; (d) 100-year simulation
with rise and decline of fossil
fuel use.


                                  (Figure 4.3b). The producers, plants of the earth use sunlight
                                  and carbon dioxide to make plant biomass (organic matter) and
                                  oxygen. The consumers of the earth including animals, microbes,
                                  and cities use the organics and oxygen to operate their growth
                                  while releasing carbon dioxide as a by-product. The organic
                                  matter on the surface of the earth is increased by a flow of fossil
                                  fuels pumped from underground. Some of the carbon dioxide
                                  flows from the air into the ocean sink, reacting with carbon-
                                  ates there.
                                     Open and double click on the model EARTHPIC (in the Earth-
                                  sys folder). The program loads the library ESLIB, and the system
                                  diagram with pictorial icons appears (Figure 4.3b). The fossil
                                  fuel reserve is not connected. The model uses a time unit of days.
Simulating Preassembled Minimodels                                                                 59




FIGURE 4.3.
(Continued)




                                     The simulation is set to run for 10 years (3650 days). Look at
                                     the simulation graph (Figure 4.3c). Because the sunlight is sup-
                                     plied with a sinusoidal curve representing the seasonal changes,
                                     the organic matter and the carbon dioxide go up and down each
                                     year also. However, as examined over a period of years, the
                                     storages remain fairly constant, indicating a balance between the
                                     rates of production of carbon dioxide by consumers and the
60              Chapter Four Simulation with Picture Blocks for EXTEND


     removal of carbon dioxide by the plants and the exchange with
     the carbonates.
        Next, use the mouse to connect a pathway from the Fuel
     Reserve source to the box labeled Fuel R on the consumer icon
     (Figure 4.3b). The dialog box of the fuel reserve should be set
     to 1000. Run the simulation and examine the plot. Now the
     carbon dioxide concentration is increasing, the consumer assets
     are increasing, and environmental resources (organics) are de-
     creasing.
        Change the simulation time to 100 years (36,500 days) and
     run again. The result (Figure 4.3d) shows the carbon dioxide
     reaching high values, increasing the greenhouse effect on
     climate. By then the fossil fuel reserve has been reduced, de-
     creasing the consumption that is generating carbon dioxide.
     Consumer assets begin to decline again and environmental stor-
     ages increase.

     ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the
     EXTEND Model EARTHPIC
     4.2–5 What happens if the flow into the ocean carbonate sink
           is disconnected while the fossil fuel source is being used?
           Click on the pathway with the mouse and press the De-
           lete key.
     4.2–6 What happens if the fossil fuel reserve is doubled?
     4.2–7 Without the fossil fuel connection, what happens if some-
           thing reduces the sunlight intensity by half?



                                     䉬
                 4.3 CREATE AND SIMULATE A
                       PICTURE MODEL

        You can make your own models by combining icons on a
     blank screen. Figure 4.4 shows the icons available in the pictorial
     library (PICTLIB in the IntrModl folder) assembled on screen
     without connections. If the library has been loaded, you can
     bring these icons to screen view on a strip by pulling down the
     LIBRARY menu to PICTLIB and Open Library Window. Choose
     Open New Model and drag icons from the library window to
     make a new model. Use the steps in Table 4.2. Make your first
     one simple.
        Include a ‘‘quantity plotter’’ to which you connect outputs
Bioquest Models                                                                               61




FIGURE 4.4.
Computer screen with the
picture symbols of the EXTEND
library PICTLIB.



                                marked Fc (force) in order for the program to plot a graph of
                                the stored quantity. As explained in Chapter 2, some system
                                parts deliver ‘‘forces’’ to pathways, and some deliver ‘‘flows.’’
                                Output connectors marked with Fl deliver flows. Output connec-
                                tors marked with Fc deliver forces. Input connectors marked Fl
                                require flow inputs. Input connectors marked Fc require force
                                inputs. Correct use requires that the mouse connect from the
                                black output of one block to the clear input of another block.
                                   One of the icon blocks in the PICTLIB library is the flow
                                plotter. You can use it to plot flows by connecting the black
                                output connectors marked Fl (flow) to one of the plotter’s input
                                connectors. For example, after opening the PONDWATR model,
                                use the LIBRARY menu and select the Flow Plotter option. Then
                                if you click the mouse on the model screen, the flow plotter
                                appears. Use the mouse to drag it into a position on the right.
                                The outflow from the lake in the PONDWATR model will be
                                plotted if you connect the output of the lake icon to one of the
                                input connectors of the flow plotter and rerun.



                                                               䉬
                                                4.4 BIOQUEST MODELS

                                   Using EXTEND, a set of exercises introducing system simula-
                                tion was prepared for a software package named BioQUEST, at
                                Beloit College, Wisconsin. These exercises are available from
                                Academic Press and are included in the EXTEND folder of this
62                                       Chapter Four Simulation with Picture Blocks for EXTEND


                              book’s disk, each with an instruction manual in WORD. After
                              loading the program EXTEND, load a model and the appropriate
                              library. All folders and files are also listed in Appendix E.
                                 Folder EDM (Environmental Decision Making) contains pre-
                              arranged models including BQFISH, a model of a fishing food
                              chain; BQGRASS, a model of grassland and fire; BQLOG, a
                              model of forest logging and sale; and FISHSALE, a model of
                              fishing and sales. The first three models use pictorial icons and
                              also general systems blocks. Figure 4.5 shows the pictorial icons
                              used in these models (file BIOICON in the IntrModl folder).
                              These EDM models use the library BIOQULIB.lix. From the
                              EDM folder, call up the Instruction Manual (EDManual, in
                              WORD), which leads you through the simulation exercises.
                                 In the Biosphr2 folder is a model SIMBIO2, which simulates
                              the atmosphere in Biosphere 2, the giant experimental glass cham-
                              ber in Arizona. The model in picture icons is SIMBIO2P, and
                              the model in general systems blocks is SIMBIO2G. These use the
                              library SB2LIB. To use these models, load the Instruction Manual
                              (SBManual, in WORD) and follow its directions.



                                                             䉬
                               4.5 SPECIALIZED ICON BLOCKS FOR EXTEND

                                 The introductory picture blocks in this chapter (PICTLIB li-
                              brary in the IntrModl folder) are simple units prepared for intro-




FIGURE 4.5.
Computer screen with the
picture symbols used in the
BioQUEST models for EXTEND.
Specialized Icon Blocks for Extend                                                                  63


                                     ductory teaching. Most of the data and calibrations that make
                                     the blocks quantitative are hidden within the programs. Clicking
                                     on the icons only causes simple dialog boxes to appear with
                                     blanks for only one or two values to be typed. Not having many
                                     numbers to consider makes the first experience in simulation an
                                     easy one.
                                        However, specialized picture blocks can be made of a particu-
                                     lar species, chemical relationship, city, etc., with many details,
                                     and quantitatively calibrated so that the block can represent what
                                     that unit does in the real world. For example, developing species
                                     blocks for simulation of ecological systems is a research opportu-
                                     nity for the future. Appendix A has instructions for making new
                                     blocks or changing the program script within blocks.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
           Chapter Five
                        䉬

 SIMULATION WITH
 GENERAL SYSTEMS
BLOCKS FOR EXTEND



5.1 Energy Systems Symbols Preprogrammed as
    Icon Blocks for EXTEND
       GENSYS Icon Blocks
       EXTEND Plotters for Energy Systems Models
5.2 EXTEND Models Using General Systems Blocks
       TANK Model of Storage Using EXTEND
       Accelerating Growth Model EXPO
       PC&CYCLE: A Model of Production,
         Consumption, and Recycle
5.3 Entering Numbers in Dialog Boxes of GENSYS
    Blocks (Model PC&CYCLE)
5.4 Entering Numbers for the Start of Simulation
    (PC&CYCLE)
5.5 Graphs from Simulating PC&CYCLE
    with EXTEND
5.6 Simulating the Earth System Model with
    Energy System Blocks (EARTHGS)
5.7 Building New Models




                        65
W       hereas pictorial icon blocks were used with EXTEND to
simulate models in Chapter 4, Chapter 5 introduces general icon
blocks for simulating any system. Preprogrammed blocks were
made for each of the symbols of the energy systems language
(GNSYSLIB library). Simulation is arranged by connecting icon
blocks on the screen to match an energy systems diagram. Pro-
grams are made quantitative by copying numerical values from
the systems diagrams into dialog boxes. Like the networks of
picture icons, networks of general symbols can generate graphs
without involving the user in the equations. Simulation modeling
with general systems symbols helps compare similar processes
on many scales.




                               䉬
         5.1 ENERGY SYSTEMS SYMBOLS
       PREPROGRAMMED AS ICON BLOCKS
                 FOR EXTEND

   With procedures detailed in Appendix A, icons were drawn
and program scripts written for the symbols of the energy systems
language and saved for use in simulation. Whereas the quantita-
tive properties of picture symbols are built in and hidden in the
object-oriented programs, the general symbols have dialog boxes
for the user to type in numerical values. The program uses these
values of flow and storage to calibrate the coefficients that make
the model quantitative.




                   GENSYS ICON BLOCKS

  The icon blocks made for the energy language symbols are
shown together on a computer screen (without connections) in


              66
Energy Systems Symbols Preprogrammed as Icon Blocks for EXTEND                                 67


                                 Figure 5.1. These blocks are in the GNSYSLIB file of the disk
                                 supplied with this book. After opening EXTEND, use the
                                 LIBRARY menu to load the GNSYSLIB library (Gensymb
                                 folder). Then appropriate blocks can be assembled on the screen,
                                 or a model with prearranged symbols can be opened and simu-
                                 lated.
                                    In Figure 5.1 sources are on the left, and storage units and
                                 production modules of several types are next. In the middle are
                                 interactions and switch junctions. To the right are several types
                                 of consumer units and units for economic exchange.


                                                 EXTEND PLOTTERS FOR
                                                ENERGY SYSTEMS MODELS

                                    The right side of Figure 5.1 shows several kinds of plotter
                                 blocks. The quantity plotter records stored quantities and the




FIGURE 5.1.
Screen with energy language blocks for EXTEND from library GNSYSLIB.
68      Chapter Five Simulation with General Systems Blocks for EXTEND


     forces delivered by sources. The flow plotter plots the outputs
     of interactions and production processes. Three plotters are avail-
     able to graph transformity, emergy, and empower, concepts ex-
     plained in Chapter 11. The EMERGY plotter multiplies the force
     received, representing quantity times the transformity received.
     The EMPOWER plotter multiplies the transformity received
     times the flow received. The plotter in the lower right is a com-
     pound plotter that arranges for all five plotters to operate simulta-
     neously (five screen windows).



                                      䉬
           5.2 EXTEND MODELS USING GENERAL
                    SYSTEMS BLOCKS

        Several prearranged EXTEND models that correspond to sim-
     ple energy systems diagrams are supplied on the book disk. In-
     structions for loading and running already-assembled models are
     given in Table 4.1.



        TANK MODEL OF STORAGE USING EXTEND

        In the first chapter the simple storage model TANK was shown
     as an energy systems diagram (Figure 1.1b) and with the equiva-
     lent EXTEND model, using general icon blocks in Figure 1.3a.
     The simulation result in Figure 1.3b shows the growth when
     storage starts with a low value. Its program is similar to the
     pictorial PONDWATR model.
        After opening the EXTEND model, use the FILE menu to
     open the prearranged TANK model from the EXTEND folder
     (in the IntrModl folder) of the book disk. Run it.

     ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the
     EXTEND Model TANK

     5.2–1 What happens if there is a large stored quantity at the
           start of the simulation and the source flow is 2? Double
           click on the tank symbol to get the dialog box where you
           can type in a large quantity (e.g., 100). Then use the menu
           to run again.
EXTEND Models Using General Systems Blocks                                                       69


                                 5.2–2 With the starting storage set at 100, what happens if the
                                       inflow is set to 0 (or the pathway is disconnected)?
                                 5.2–3 With the starting value 1 and source flow 2, what happens
                                       if the rate of outflow is increased? Change the dialog box
                                       so that the rate of outflow is 10%. (‘‘When the storage
                                       is set to 100, the outflow is 10.’’)


                                      ACCELERATING GROWTH MODEL: EXPO

                                    When there is a constant (unlimited) energy source driving
                                 an autocatalytic process (Figure 2.13), growth accelerates. In
                                 Chapter 9 this pattern will be shown to be ‘‘exponential,’’ hence
                                 the name ‘‘expo.’’ A pictorial version of this model (PEXPO in
                                 the IntrModl folder) was simulated in Chapter 4 (Figure 4.2a).
                                    Using EXTEND, load the prearranged model EXPO (in the
                                 Gensymb folder) and note that the system design is like that of
                                 the energy systems diagram (Figure 2.13). Run its simulation.
                                 An accelerating growth curve similar to that in Figure 4.2b is ob-
                                 served.

                                 ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problem for the
                                 EXTEND Model EXPO

                                 5.2–4 What changes can you make in the numbers in the dialog
                                       boxes so that the storage drains away toward zero?


                                      PC&CYCLE: A MODEL OF PRODUCTION,
                                         CONSUMPTION, AND RECYCLE

                                    An ecological minimodel with some of the main processes of
                                 ecosystems is PC&CYCLE, shown as an energy systems diagram
                                 in Figure 5.2a. Nutrient materials from outside flow into a storage
                                 and some flow out in proportion to it. Interaction between an
                                 energy flow and necessary nutrient material generates production
                                 of organic matter that goes into a storage. Organics go to a
                                 consumer represented by a box and to a depreciation flow (small
                                 box). Both of these pathways release materials that recycle to
                                 the nutrient storage tank.
                                    Using EXTEND, open the model PC&CYCLE (in the Gen-
                                 symb folder) and observe the icon blocks prearranged on the
                                 screen (Figure 5.2b) to represent the energy systems diagram
70                                     Chapter Five Simulation with General Systems Blocks for EXTEND




FIGURE 5.2.
Use of EXTEND to calibrate
and simulate program
PC&CYCLE starting with an
energy systems diagram with
numbers. (a) Energy systems
diagram and numerical values
of flows and storages; (b) screen
of EXTEND with model
assembled; (c–f) dialog boxes
for system components with
calibration numbers entered;
(g–i) dialog boxes of sources
with numbers entered for
simulation run.



                                    (Figure 5.2a). Run the simulation and observe the storages reach-
                                    ing a steady state.



                                                                   䉬
                                    5.3 ENTERING NUMBERS IN DIALOG BOXES OF
                                         GENSYS BLOCKS (MODEL PC&CYCLE)

                                       So that they can be used for any system or scale, the general
                                    systems icon blocks of this chapter (GNSYSLIB library in the
                                    Gensymb folder) have no built-in numerical values (no precali-
                                    bration). Instead, dialog boxes are provided for copying flow
                                    values and storage values from an evaluated energy systems dia-
                                    gram like that of Figure 5.2a. The program uses these inputs to
Entering Numbers in Dialog Boxes of GENSYS Blocks (Model PC&CYCLE)                            71




FIGURE 5.2.
(Continued)



                                 calculate automatically the coefficients of the hidden equations
                                 that are set up when blocks are assembled and joined.
                                    Placing numbers on diagrams was introduced in Chapter 3.
72               Chapter Five Simulation with General Systems Blocks for EXTEND




FIGURE 5.2.
(Continued)


              Care is used at that stage to properly represent units (i.e., grams,
              dollars, joules, etc.). Flows and values for the same storage have
              to be in the same units. All flows have to use the same time unit.
              After that, copying of these numbers on diagrams to the dialog
              boxes can be made without further consideration of units.
                 For example, to enter numbers from the PC&CYCLE model
              in Figure 5.2a to the EXTEND version in Figure 5.2b, copy the
              numbers to the appropriate dialog boxes for the symbols. These
              appear when you double click on the icons. To illustrate the
Entering Numbers for the Start of Simulation (PC&CYCLE)                                           73


                                  process, the values copied from the energy systems diagram are
                                  shown in the dialog boxes as follows (Figures 5.2c–h):

                                  In the dialog box in Figure 5.2c, set depreciation from nutrient
                                     storage to zero, because concentrations are too low to diffuse
                                     and disperse further.
                                  In the dialog box in Figure 5.2d, enter depreciation and material
                                     recycle from organic storage with a flow 1000/time when
                                     storage is 10,000.
                                  In the dialog box in Figure 5.2e, enter the outflow from the
                                     nutrient storage with a flow of 10/time when the storage
                                     is 500.
                                  For the linear flow from organic storage to the consumer block
                                     (dialog box in Figure 5.2f ), enter a flow of 2000 and a storage
                                     force of 10,000. Consumption releases nutrients. For the path-
                                     way from the box enter a flow of 100 by entering 5% (of the
                                     inflow of 2000).
                                  For the interaction dialog box (Figure 5.2g), enter numbers for
                                     inflows and output. Set flow from the left to 90 driven by the
                                     unused energy inflow 10%; set flow from above to 150 when
                                     the quantity above is 500; set the output production at 3000.
                                  Enter numbers for input sources: 100 for energy source inflow
                                     (dialog box in Figure 5.2h) and 10 for nutrient source inflow
                                     (dialog box in Figure 5.2i).



                                                                  䉬
                                    5.4 ENTERING NUMBERS FOR THE START OF
                                            SIMULATION (PC&CYCLE)

                                     Dialog boxes of the sources and storages have places to enter
                                  the starting values, not to be confused with the entries made
                                  earlier for the program to calculate coefficients (calibration).
                                  Starting values (initial conditions) need not be the same as those
                                  used for calibration.
                                     For example, conditions for a run of the PC&CYCLE simula-
                                  tion can be set lower than the calibration values so that we can
                                  watch the system grow: Set organic storages in Figure 5.2d to
                                  100 (1% of the value used for calibration). Similarly, set the
                                  starting condition for nutrients in Figure 5.2c at 10.
                                     Next, use the Set Up option in the RUN menu to set the time
74                                 Chapter Five Simulation with General Systems Blocks for EXTEND


                                interval of iteration (DT). Normally this value can be 1. To
                                determine if the interval is small enough to avoid error, see if
                                simulations with smaller values are identical. If the flows per
                                iteration are a large proportion of the storages, the simulation
                                can go into artificial chaos with values jumping up and down,
                                often leaving the screen graph with vertical lines and solid areas.
                                In such a case, a smaller DT is required. With EXTEND, small
                                DTs may require that more memory be assigned to the pro-
                                gram operation.



                                                                䉬
                                  5.5 GRAPHS FROM SIMULATING PC&CYCLE
                                              WITH EXTEND

                                   In the simulation run in Figure 5.3, nutrients (plotted on the
                                right side scale Y2) reached a steady state in 75 years, and the
                                organic matter storage (left scale) leveled in 300 years.

                                ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the
                                EXTEND Program PC&CYCLE

                                5.5–1 Simulate the model in Figure 5.2b with a lower nutrient
                                      flow (5.0/time). How long does it take for the system to




FIGURE 5.3.
Plotter screen of EXTEND
with results of simulation of
PC&CYCLE model in
Figure 5.2.
Building New Models                                                                    75


                             reach steady state because of the smaller inflow of nutri-
                             ents? What happens to the organic matter?




                                                      䉬
                       5.6 SIMULATING THE EARTH SYSTEM MODEL
                         WITH ENERGY SYSTEM BLOCKS (EARTHGS)

                         The earth system model in Figure 4.3b of Chapter 4 was
                      simulated with EXTEND using the picture block icons (ESLIB
                      in the Earthsys folder), thus introducing system ideas about the
                      biosphere. However, the observer has to look at the correspond-
                      ing energy systems diagram (Figure 4.3a) to know what the
                      symbols represent. By using the general systems blocks, it is easier
                      to remember what the blocks do and thus comprehend model
                      networks better. In Figure 5.4b the earth system model was
                      arranged using general systems icon blocks for simulation with
                      EXTEND. Numbers for flows and storages written on the energy
                      systems diagram in Figure 5.4a were used for calibration.
                      EARTHGS (abbreviation for ‘‘Earth in General Systems Sym-
                      bols’’) is the simulation program for EXTEND on the book disk.
                      If you run the program (Earthsys folder), observe simulation
                      graphs similar to those in Figure 4.3. The CO2 graph is somewhat
                      different, because carbon dioxide is expressed in grams per square
                      meter of surface area, rather than parts per million as used in
                      Figure 4.3.




                                                      䉬
                                   5.7 BUILDING NEW MODELS

                         General systems icon blocks (GNSYSLIB library) can be ar-
                      ranged and connected to represent most energy systems diagrams.
                      (Table 4.2 has instructions for arranging new EXTEND models.)
                      As the first example, assemble the simple TANK model. Using
                      EXTEND, open a blank screen (New Model). Call up a constant
                      source icon, setting the buttons on its dialog box to external
                      flow. Call up a tank icon and a quantity plotter. Connect the
76                                  Chapter Five Simulation with General Systems Blocks for EXTEND




FIGURE 5.4.
General systems blocks
arranged to simulate the earth
system model with EXTEND.
(a) Numbers on the energy
systems diagram; (b) model
(EARTHGS) on computer
screen.



                                 icons, enter values for source flow and initial storage, and run
                                 the program. Compare the model and simulation graph with
                                 Figure 1.3. If the blocks in the library do not have the function
                                 you need, Appendix A has instructions for making new blocks
                                 or changing the program scripts.
             Chapter 6
                         䉬

EQUATIONS FROM
   DIAGRAMS




6.1 Equations for a Single Storage
       Differential Equation
6.2 Equations for Step Simulation
       Step Simulation, Ramp Example
6.3 Step Simulation and Continuous Processes
6.4 Equations from Systems Diagrams
       Five-Pathway Model for One Storage
       Equations for Systems with Many Storages
       Flow Use Junction
6.5 Translating Equations into Energy
    Systems Diagrams
       Example of Diagramming a Set of
         Systems Equations
6.6 Mathematical Characteristics of Units
       Exponential Draining Storage Model (DRAIN)
6.7 Mathematics and Networks
6.8 Simulating Equations with EXTEND
       Time Lag




                         77
B     ecause of the way the energy language was devised, the act
of making diagrams defines a set of mathematical equations for
that system. Writing the equations is an automatic translation
process that does not require mathematical training. Derived in
this way, equations are consistent with the principles of energy,
materials, and information for that system. Equations are neces-
sary for communication with those who think and represent
systems with mathematics. Simple equations can be manipulated
to show useful properties not seen from words or diagrams alone.
The equations are also needed for simulation procedures in chap-
ters to follow. You should be able to write equations from dia-
grams and draw diagrams that translate the equations. With the
models of later chapters, equations are included with the systems
diagrams. A method of simulation is explained that arranges the
parts of an equation on screen using math blocks for EXTEND.



                               䉬
    6.1 EQUATIONS FOR A SINGLE STORAGE

   From Chapter 1, Figure 1.1, let’s start with the simple model
of a storage with two pathways (Figure 6.1). As already discussed
in Chapter 3, the model says that the rate of change of the
quantity in the storage is equal to the rate of inflow minus the
rate of outflow. For example, the rate of increase of water in a
storage tank is equal to the liters of water per hour inflowing
minus the liters per hour outflowing. After putting a storage and
its pathway connections in words, we write the mathematical
equation with one expression for the ‘‘rate of change’’ and one
expression for each pathway carrying inflows or outflows.


              DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION

   In Figure 6.1 the inflow per time on the left input pathway is
represented by J. Drawing a line pathway (Figure 2.2) out of a


              78
Equations for a Single Storage                                                                      79




FIGURE 6.1.
Kinds of equations for the
simple storage model TANK.
See introductory diagram
(Figure 1.1) and simulation with
BASIC in Figure 9.1 (program
TANK.bas in Tables 9.1 through
9.5). Simulation with other
methods is shown in Figures 4.1
and 10.3.




                                   storage normally means that the flow is in proportion to the
                                   ‘‘force’’ exerted by that storage (such as physical force, chemical
                                   concentration, or other property to which the flow is propor-
                                   tional). In other words, the outflow is proportional to the quantity
                                   stored (Q in Figure 6.1). When a flow is proportional to a quan-
                                   tity, it means that increasing the quantity increases the flow. A
                                   pathway (and its mathematical expression) that is proportional
                                   to one other quantity is said to be ‘‘linear.’’ For example, water
                                   flows through sand in proportion to the quantity of headwater
                                   storage (the stored water causes pressure that pushes the water
                                   flow).
                                       The amount that the flow increases is indicated by a constant
                                   (also called a coefficient), usually obtained from observed data.
                                   It is called a constant because its value does not change as the
                                   stored quantities (variables) go up and down. While using one
                                   set of data for calibration and another set for experiments, a
                                   constant is not changed for the study of a model’s behavior over
80                                  Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams


     time. Then, to see the sensitivity of changing in that relationship,
     you can change it and observe the effect. In this book most of
     the constants are given the letter ‘‘K’’ (some are L’s) and each is
     given a different subscript. For example, the outflow from Q in
     Figure 6.1 is the constant K1 multiplied times Q. This is sometimes
     written K1 ⫻ Q where ⫻ means to multiply. Sometimes multipli-
     cation is written simply as KQ where multiplication is implied
     when two letters are closed up side by side.
        However, with computers multiplication is indicated by the
     asterisk (*), so that the flow in Figure 6.1 is written K1*Q. Sepa-
     rating the items multiplied in this way is useful not only so
     the computer can understand the equation, but also to avoid
     confusion when a quantity is represented by more than one letter
     and/or number.
        Verbalizing what is shown in the two-pathway storage model
     of Figure 6.1, we state:

        The rate of change of storage with time is the difference
        between the inflow J and the outflow K1*Q.

     The most common notation for ‘‘rate of change of a quantity
     with time’’ is dQ/dT. Another notation is Q with a dot over it.
     Usually the plus (⫹) is omitted if the first expression in an equa-
     tion is plus. Without words, the equation is:

                            dQ/dt ⫽ J ⫺ K1*Q.

        A rate equation is sometimes called a differential equation.
     Its equation states the rate of change in general terms, without
     actually using numbers. For a particular case, you can find out
     what the inflow rate is numerically and what the outflow constant
     is numerically. For example, Figure 3.3b has data observed for
     flows of water in and out of a tank in steady state. For the model
     in Figure 6.1 the outflow is 100 liters per hour. Therefore, the
     outflow expression K1*Q represents 100 liters per hour. (‘‘Per’’
     means divided by. Division is indicated with a slash, /.)

                           K1*Q ⫽ 100 liters/hr.

     Dividing both sides by Q:

                                K1 ⫽ 100/Q.
Equations for Step Simulation                                                                  81


                                When the flow was 100, Q was 1000. Therefore,

                                                   K1 ⫽ 100/1000 ⫽ 0.1/hr.

                                   More on using data to calibrate equations is given in Chapter
                                7. To encourage visual images of real systems, we use the words
                                storage and tank for the locations of accumulation. In mathemati-
                                cal teaching of systems these are called state variables.




                                                               䉬
                                     6.2 EQUATIONS FOR STEP SIMULATION

                                   Another way of handling changes of storages with time is to
                                write an equation for step changes over a specified interval of
                                time. Referring to the TANK model in Figure 6.1, we verbalize
                                the changes:

                                Quantity Q after the next time interval will equal the quantity
                                now plus the change rate times the time interval:
                                (New quantity) ⫽ (old quantity) ⫹ (change rate) * (time
                                interval).

                                Computers simulate by making repetitive calculations of step
                                changes over small time intervals. This book uses the letters
                                used in the computer programs as follows: Time interval is DT.
                                Change rate is DQ, which is the sum of flow rates in and out
                                of storage. With this notation the equation in the simulations is:

                                                    Qnew ⫽ Qold ⫹ DQ*DT.

                                   When the computer makes a calculation during simulation,
                                the ‘‘⫽’’ sign means ‘‘will equal.’’ It responds to the equation
                                by replacing the present value of Q (a memory location in the
                                computer) with a new value of Q calculated as the old value plus
                                the change for that interval of time (DQ*DT). The equation
                                given to the computer simulation is simply:

                                                      Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*DT.
82                                  Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams


     When the computer attention gets to the equation during simula-
     tion it recalculates what the change rate DQ is at that time,
     multiplies by the setting for time interval (iteration interval DT),
     and adds it to the old Q. It prints, plots, or saves the number
     before repeating the calculation for the next time step. It repeats
     the calculation over and over for all the storages in the model,
     plotting graphs of the way all aspects of the system change
     with time.
         Graphs can be compared with expectations to see if the model
     is the right one to show what happens in the real world. People
     who have verbal models about systems are often surprised to
     find that the simulation behavior is not what they expected from
     their qualitative thinking.


             STEP SIMULATION, RAMP EXAMPLE

        Figure 6.2 is an example of stepwise summing of changes
     according to a simulation equation. The model is a storage with
     only one inflow pathway. The change rate is constant: DQ ⫽ J,
     and J ⫽ 10 units per hour. The quantity in the tank at each hour
     will be what it was at the start of the hour plus the amount
     added. In words:

          New Q will equal old Q plus DQ for one time step:
          Q ⫽ Q ⫹ J*DT.

     Adding 10 at each time interval produces an upward sloping
     line. This model is appropriately called a RAMP (Figure 6.2).



                                     䉬
                  6.3 STEP SIMULATION AND
                   CONTINUOUS PROCESSES

        For a process that operates in steps, the RAMP model with
     stepwise digital simulation generates a realistic graph. For exam-
     ple, a pump turning on briefly every hour to pump in 10 gallons
     of water would produce a record of water level steps like that
     shown in Figure 6.2b.
        Digital simulation usually simulates continuous processes even
Step Simulation and Continuous Processes                                                            83




FIGURE 6.2.
Simulation by summing the
step additions for a time
interval according to a very
simple rate change equation.
(a) Energy systems diagram of
a single storage model without
an outflow (RAMP) and its
equation; (b) graphical result of
simulation.




                                    though its iterations occur in steps. A pump operating all the
                                    time to send 10 gallons of water into the tank (Figure 6.2a) is a
                                    continuous process. Even though the change rate DQ ⫽ 10 is
                                    correct, simulating it with repeated digital recalculations (Figure
                                    6.2b) is an approximation. The more you reduce the time interval
                                    (DT) between calculations (iterations), the closer the simulation
                                    approaches the correct graph for continuous pumping, in this
                                    case a straight line. However, the smaller the time step is, the
                                    more iterations the computer has to make and the longer it takes
                                    for the program to run.
                                       Because the flow rates are usually changing during a time step,
                                    calculating change with the rates at the start of the time interval
                                    is not correct for the whole time step. The error is large and
                                    cumulative if rates are changing rapidly and the time step is large
                                    (example: steeply accelerating growth curves). Several kinds of
                                    mathematical calculations can be added to simulation programs
                                    to base the changes on the average rates during each time step.
                                    Swartzman and Kaluzny (1987) summarize Runge-Kutta meth-
                                    ods and mathematics of numerical integration. Many commercial
84                                Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams


     software packages for simulation include several options for in-
     creasing accuracy (Chapter 22).
        As the time step approaches zero, the errors approach zero.
     In this book we reduce the time step DT until no change is
     observed in the simulation curves, and the error is judged to be
     negligible. This method is called Euler numerical integration.



                                   䉬
       6.4 EQUATIONS FROM SYSTEMS DIAGRAMS

        For each model we need rate equations to put into the simula-
     tion programs. In this book, for a storage labeled Q, DQ is
     shorthand for the rate of change with time: dQ/dt. Most of this
     chapter explains details for writing rate equations for energy
     systems diagrams. Figure 6.3 shows the mathematical expressions
     for many kinds of pathways. With a little practice it gets easy
     to visualize the network and the mathematical terms together.
     Depending on previous experience and aptitude, some people
     will think first in one while deriving the other.



        FIVE-PATHWAY MODEL FOR ONE STORAGE

        Figure 6.4 is another example with five different kinds of
     pathways, two flowing in and three flowing out. The rate of
     change of the quantity in the tank is the difference between the
     plus contributions of the inflows minus those subtracted by the
     outflows. There is one mathematical term (expression) for each
     pathway. We write the equation by setting DQ equal to two plus
     terms and three minus terms. The first term J is for an inflow
     whose value is determined from outside the system by whatever
     is varying J or making J constant. The second inflow is coming
     from a storage of reserve energy E by the linear pathway whose
     expression is ⫹K0*E.
        The topmost outflow is in proportion to an interaction, which
     means the product of the storage and an outside source of active
     pumping F calibrated with the constant K3. The middle pathway
     flows out in proportion to the self-interaction of thequantity Q
     calibrated with the constant K2, which equals K2*Q*Q (Q times
     Q is Q squared ⫽ Q2 ). For example, crowding may cause a
Equations from Systems Diagrams                                                                        85




FIGURE 6.3.
Mathematical expressions for
common pathways of systems
models. (a) Linear
transformation; (b) linear
frictional process; (c) reversible,
linear flow with backforce;
(d) quadratic flow; (e) product
interaction; (f ) dividing
interaction; (g) subtracting
interaction; (h) constant gain
amplifier (gain ⫽ K2);
(i) pumping from source limited
flow; ( j) on/off switch.




                                      population to drain energies negatively in proportion to the fre-
                                      quency of self-interactions. The lower pathway drains storage
                                      linearly as required by the second energy law. The term here is
                                      ⫺K1*Q, like that of Figure 6.1.


                                                EQUATIONS FOR SYSTEMS WITH
                                                      MANY STORAGES

                                         The examples used so far have one rate equation for one
                                      storage. Most models are more complex than one storage, and
                                      therefore a set of several equations is used to represent the system.
                                         Let’s write the equations for the production–consumption–
                                      recycle model (PC&CYCLE) given in Figure 3.4. First, copy that
                                      model to the top of a page (Figure 6.5a) and add some letters
86                                                             Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams




FIGURE 6.4.
Writing the equation for a
storage model with five kinds
of pathways.




                                representing the sources and storages. Then assign a ‘‘K’’ for the
                                constant coefficient on each pathway (Figure 6.5a). Next we
                                suggest you cover up the rest of the page and try to write the
                                mathematical terms for each pathway. Compare your result with
                                Figure 6.5b. Then write the equation for each tank as the sum
                                of the plus inputs and minus outputs. Compare your results with
                                those given in the figure.



                                                  FLOW USE JUNCTION

                                   A special design is appropriate where pumping is from a flow-
                                through source with a fast turnover. The energy source on the
                                left in Figures 3.4 and 6.5 sends a flow into the system (as defined
                                by the frame). Components within the system can interact with
                                that flow using part or most of it in production processes. That
                                which is unused flows out. An example is the flow of sunlight
                                into a forest, most of which is captured and used, with some
                                being reflected out. Another example is the flow of water in a
                                stream used by a village. It can pump from whatever water
                                remains until that flowing out is too small. A special equation
Equations from Systems Diagrams                                                                   87




FIGURE 6.5.
Equations for a more complex
model (given with numbers in
Figure 3.4). (a) Shown with
constant coefficients for each
pathway; (b) shown with the
complete math terms for each
pathway.




                                  is used for this configuration that is diagrammed in Figure 6.3i.
                                  The unused remainder R is the inflow from outside minus that
                                  used.
                                     The productive interaction that uses that flow-through re-
                                  source does so in proportion to the unused remainder. The use
                                  and the productive output are modeled as the product of the
                                  interacting force (F in Figure 6.3i) and the available remainder R.
                                     This mathematical expression is useful where the inflow of
                                  the resource is much faster than any storage of that resource
                                  within the system. For example, light energy flowing thousands
                                  of miles per second almost instantaneously replaces the quantity
                                  of light energy that is within the system at one time. It would
88                                  Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams


     not be possible to simulate light storage because the turnover
     time is too fast compared to the scale of the rest of the system.
     Where turnover times of some quantity are much higher than
     the other storages of a system, show the resource as a flow from
     which other units can pump according to the unused remainder.
     Then write the mathematics as shown in Figure 6.3i.



                                     䉬
      6.5 TRANSLATING EQUATIONS INTO ENERGY
                SYSTEMS DIAGRAMS

        Whereas previously we wrote math for systems networks, we
     next do the reverse. Looking at a set of equations, even by those
     mathematically trained, does not immediately provide a systems
     overview. But an energy systems diagram provides an immediate
     understanding of parts, processes, and overall relationships. Get-
     ting understanding from the raw math is tedious thinking. The
     easiest way is to translate the equations into energy systems lan-
     guage.
        Writing equations for an energy systems diagram is rigorous
     and not ambiguous. However, for the reverse process, drawing
     diagrams for a set of equations produces more than one alterna-
     tive. This is because the equations do not indicate which letters
     are sources, where the energy and material constraints are, nor
     which is the author’s intent out of a possible number of different
     configurations with the same mathematics. We have discovered
     18 different systems models that produce logistic mathematics
     when the equations are manipulated into a common form. As
     Oster and Auslander (1971), among others, have explained, typi-
     cal mathematics practices are too general to represent systems ac-
     curately.



           EXAMPLE OF DIAGRAMMING A SET OF
                 SYSTEMS EQUATIONS

        With the difficulties in mind, let’s illustrate the process of
     translating equations with Figure 6.6. A set of equations is given
     at the top of the figure. Cover up the rest of the figure and try to
     visualize what the equations mean without diagramming—pretty
Translating Equations into Energy Systems Diagrams                                                 89




FIGURE 6.6.
Diagramming a model that is
in the form of a set of systems
equations. (a) Equation set;
(b) start of diagram;
(c) completed diagram.




                                   obscure. You can keep the lower part of the figure covered as
                                   you try the following procedure.
                                      Next, place a storage symbol on the paper for each rate equa-
                                   tion. Connect one pathway for each term in that equation. For
                                   each pathway, fix its structure appropriate to that expression
                                   (see pathway examples in Figure 6.3). Figure 6.6b shows the first
                                   stage. Try to make the connections of one storage to another
                                   consistent according to terms in both equations.
                                      Next, try to identify and draw the plausible energy sources
                                   and sinks. Estimate the order of items on the transformity scale
                                   so as to position units on the diagram in that order. These provide
                                   a reasonable, correct solution, which may be only one among
                                   several possible. To complete a diagram of someone else’s model
90                                 Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams


     equations, you need that person’s collaboration to obtain other
     information and intent.




                                    䉬
         6.6 MATHEMATICAL CHARACTERISTICS
                    OF UNITS

        Whereas most models are simulated to determine what they
     do, the equations for some simple models can be manipulated
     mathematically to find the graphs of storages with time, calcu-
     late steady states, and learn other special properties. The
     mathematical characteristics of simple units are helpful in their
     use to build more complex models. The mathematics of energy
     systems models was given in another book (Odum, 1983,
     1994). Properties of one unit are given next to explain exponen-
     tial processes.



             EXPONENTIAL DRAINING STORAGE
                    MODEL (DRAIN)

         A storage with one linear draining pathway is about the sim-
     plest model that you can draw (Figure 6.7). Because the outflow
     is in proportion to the remaining storage, its percent outflow per
     time is constant. For example, water stored in a temporary pond
     percolating into the ground drains out—quickly at first and then
     more slowly as the pressure driving it decreases. A constant
     fraction K of what is remaining in storage Q flows out in each
     unit of time.
         A differential equation is integrated to get an equation for
     storage over time (Figure 6.7). Time T in the resulting expression
     for quantity Q is a negative exponent classifying the equation as
     a declining exponential (Figure 6.7). In Chapter 9, Section 9.8,
     simulation of this model generates the same curve. DRAIN is a
     general systems model because it fits similar processes on all
     scales. Remembering the equations that go with a draining stor-
     age helps you recognize when it is an appropriate model. Data
     fit when they follow a straight line of Q plotted against T on
     semi-log paper.
Mathematics and Networks                                                                           91




FIGURE 6.7.
Model (DRAIN) of a single tank
with one linear outflow
pathway with mathematical
manipulations to show the form
of its plot on a semi-logarithmic
plot with time and its
exponential form on an
ordinary plot with time.




                                                                   䉬
                                           6.7 MATHEMATICS AND NETWORKS

                                        In translating diagrams, we write a rate equation for each
                                    storage. A model with four storages will have four rate equations.
                                    If these storages are connected with each other through at least
                                    one mutual pathway, then the letters for each storage will occur
                                    in the equation for at least one other tank, and together directly
92                                                           Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams


                               or indirectly they all share terms. Although there is not much
                               point for complex systems, each equation could be combined
                               with the others to form one giant equation. This is another way
                               of recognizing that everything is connected to everything else
                               directly or indirectly. In practice, for simplicity, we keep each
                               storage rate equation separate but simulate them together as a
                               system set.
                                  In common mathematics, operations terms are combined, fac-
                               tored, and manipulated in various ways to get results in a compact
                               and more easily understood form. However, this is the same as
                               changing the systems diagram, and it results in differences in
                               meaning regarding pathways. For example, Figure 6.8 shows
                               some equation changes that most people would regard as simpli-
                               fying without changing the meaning, but when translated into
                               network form, different configurations result. For example, in
                               Figure 6.8a factoring changed the number of pathways entering
                               storage. In Figure 6.8b it eliminated an outflow pathway. The
                               more complex the model, the more possibilities there are in ener-
                               getics and configurations for the same equations.
                                  For this book the equations are used mainly as an intermediate
                               stage in setting up programs for computer simulation. Because
                               rate equations are a widely understood language for representing
                               system structures and processes, but are ambiguous in represent-




FIGURE 6.8.
Changes in diagrams implied
by manipulating equations.
Factoring K1 implies a
combination of pathways.
(a) Pathways into storage;
(b) pathways out of storage.
Simulating Equations with EXTEND                                                                     93


                                   ing networks without a diagram, this book presents all models
                                   with rate equations and energy systems diagrams.



                                                                    䉬
                                     6.8 SIMULATING EQUATIONS WITH EXTEND

                                      Although we use EXTEND in a special way to simulate with-
                                   out writing equations in Chapters 4 and 5, a manual and other
                                   libraries for simulating equations come with the EXTEND pro-
                                   gram. There are blocks for adding, subtracting, dividing, integrat-
                                   ing, etc. Equations can be calculated by connecting math blocks
                                   on screen. Most of these blocks are not compatible with our
                                   special blocks because of their array structure (Appendix A).
                                   Figure 6.9 is an example of how EXTEND is used to generate
                                   system graphs by manipulating equations with the math icon
                                   blocks from the ‘‘generic library.’’ In the library there are also
                                   blocks where simulation is accomplished just by typing in equa-
                                   tions.
                                      The differential equation derived from the energy systems dia-
                                   gram for the TANK model (Figure 6.1) is dQ/dT ⫽ J ⫺ K*Q.
                                   Integrating both sides produces an integral equation for Q (Figure
                                   6.9a). The math steps in the integral equation are also dia-
                                   grammed in Figure 6.9a in the form used to explain negative
                                   feedback (a feedback that subtracts) in classical engineering con-
                                   trol systems.
                                      After opening EXTEND and the generic library, mathematical
                                   icons are arranged on screen to match (Figure 6.9b). The place
                                   in the network that computes Q is connected to a plotter from
                                   the plotter library (Figure 6.9b). A graph of the storage Q results
                                   (Figure 6.9c). You need merely know what integration is to use
                                   this approach to simulation, because the integration is done by
                                   the blocks. Integration is finding the equation for a state (storage)
                                   from the rate equation.



                                                              TIME LAG

                                      Most of the models in this book have the time lag inherent
                                   in storages. Because storage tanks require time to fill, a lag occurs
                                   before the inputs to the tank affect the outputs. Another kind of
94                                                              Chapter Six Equations from Diagrams




FIGURE 6.9.
Simulating the model TANK
(Figure 6.1) with EXTEND by
arranging math blocks of the
generic library to represent its
integral equation. (a) Equation
and its diagram; (b) math
blocks connected on computer
screen; (c) simulation graph.




                                   time lag occurs when a backforce is generated in opposition to
                                   the input. Examples are electrical current flows through coils of
                                   electrical wire (electromagnets) and the resistance of people to
                                   new ideas. The equations for this ‘‘impedance’’ are found in
                                   electrical engineering texts. Another kind of time lag is digital
                                   time delay, when an input is delayed for a time interval before
                                   being passed to its destination. Examples are delay between food
                                   inputs to an animal and production of offspring and delay in
                                   production on an assembly line due to a holiday. When the time
                                   delay is added to a system that usually grows into a steady state
                                   (example: LOGISTIC in Chapter 13), the system oscillates.
     Chapter Seven
                        䉬

   CALIBRATING
     MODELS




7.1 Procedure for Calibrating a Model
      Using Steady-State Values
      Selecting Units
      Calculating Coefficients
7.2 Calibrating a Model with a
    Spreadsheet Program
7.3 Calibrating More Complex Models
      Spreadsheet Use




                        95
C     alibration is the process of fitting a model with numbers.
Numbers are used to calculate the constant coefficients of equa-
tions to be used in simulation. The numbers may be observed
data from measurements in nature, or they may be numbers
assumed to investigate how the model works. Chapter 7 explains
how to calculate coefficients after numbers are placed on energy
systems diagrams (Chapter 3).
   Coefficients are constant values of the K’s in the program that
indicate how much flow there is on a pathway in terms of causal
forces or concentrations. After numerical values of flows and
storages are placed on an energy systems diagram, calibration is
accomplished by calculating a table of coefficients from these
numbers, a simple task for a small minimodel. For larger models,
calculations should be made with a computer ‘‘spreadsheet,’’
which makes subsequent changes easy. For some programs, the
calibration calculations are included within the simulation pro-
gram, and you merely have to enter the flows and storage values
from the evaluated systems diagram. After equations are cali-
brated, you are ready to simulate with one of the programs
explained in this book (QUICKBASIC, EXTEND, STELLA,
EXCEL).


                               䉬
 7.1 PROCEDURE FOR CALIBRATING A MODEL

   The numbers used for calibration are flows (quantities pro-
cessed per time) and storages at the time. The data may be for
a particular moment or, more often, average data. With the first
calibration of a model, getting approximate numbers is sufficient.
Later when the model is running, calibration can be refined using
knowledge of how the model performed.

           USING STEADY-STATE VALUES

   If the system is one that tends to level its growth with
storages in steady state (inflows balancing outflows), you may


              96
Procedure for Calibrating a Model                                                                    97


                                    use the steady-state conditions for the calibration. If you have
                                    some of the flows but not all, the missing values for flows
                                    can be assumed as the values necessary to make the inflows
                                    and outflows equal.
                                       Calibration with steady-state values helps you find errors
                                    when simulation models are run for the first time. If the model
                                    is not an oscillator, if the starting values are the same as the
                                    calibration values, and if there are no errors, then the graphs
                                    are straight horizontal lines. In other words, the model is
                                    started and run at steady state. Error is recognized if the lines
                                    are not straight.



                                                         SELECTING UNITS

                                       First, decide what the unit of time will be for the whole model
                                    (example: hours, days, years, etc.). It better to select a time unit
                                    that is much smaller than the span of interest of your planned
                                    simulation. For example, if your interest is in a model’s behavior
                                    over many years, use a unit of days, weeks, or months. You can
                                    use a large unit on the same scale as the span of time of the
                                    simulation, but then the iteration interval (DT) will need to be
                                    very small.
                                       Decide what the spatial units will be. Whereas the units for
                                    a storage and all the flows into it have to be the same (one
                                    equation), the different storages can have different units (exam-
                                    ple: Figure 3.5). However, it may be simpler to make the spatial
                                    units the same for all the storages.
                                       Whereas you could use the area of the whole system as
                                    the spatial unit, such numbers are large and hard to visualize.
                                    Instead, you can select a commonly used unit with which
                                    people have had experience. For example, flows and storages
                                    can be given per square meter even though the area of the
                                    system is much larger. Whatever is chosen, place the units on
                                    the energy systems diagram to help you keep them straight
                                    (example: Figure 3.5).
                                       Then, for the complex diagrams, use a colored pencil to write
                                    the numbers for the storages in the tanks and for the flows on
                                    the pathways in and out of the tanks (Figure 7.1). Everything
                                    that flows in and out of the same tank must have the same units.
                                    For example, for a tank representing population, the flows in
                                    and out must be numbers of people per unit of time. For a tank
98                                                                   Chapter Seven Calibrating Models




FIGURE 7.1.
Minimodel FISH with three
evaluated pathways to show
how to calibrate equations.
Table 7.1 shows the calibration
result.




                                  representing biomass, the flows must all use a consistent weight
                                  unit, such as grams per time.
                                     The flows in and out of an interaction will be in different
                                  units. At this symbol the input forces or concentrations multiply,
                                  divide, or involve other functions, but they do not add to generate
                                  the production output. Even if two flows to an interaction have
                                  the same units (grams, calories, etc.), they represent different
                                  qualities of energy and should not be added.



                                              CALCULATING COEFFICIENTS

                                     After the flows and storage numbers have been placed on the
                                  diagram (Figure 7.1), calculate the coefficients as shown in Table
                                  7.1. Usually there is one coefficient for each pathway. In the first
                                  column list the mathematical terms for each of the pathways to
                                  a storage (the terms in the rate equation for that storage). Using
                                  these numbers, divide through by the values of the causal vari-
                                  ables (sources and storages) in each expression (columns 2, 3,
                                  and 4). Values for the coefficients result in the last column. For
                                  example, in the first line of the table, K1*E ⫽ 5 when E ⫽ 10.
Calibrating a Model with a Spreadsheet Program                                                             99


                                    TABLE 7.1
                                    Calibration of Constants for the Model FISH Using Numbers on
                                    the Diagram in Figure 7.1a

                                    Expression       Coefficient                               Coefficient
                                    and value        expression         Calculation            value

                                    K1*E ⫽ 5         K1 ⫽ 5/E           K1 ⫽ 5/10              K1 ⫽ 0.5
                                    K2*Q ⫽ 3         K2 ⫽ 3/Q           K2 ⫽ 3/1000            K2 ⫽ 0.003
                                    K3*Q*F ⫽ 2       K3 ⫽ 2/(Q*F)       K3 ⫽ 2/(1000*10)       K3 ⫽ 0.0002
                                       a
                                         Sources: E ⫽ 10, F ⫽ 5, and storage, Q ⫽ 1000. Values for sources and
                                    storages used for calibration may or may not be those used for simulation.




                                    Therefore, K1 ⫽ 5/E; substituting the value of E ⫽ 10, K1 ⫽
                                    5/10 ⫽ 0.5.



                                                                       䉬
                                            7.2 CALIBRATING A MODEL WITH A
                                                 SPREADSHEET PROGRAM

                                        Especially if the table of constants is long (many coefficients),
                                    it is convenient to set up the calibration table using a spreadsheet
                                    program (examples: LOTUS, QUATRO, EXCEL). Because
                                    items occur in several places in a set of equations, each may
                                    be part of several calculations. A common error occurs when
                                    you change something in one place, but forget to change it
                                    in all the places it occurs. Spreadsheets respond to changes
                                    by automatically changing all the relevant calculations. Formu-
                                    las for automatic calculation are built into the cells for the
                                    coefficient values.
                                        After the spreadsheet program is loaded, a screen grid appears.
                                    You can enter captions and labels similar to those used for the
                                    hand calculation (Table 7.1). Figure 7.2 shows a spreadsheet
                                    with letters for column headings, and numbers labeling the rows.
                                    The numbers used in Figure 7.2 are for the FISH model shown
                                    in Figure 7.1. Each cell in the grid has an address according to
                                    its column and row. For example, the source value 10 is in cell
                                    C4 and the inflow value 5 is in cell C9.
                                        When you type something into a cell, the program treats
100                                                                Chapter Seven Calibrating Models




FIGURE 7.2.
Numbers for the model FISH in
Figure 7.1 demonstrating the
use of spreadsheets for
calibrating coefficients.




                                an entry that starts with a letter as a label; whereas those
                                that start with a numerical item such as ‘‘⫹’’ are processed
                                as arithmetic calculations. As set up in Figure 7.2, entries in
                                columns A, B, D, and E are labels, whereas entries in columns
                                C and F are numerical. When the cursor is on a cell, its
                                contents appears in a line at the top of the screen, where you
                                can type a change.
                                   For cells in the final column, enter the formulas for calculating
                                the constants (K’s) in terms of the addresses of the cells containing
                                numbers to be multiplied or divided. For example, for the expres-
                                sion K1* E ⫽ 5 (line 9 in Figure 7.2), the formula entered in the
                                program for cell F9 is the ratio of the addresses of the numbers
                                to be divided 5/10. A plus is added to indicate that these are not
                                labels, but numbers to be processed.

                                                             ⫹C9/C4.

                                The program automatically takes the value in cell C9 and
                                divides it by the value in cell C4. The advantage of this means
                                of calculation is that when you change a number anywhere
                                in the table, the program instantly recalculates every coefficient
Calibrating More Complex Models                                                                   101


                                  affected by the change. A printout of the EXCEL spreadsheet
                                  for this model is shown in Figure 7.3. Vertical and horizontal
                                  lines to show the addresses and cell limits are optional in
                                  the printout.
                                     The rate of change equation for the FISH model in Figure
                                  7.1 is:


                                                  DQ ⫽ K1*E ⫺ K2*Q ⫺ K3*Q*F.


                                  If the evaluated constants from Figure 7.2 or 7.3 are substituted
                                  for the K’s in the equation, the calibrated equation is:


                                             DQ ⫽ 0.5*E ⫺ 0.003*Q ⫺ 0.0002*Q*F.




                                                                   䉬
                                    7.3 CALIBRATING MORE COMPLEX MODELS

                                      For a more complex model than that just discussed, the process
                                  is the same, except there are coefficients for several equations (for
                                  several storages). The numbers on the energy systems diagram of
                                  model PC&CYCLE used in previous chapters (Figures 5.2 and
                                  5.3) are shown again in Figure 7.4a and used to calculate coeffi-
                                  cients in Figure 7.4b. These coefficients are used for the simula-
                                  tion in BASIC in Chapter 9. See more complex examples in
                                  Chapter 21.




FIGURE 7.3.
Printout of EXCEL spreadsheet
(file FISHNUMB.wk1)
containing the calibration
table for the model FISH in
Figure 7.2.
102                                                             Chapter Seven Calibrating Models




FIGURE 7.4.
Calibration of the model
PC&CYCLE. (a) Numbers
on energy systems diagram;
(b) coefficient calculations.



                                                   SPREADSHEET USE

                                   By now spreadsheets are part of general education of most
                                students. Details on their use can be found in the manuals for
                                those programs. The tables can be converted into text tables or
                                transferred to other computers. The spreadsheet FISHNUMB.
                                wk1 used in this chapter is included on the disk supplied with
                                this book.
        Chapter Eight
                          䉬

SIMULATING WITH
  SPREADSHEET




8.1 Procedure for Simulation with a Spreadsheet
8.2 Simulating the Model FISH
      Practice Exercise
      Saving Large Templates




                          103
S    preadsheet computer programs process data in tables. They
provide a grid of ‘‘cells’’ (boxes) on the computer screen in which
numbers and labels are typed. Then cells are given formulas for
calculating quantities from numbers in other cells. Chapter 8
explains how to use spreadsheet programs to simulate systems
models. The simple model FISH is used as an example.




                                  䉬
         8.1 PROCEDURE FOR SIMULATION
               WITH A SPREADSHEET

    After rate equations have been written for a model (Chapter 6)
and its coefficients calibrated (Chapter 7), a spreadsheet program
such as LOTUS, EXCEL, QUATRO, or one of many others is
selected and loaded. The program brings an empty grid to the
screen showing the cells formed by the crossing lines (Figure 7.2).
The vertical columns are labeled with letters and the horizontal
rows with numbers. Cells are identified by the column’s letter
and the row’s number (examples: B1, H3, etc., in Figure 8.1b).
    Type in the numbers for coefficients and other constant values
in cells at the top of the screen. Below, set up the main simulation
table by entering the terms of the model equations in a row as
headings for the columns (Figure 8.1b) including sources, stor-
ages, math terms for pathway flows, and change rates.
    When you type labels, numbers, or calculation formulas into
the cells, the program treats each of these three kinds of informa-
tion differently. Normally, something typed into a cell is treated
as a label if it starts with a letter; it is treated as a number if the
first character is a number. You can set the number of decimal
places. However, if a ⫹ or ⫽ sign is used first (example: ⫽ G9),
the program treats it as an address but uses its contents as a
number. Figure 7.2 shows examples of formulas used in a spread-
sheet for calibration.
    After a formula is written into a cell it automatically calculates


              104
Procedure for Simulation with a Spreadsheet                                                       105




FIGURE 8.1.
Simulating the model FISH with
a spreadsheet. (a) Model with
calibration numbers and
equation; (b) spreadsheet
simulation table (formulas
are given in Table 8.1.);
(c) simulation graph derived
from the table.




                                     a number for that cell using numbers in other cells. It does this
                                     by adding, subtracting, multiplying, and otherwise manipulating
                                     the numbers at the cell addresses. For example, the formula ⫽
106                              Chapter Eight Simulating with Spreadsheet


      G9*E6 means multiply the number in cell G9 by the number in
      cell E6.
          Each horizontal row represents the values at one time. In the
      first row, enter zero for the time and the starting value for storage.
      Attach formulas to calculate the other numbers. For example,
      the formula for the change rate DQ is the sum of the cells that
      have the terms of the rate equation.
          For the second line down (the next time step), put in formulas
      that calculate values from the first line. The formulas for this
      one line are duplicated on the third line and beyond with the
      FILL DOWN command that automatically increases the line
      numbers of the cell addresses by one. In this way, every calcula-
      tion is repeated on the next line for the next interval of time,
      similarly on the next, and then the next, etc. Those numbers that
      need to be held constant from line to line in the fill down process
      are given the $ symbol in front of each character. For example,
      if address F4 contains a constant, it is kept from changing when
      copied down by entering it as $F$4.
          The result of copying the calculation line to successive posi-
      tions below is a long table that tabulates the storages and flows
      as they change with time. The vertical columns of numbers for
      time, for storage, and other quantities are convenient for plot-
      ting graphs.



                                       䉬
               8.2 SIMULATING THE MODEL FISH

         An example of simulation is shown in Figure 8.1 for the
      systems model FISH previously used in Figure 7.1 to illustrate
      calibration. The energy systems diagram (Figure 8.1a) shows the
      storage Q to be a balance between the production of young fish
      from the left K1*E the recruitment in fisheries, and the losses
      along two pathways: the normal mortality and the mortality due
      to interaction with the fishing effort F. Figure 8.1b shows the
      top of the simulation table of the spreadsheet.
         Values of the constants E, K1, K2, and K3 were entered in
      line 4 (Figure 8.1b). Then in row 10, time was set at 0 and initial
      conditions of storage Q set at 1. The formulas shown in Table
      8.1 calculated the source inflow, the fishing effort, the deprecia-
      tion loss, the yield outflow, and the storage change rate from
Simulating the Model FISH                                                                 107


                            TABLE 8.1
                            Formulas Used in Spreadsheet for Model FISH in Figure 8.1

                            Terms in equation                      Formulas in cells

                            K1*E                     Line 10       ⫽$D$4*$B$4
                            K2*Q                     Line 10       ⫽$F$4*E10
                            K3*Q*F                   Line 10       ⫽$H$4*E10*$D$10
                            DQ                       Line 10       ⫽$C$10 ⫺ F10 ⫺ G10
                            Q                        Line 11       ⫽E10 ⫹ H10
                            T                        Line 11       ⫽B10 ⫹ 1




                            numbers in the other boxes. In line 11 and all those below, the
                            storage and time were calculated as the storage plus the change
                            in storage from the previous time (row above). Table 8.1 has the
                            formulas typed in (invisibly attached) to cells in these columns.
                            When the rectangular cursor is on a cell with a formula, it shows
                            in the edit line at the top of the program. See if you can derive
                            them for yourself just by looking at rows 10 and 11 in Figure 8.1b.
                               If you make a change, the program automatically recalculates
                            numbers throughout the table without being instructed further.
                            Figure 8.1c shows the growth of fish obtained by graphing the
                            column of 1000 numbers in the Q column as a function of the
                            column of numbers in the T column, each representing a day.
                            The simulation table was saved on disk memory as template file
                            FISH.wk1. The wk1 extension indicates a spreadsheet template.




                                                PRACTICE EXERCISE

                               The spreadsheet template for Figure 8.1b (FISH.wk1 in the
                            IntrModl folder) is included on this book’s disk. After loading
                            your spreadsheet program, bring the template to screen using
                            the program menu. Load the template. The contents of Figure
                            8.1b appear on screen. The grid lines can be turned on or off.
                            Try varying source values and fishing pressures and observing
                            the changes in the same way as with other ‘‘What If ’’ exercises
                            in this book. For more details on use of the spreadsheet program
                            refer to the appropriate program manuals.
108                             Chapter Eight Simulating with Spreadsheet


                    SAVING LARGE TEMPLATES

          If you have a complex model to simulate, the headings and
      first calculation line may be very wide. Saving the whole table
      may use too much disk memory. It is not necessary to save all
      the repetitive lines below the first calculation lines. If the lower
      part of the table is not saved it can be restored after the abbrevi-
      ated template is returned by using the FILL DOWN command.
      For example, suppose only the first 11 lines of the spreadsheet
      in Figure 8.1b were saved. After the template is reloaded from
      disk, highlight lines 11 and below to include 1000 lines. From
      the menu activate the FILL DOWN command. The formulas in
      line 11 are transferred to all the lines below and the values
      calculated. Thus, the whole table is immediately restored on
      screen.
          People already familiar with spreadsheets can simulate with
      equations for models without learning a special simulation pro-
      gram. Larger models may reach the limits of some computers’
      memory. Because spreadsheet programs are common in business
      and are becoming part of everyday knowledge, a full explanation
      of their use is left to other books and manuals.
           Chapter Nine
                          䉬

      PROGRAMMING
         IN BASIC

9.1   Running a Simulation Model
      with QUICKBASIC
        Model TANK
9.2   Simulation with Calculations by Hand
        Rounding-Off Errors
9.3   Writing a BASIC Program for the TANK Model
        Examples that Fit the Storage Model TANK
9.4   Iteration Time
9.5   Factors for Keeping Graphs on Scale
9.6   Program Format and Use of Remarks
      in Programs.
9.7   Simulating Exponential Growth with
      Program EXPO
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Exponential Models
        Growth with Quadratic Feedback
9.8   Simulating Dispersal from Storage with
      Model DRAIN
        Examples of the DRAIN Model
9.9   Simulating Production, Consumption, and
      Recycle with Model PC&CYCLE
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of PC&CYCLE
9.10 Useful Modeling and
     Programming Mechanisms


                         109
I   n this chapter simulation programming is introduced using
the simple language BASIC. Learning to visualize processes as a
sequential list of instructions, that is, as a program, provides
special insights about systems. These are tested for consistency
when the program is run on computer. An essential part of
education, learning some programming, permits students to sim-
ulate their own models, testing their own ideas in a special way.
For these purposes, people should do their own programming.
   For minimodels, which we use to overview systems, a simple
language may be sufficient. BASIC is the best known simple
programming language, written by J. Kemeny at Dartmouth in
the early days of computing. A generation of college-bound stu-
dents learned BASIC in high school. Learning BASIC is often
recommended as a first step that makes it easy to learn more
complex programming languages later.
   In this book a BASIC program is provided for each minimodel
along with the diagram of the system in energy language, equa-
tions, and a typical sample of the graphic output from running
the program. There are 46 BASIC programs in Parts III and IV.
Although some modern versions of BASIC are elaborate, only a
few commands are needed for simulating systems. The reader
needs to learn enough of the BASIC commands to read programs,
understand what they do, run them, and make changes. Some
readers may want to write programs for new minimodels. The
easiest way is to load a somewhat similar minimodel program
and make changes.
   In any system there are storages such as wood, money, materi-
als, or water. Let’s start with a program of a simple model with
one storage called TANK, which was introduced in Figures 1.1
and 6.1. Instructions and explanations given in the TANK exam-
ple apply to most of the models in this book. More advanced
concepts are introduced with examples in Part III and program-
ming details in Appendix B. To aid the comparison of methods,
models simulated with BASIC in Chapter 9 (TANK, EXPO,
DRAIN, and PC&CYCLE) are the same ones used in the previous
chapters on model building, spreadsheets, and EXTEND, and in
the next chapter on STELLA.


             110
Running a Simulation Model with QUICKBASIC                                                          111


                                                                               䉬
                                                 9.1 RUNNING A SIMULATION MODEL
                                                         WITH QUICKBASIC

                                            To run a simulation program with QUICKBASIC, you should
                                         have on hand a computer with a monitor, a disk drive, access
                                         to a printer, and a graphics ‘‘screen dump’’ program, which
                                         instructs the printer to record the the output graphs on paper.
                                         Directions for putting in disks, loading programs and running
                                         simulations with QUICKBASIC, saving programs, and printing
                                         out graphs are given in Table 9.1. More details and notes on
                                         running models with other programs and computers are given
                                         in Appendix B.


                                                                    MODEL TANK

                                           Try the various operations in Table 9.1 for the simple model
                                         TANK. It is a storage with an inflow and an outflow (Figure

TABLE 9.1
Steps in Running a Simulation Program with QUICKBASICa

 1. With the computer on and running, load QBASIC.exe from PC windows files. Each of the words that
    appears across the top of the screen is a pulldown menu.
 2. Load the CD-ROM that comes with this book and locate the BASIC simulation programs in the file
    Basicprg.
 3. If QUICKBASIC for Macintosh is not available, Macintosh users can load Chipmunk Basic from the
    CD using it to do the book exercises. Follow instructions in Appendix B.
 4. Use the QBASIC file menu to load a simulation program and observe the program listing that
    appears on the screen.
 5. In the RUN menu, select the Run option and observe the plotted graph that appears on the screen.
 6. You can make changes and run the program again. To save the revised program, select Save As in
    the FILE menu. When the screen provides open dialog boxes, type a new name and select a folder on
    a floppy disk or hard disk as the destination for the new file.
 7. To print the program listing, select the Print option in the FILE menu.
 8. To save a simulation graph, use a screen-dump procedure to save the screen control to the clipboard.
    (For PCs using windows, use the Print Screen key; for Macintoshes, use Command-Shift-3).
 9. To print a simulation graph, load a program that can read graphics (SIMPLETEXT, CANVAS,
    COREL DRAW, WORD, etc.). Use the menus in that program to load the file with the saved graph.
    On Macintoshes the screen dumps are on the hard disk labeled ‘‘Picture 1,’’ ‘‘Picture 2,’’ etc. On
    Windows PCs the graphics are on the clipboard ready to be pasted into a drawing program. Use
    features of the drawing program to label and make changes.
10. Use the FILE menu of the drawing program to save the graph. Print the graph as a final illustration.
  a
      Details and notes for use with other programs are given in Appendix B.
112                                                                 Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC




FIGURE 9.1.
Model of growth of storage
with inflow and outflow
(program TANK.bas).
(a) Systems diagram, equations,
and calibration of the coefficient
K; (b) graph of growth to
steady state. Also see equations
in Figure 6.1 and hand
simulation in Figure 9.2.




                                     9.1a). As the water flows in and out, the total quantity of water
                                     in the basin will increase and then level off. It levels off when
                                     the amount of water inflow equals the amount of water outflow.
                                     Water continues to flow in and out, but the level stays the same.
                                     The graph in Figure 9.1b shows these changes. The change in
                                     time is graphed on the horizontal axis and the change in quantity
                                     of water on the vertical axis. As you can see, the line which
                                     represents quantity of water goes up steeply at first, and then more
                                     gradually, until it finally reaches a point at which it levels off.



                                                                      䉬
                                          9.2 SIMULATION WITH CALCULATIONS
                                                       BY HAND

                                        Simulation is a sequence of calculations, and the list of instruc-
                                     tions used to make the calculations is a program. First, let’s
                                     simulate the model TANK by hand using its rate equation:
                                     DQ ⫽ J ⫺ K*Q (Figure 9.1a). The instructions follow:
Simulation with Calculations by Hand                                                                  113


                                       1. First list the numbers to be used from Figure 9.1b: The rate
                                          of inflow J ⫽ 2, the starting storage quantity Q ⫽ 1, and the
                                          constant coefficient for the outflow K ⫽ 0.02.
                                       2. Make a simulation table with time T, the storage value Q,
                                          and the terms in the rate equation as headings of the columns
                                          (Figure 9.2). Each line in the table represents a time step.
                                       3. Enter the starting values in the first line: The source J ⫽ 2;
                                          time is 0, and storage Q is the inital value 1. After multiplying
                                          K ⫽ 0.02 times the inital storage 1, put the result (0.020) in
                                          the column K*Q.
                                       4. Now calculate what the change in Q will be during the
                                          next time interval: DQ ⫽ J ⫺ K*Q ⫽ 2 ⫺ (0.02)(1) ⫽ 2 ⫺
                                          0.020 ⫽ 1.98.
                                       5. On the next line put time as 1, and Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ from the
                                          first line Q ⫽ 1 ⫹ 1.98 ⫽ 2.98; enter the other numbers. The




FIGURE 9.2.
Hand simulation of the model
TANK (calculating and
graphing without computer).
Graph plots the points for Q
with time calculated in the
table.
114                                  Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


         change for the next time step is DQ ⫽ J ⫺ K*Q ⫽ 2 ⫺
         (0.02)(2.98) ⫽ 2 ⫺ 0.060 ⫽ 1.94.
      6. On the third line time is 2 and Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ ⫽ 2.98 ⫹
         1.94 ⫽ 4.92.
      7. Continue calculating down the table. Next, if you plot the
         series of Q’s on a graph with time, it should resemble Fig-
         ure 9.2.

         You can see how tedious hand simulation is. The computer
      can calculate and graph thousands of points in a second. The
      simulation using a spreadsheet in Chapter 8 let the computer
      calculate a simulation table.



                      ROUNDING-OFF ERRORS

         The calculations in Figure 9.2 are made to two or three decimal
      places. With these calculations, you will notice that it is necessary
      to round off figures, thus introducing a small error. However,
      the error can accumulate. When the computer does the calcula-
      tions, they may be accurate to 40 decimal places or more, but
      there is still a rounding-off error. However, for most minimodel
      simulations great precision is not required.




                                       䉬
         9.3 WRITING A BASIC PROGRAM FOR THE
                     TANK MODEL

         To write a program for the computer, you use the same instruc-
      tions used in the hand simulation, but you have to use a language
      of short words and phrases to which the computer will respond.
      In this chapter we use the words understood by BASIC programs
      such as QUICKBASIC and BASICA. You only need to learn two
      dozen BASIC commands to simulate most minimodels.
         A computer program is like a cookbook recipe with the quanti-
      ties listed and then the directions given. In BASIC each instruction
      statement is given a number. You usually start using 10, 20, 30,
      etc., so that you can later add statements between your original
      statements. When all the statements are written and you type
      RUN and press Return, the computer will start at the first number
Writing a BASIC Program for the TANK Model                                                           115


                                 and follow your directions in sequence. In QUICKBASIC the line
                                 numbers are optional.
                                    From a PC Windows file call up QBASIC, and in the FILE
                                 menu type NEW to get a blank screen ready for your program.
                                 Giving each a line number, type and learn the commands in
                                 Table 9.2 (PC) or Table 9.3 (Macintosh). Then use the RUN
                                 menu to start the program. If there are no errors, the same graph
                                 should appear that you observed when running the TANK file
                                 from the book disk. If something different results, search for bugs
                                 (errors in typing, items left out, wrong punctuation, erroneous
                                 thinking). Spaces are required between items in a line, but the
                                 amount of space is not critical. Use the instructions given in
                                 Table 9.1 to save and/or print this result of your first program.
                                 Compare it with Tables 1.1 and 9.1 or 9.2.


                                          EXAMPLES THAT FIT THE STORAGE
                                                  MODEL TANK

                                    An ecological example that fits the TANK model is the change
                                 in quantity of leaves on the forest floor when there is a steady
                                 leaf-fall and creatures decomposing them at a constant fraction of


TABLE 9.2
PC Program for TANK with Explanations

Program                       Explanations

10 REM IBM: TANK              REM means remark; does not affect the program
20 CLS                        Clears the screen
30 SCREEN 1,0:COLOR0,0        Sets medium-resolution graphics and color
40 LINE (0,0)-(320,180),1,B   Plots a border around the graph
50 J ⫽ 2                      Enters the quantity for J
60 Q ⫽ 1                      Enters the beginning quantity for Q
70 K ⫽ .02                    Enters the quantity for K
80 DT ⫽ 1                     Time step between recalculations
100 REM Start of Iteration    Start of recalculation loop
110 PSET (T,180 ⫺ Q),2        Tells the computer to plot a point for T and a point for Q (180 ⫺ Q is
                                 necessary to get a graph with the normal starting 0 point in the lower
                                 left corner)
120 DQ ⫽ J ⫺ K*Q              Equation for the change in Q over time
130 Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*DT             Equation for Q after the change
140 T ⫽ T ⫹ DT                Time is increased by one unit
150 IF T ⬍ 240 GOTO 100       If the graph is not at the end of the screen (240 points), it will run again
                                 starting at statement 100
116                                                              Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


TABLE 9.3
Macintosh Program for TANK with Explanations

Program                      Explanation

10 ‘TANK’ or REM TANK        Means remark; does not affect the program
20 CLS                       Clears the screen
40 LINE (0,0)-(280,240),,B   Draws a border around the graph
50 J ⫽ 2                     Enters the quantity for J
60 Q ⫽ 1                     Enters first quantity for Q
70 K ⫽ .02                   Enters the quantity for K
80 DT ⫽ 1                    Time step between recalculations
100 REM Start of Iteration   Start of recalculation loop
110 PSET (T,180 ⫺ Q)         Tells the computer to plot a point for T and a point for Q (180 ⫺ Q is
                                necessary to get a graph with the normal starting 0 point in the lower
                                left corner)
120 DQ ⫽ J ⫺ K*Q             Equation for change in Q over time
130 Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*DT            Equation for Q after change
140 T ⫽ T ⫹ DT               Time is increased by one unit
150 IF T ⬍ 240 GOTO 100      If the graph is not at the end of the screen (240 points), it will run again
                                starting at statement 100




                                what is stored per unit time. An economic example of the TANK
                                model is a bank account that receives a steady income and has
                                expenditures in proportion to the money in the account (program
                                CASH.bas, Figure 9.3 and Table 9.4). In this case money is
                                inflowing as income. The tendency for more money to cause
                                higher spending might be called a ‘‘first law of economics.’’
                                Spending with time is set to be a proportion of the stored money.
                                Because work is required by those processing the money, heat
                                sinks are shown dispersing energy, but the quantities in the
                                program are money.
                                   Simulation models are like controlled experiments, holding
                                everything the same while you change one variable to see the
                                effect. After running a program, you can change one thing in
                                the program to see what would happen. For each program
                                we suggest some ‘‘What If ’’ experiments. No doubt you have
                                others to consider. Sometimes you systematically test the effects
                                of all the sources and other factors in a model, one at a
                                time, to see what responds more or less. This is called a
                                sensitivity analysis.
Iteration Time                                                 117




FIGURE 9.3.
Model of growth of storage of
money (program CASH.bas).
(a) Systems diagram and
equations; (b) typical simulation
of growth in cash money to
steady state.




                                    TABLE 9.4
                                    Program of Money Storage
                                    (CASH.bas) (Figure 9.3)
118                                  Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC



                                       䉬
                         9.4 ITERATION TIME

          At the bottom of the program there is a loop with the calcula-
      tions of time and quantity and plotting of points repeated over
      and over (statements 100–150 in Table 9.4). DT is the iteration
      time interval, the time step, the time represented by each passage
      around the loop. The way values are added in successive steps
      is illustrated in Figure 6.2.
          DT is part of the statement that advances the time:

        140 T ⫽ T ⫹ DT            New time equals old time plus the
                                  time interval for iteration.

      DT, the interval, is multiplied by the change rate (DQ) for
      each interval

      130 Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*DT                New quantity equals the old
                                       quantity plus the change for the
                                       time interval.

      DT was put in the scaling factor section of the program so that
      it can be easily changed.

         83 DT ⫽ 1          Start with 1, but adjust after testing for
                            accuracy.

      By making DT smaller than 1, the program goes through the
      loop more often for the same passage of time. More points are
      plotted. The simulation mathematics is more accurate, but it
      takes longer for the run to cover the same time. If you make DT
      large, the simulation is fast but the graph it generates may be in
      error. You can find out if it is erroneous by setting DT smaller
      and running again. The large value is OK if the smaller runs with
      the smaller value are identical. Varying DT does not change the
      time scale (amount of time represented by the horizontal axis).
      Time span and scale represented on the horizontal axis of the
      plot are controlled by T0 (T zero).
         When the DT is too large, the flow into a storage in one iteration
      may be so large that the storage jumps up much higher than its true
      value; then on the next iteration, with high value the outflows are
Iteration Time                                                                  119


                 too large and the storage may discharge too much and go to low
                 values, even zero or minus values. This erroneous jumping back
                 and forth is called artificial chaos and shows up on the screen as
                 scattered points or vertical solid lines, often stopping the program
                 and causing overload statements to appear.


                                                 䉬
                 9.5 FACTORS FOR KEEPING GRAPHS ON SCALE

                     The simulation graph in Figure 9.1, using the TANK program
                 in Table 1.1, had values that were within the scale of the y and
                 x axis of the graph. However, a different set of initial conditions
                 and coefficients might have caused the graph to go off scale (too
                 large) or be so small that its plots are not distinuishable from
                 the zero line. Plots that go way off scale may stop the program
                 with an error message. Thus, a good general procedure to practice
                 is to include scaling factors on the plot statements so that it is
                 easy to increase or decrease the amplitude of the quantity being
                 plotted. In Table 9.5, for example, Q0 is included in line 90
                 and 110:

                                    90 Q0 ⫽ 1
                                   110 PSET (T, 180-Q/Q0), 3



                 TABLE 9.5
                 Program for a Stored Quantity (TANK2.bas) (Figure 9.1)
120                                  Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


      The scale of Q is increased or decreased by changing Q0.
        If one of the quantities on the graph goes off scale, a statement
      can be put in to limit it:

                 115 IFQ/Q0 ⬎ 180 THEN Q/Q0 ⫽ 180

      Time on the horizontal axis is scaled by putting T0 (0 is a zero)
      in the plot statements. T0 also has to be included in the last
      statement that sends the calculation back around the loop so
      that the simulation will stop at the end of the space in the frame.
      In Table 9.5, for example:

                      86 T0 ⫽ 1
                     110 PSET (T/T0, 180 ⫺ Q/Q0),3
                     150 IF T/T0 ⬍ 320 GOTO 100

         Scaling factors (Q0, T0, etc.) may be used as divisors as in
      the TANK2.bas program in Table 9.5, or they may be used as
      multipliers. If scaling factors are used as multipliers, these lines
      are revised as follows:

                115 IF Q*Q0 ⬎ 180 THEN Q*Q0 ⫽ 180
                110 PSET (T*T0, 180 ⫺ Q*Q0),3
                150 IF T*T0 ⬍ 320 GOTO 100l

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the TANK2.bas
      Program in Table 9.5

      9.5–1 What would the simulation graph look like if you started
            with 100 liters of water instead of 1 liter? First, make an
            educated guess (an hypothesis). Then change Q to 100
            by typing: 60 Q ⫽ 100. The computer will substitute this
            new statement 60 for the original. Type RUN and press
            Return; the new simulation graph will appear. Was your
            hypothesis right? To make another change you need to
            return the program to the original by retyping statement
            60: 60 Q ⫽ 1.
      9.5–2 What would happen if you cut off the water inflow after
            96 hours? What statement would you add that tells the
            computer to change J when the time is 96 hours? Type:

                       115 IF T ⫽ 96 THEN J ⫽ 0
Program Format and Use of Remarks in Programs                                                  121


                                  9.5–3 For another experiment study the effect of the constant
                                        outflow fraction per time. What if leaves on the forest
                                        floor were exposed to higher temperatures, causing faster
                                        decomposition? Change K to 0.1. Predict the effect of a
                                        faster outflow rate.



                                                                 䉬
                                  9.6 PROGRAM FORMAT AND USE OF REMARKS
                                               IN PROGRAMS

                                     Although each program has been chosen because it illustrates
                                  a new concept or different system, the sequence of lines in all
                                  the programs in this book is similar to that in the TANK program.

                                  Before the Iteration (Repeating Calculations):

                                  Remark with name of program and whether PC or Macintosh
                                  Statement to clear the screen
                                  Scaling factors and iteration interval
                                  List of constant coefficients
                                  Values of sources
                                  Starting values (initial conditions)

                                  Start of Iteration:

                                  Graphic plot statements
                                  Ordinary equations
                                  Change rate equations
                                  Calculation of new values for storages (state variables)
                                  Limit statements
                                  Statement returning the program to the start of iteration
                                  Program stops when there are no statements left

                                     The last four categories of items entered before the iteration
                                  may be in any order. Within the iteration, statements that use
                                  other values must follow the lines where those values were put
                                  into memory. To be correct, all of the change equations (example:
                                  DQ) have to precede the calculations of new state variables (ex-
                                  ample: Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ).
                                     The program will stop if a denominator (X) of a quotient
122                                 Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


      becomes zero. This can be avoided by including a statement
      preventing the value from being zero.

                     If X ⫽ 0 THEN X ⫽ 0.00000001

         In BASIC, anything in a program line that follows REM is
      ignored by the program as a remark. Normally programmers
      put extensive remarks on each line so that later people can see
      what that line does and why. However, for simple minimodels
      that have the same structure, the remarks can distract the user
      from visualizing the system’s structure and function in overview.
      In this book some remarks are used, but not for the regular
      features common to all the listings.
         Some programmers avoid using the GOTO commmand in
      large, complex programs lest it cause tortuous pathways that are
      hard to follow or become confused when iterations involve nested
      loops within loops. Instead, the FOR and NEXT commands are
      suggested. However, GOTO is more easily understood with the
      simple, standard structure of programs in this book.
         Whereas most of the statements of our programs will fit most
      versions of BASIC, the plotting statements that make the com-
      puter draw a graph of the results are different.



                                     䉬
         9.7 SIMULATING EXPONENTIAL GROWTH
                 WITH PROGRAM EXPO

          A model of autocatalytic growth on constantly available en-
      ergy, EXPO, was introduced in Figure 2.13 and is shown with
      its equations for growth in Figure 9.4a. For example, a population
      of mice that has all the food it needs will increase faster and
      faster because the more individuals, the more reproduction, the
      more food consumed, and the more growth of the whole popu-
      lation.



                 EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

        In the equations of Figure 9.4, E is the source that stays at a
      constant concentration no matter how much is used from it; Q
Simulating Exponential Growth with Program EXPO                                                  123




FIGURE 9.4.
Model of exponential growth on
a constant available energy
source (program EXPO.bas)
including equations. (a) Systems
diagram; (b) equations in other
forms; (c) typical simulation
graph.



                                   is the quantity of animals using source E. The increase in quantity
                                   of mice per time K1*E*Q is proportional to the source E and the
                                   population Q. The interaction symbol shows that the mice are
                                   eating the food to produce more mice. The term K1 is a combina-
                                   tion of two coefficients, K2 and K3. The increase in quantity of
                                   mice depends on their growth and reproduction (K2*E*Q) minus
                                   the effort they expend in getting their food and water (K3*E*Q).
                                   The net growth is K1*E*Q (K1 ⫽ K2 ⫺ K3); K4 is the death rate
                                   coefficient, the proportion of Q which dies; and K4*Q is the
                                   number of mice that die each week, the death rate.
                                       To understand the process, divide both sides of the rate of
                                   change equation (dQ/dt) (Figure 9.4b) by Q to get the growth
124                                 Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


      rate per individual [dQ/(Q*dt)]. Combining terms when E is
      constant shows the growth rate per individual to be a constant
      K. Exponential growth has a constant percent increase in each
      time period.
         Integrating both sides of the equation produces a logarithmic
      equation, which says that the log of the population is a constant
      function of the time. In other words, the semi-log graph (log Q/
      Q0 versus T) is a rising straight line.
         If the logarithm of population (an exponent) is KT, then the
      population Q relative to that at the start, Q0, is the number ‘‘e’’
      with the exponent KT. Thus, the growth is exponential. Graphing
      the exponential equation generates Figure 9.4c, which is also
      produced by simulating the change equation. Running the BASIC
      program EXPO.bas listed in Table 9.6 plots the graph in Figure
      9.4c. The change in quantity of mice over time DQ is the increase
      (K1*E*Q) minus the decrease (K4*Q): DQ ⫽ K1*E*Q ⫺ K4*Q.
      The quantity of mice Q after a week is the number at the start
      plus the change: Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*DT.


             EXAMPLES Of EXPONENTIAL MODELS

        During the early states of population growth, when the de-
      mand for food is small compared to the amount available, almost

      TABLE 9.6
      Program of Exponential Growth
      (EXPO.bas) (Figure 9.4)
Simulating Dispersal from Storage with Model DRAIN                                              125


                                  any population of microbes, plants, or animals can grow expo-
                                  nentially. Because an unlimited food supply is not possible in-
                                  definitely, eventually the population of mice would stop growing
                                  so fast. Then we would have to use a different model to fit the
                                  new situation of a limited food supply.
                                     Industries, like oil and mining, have grown exponentially when
                                  new oil fields and sources of gold were found. The economy of
                                  the United States, from the early 1800s to the mid-1900s was
                                  growing exponentially using the great abundance of natural re-
                                  sources and newly discovered fossil fuels.


                                        GROWTH WITH QUADRATIC FEEDBACK

                                     If the autocatalytic growth is proportional to the square of
                                  the storage Q2, the quadratic growth rate is less at first but
                                  accelerates to grow faster than the simpler EXPO model. You
                                  can test this by changing the equation line in Table 9.6 to read:
                                  105 DQ ⫽ K1*E*Q*Q ⫺ K4*Q. Over much of its history the
                                  growth of the United States economy was quadratic, faster than
                                  exponential. This means that growth was accelerated by self-
                                  interactions. In other words, growth processes were cooperative.

                                  ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the EXPO.bas
                                  Program in Table 9.6

                                  9.7–1 Predict what will happen to the growth of the mice popula-
                                        tion if you double the concentration of food. Retype line
                                        60 as E ⫽ 2. Then press Return and type RUN. Next cut
                                        the concentration of food (E) in half (as if each food pellet
                                        has half the nutrition). What happens to the mouse popu-
                                        lation?
                                  9.7–2 What will the graph of Q look like for another kind of
                                        mice that eats more efficiently, increasing its growth rate
                                        per individual? Type 70 K1 ⫽ 0.08. Change statement
                                        70 again, making K1 less than the original 0.07. What
                                        does that graph look like?
                                  9.7–3 What would happen to the growth of the mice population
                                        if the mice caught a virus, increasing the death rate? To
                                        test your hypothesis, would you increase or decrease K4?
                                        Show what happens to the growth of the population.
                                  9.7–4 If E is 1 and you make K1 equal to K4, what will happen
                                        to the population? Try it.
126                                                           Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC



                                                                䉬
                                 9.8 SIMULATING DISPERSAL FROM STORAGE
                                           WITH MODEL DRAIN

                                   Figure 9.5 (and Figure 6.7) shows a storage with only one
                                pathway, an outflow. The dispersal model and its BASIC program
                                in Table 9.7 are useful for showing the mathematics of exponen-
                                tial decline. This model is a version of storage like TANK but
                                without inflow. When the run starts, the storage drains rapidly
                                and then more slowly because a constant fraction K of what is
                                remaining of Q flows out in each unit of time. The mathematics
                                in Figure 6.7 is like that for exponential growth except with a
                                minus sign. The result (Figure 9.5b) is a declining exponential.


                                         EXAMPLES OF THE DRAIN MODEL

                                    Water draining from a tank with an outlet or a lake with a
                                stream flowing out are examples of this model. Another example
                                is the decay of radioactivity of elements like uranium. The same
                                proportion of what remains decays in each time period. If half
                                is lost in one period of time, then half of what remains is lost in
                                the next, and half of that in the third period, and so on. We




FIGURE 9.5.
Model of a storage with one
outflow pathway proportional
to the storage remaining
(program DRAIN.bas). See
Figure 6.7 for equations
explaining exponential decay.
(a) Systems diagram and
change equation; (b) typical
simulation graph.
Simulating Dispersal from Storage with Model DRAIN                                                127


                                  TABLE 9.7
                                  Program of Draining Tank
                                  (DRAIN.bas) (Figure 9.5)




                                  describe decay systems by their half-lives, the time to lose half.
                                  Uranium 238 has a half-life of 4 billion years. That means that
                                  in 2 billion years half of a sample has decayed to lead. In the
                                  next 2 billion years only half of that will decay.
                                     Spending money at a rate dependent on the money left is an
                                  economic example. You are given a bank account from which
                                  you spend a certain percent every month. Your account goes
                                  down exponentially.
                                     Decomposition of a pile of leaves by microbes often fits this
                                  model. Another example is the survival curve of those popula-
                                  tions of organisms in which deaths are proportional to the num-
                                  ber of individuals remaining. The survival curve is the fraction
                                  of those born at the same time that are still living at a later time.
                                     In pollution studies, a rough but widely used method of mea-
                                  suring organic matter in waters is the measurement of BOD
                                  (biochemical oxygen demand). When water is put into a bottle
                                  and then kept in the dark, decomposition (respiration) occurs in
                                  proportion to the amount of organic matter available. The oxy-
                                  gen remaining after 5 days is used as a comparative measure of
                                  the organic matter originally present. The change in oxygen in
                                  the bottle often follows this graph.

                                  ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the DRAIN.bas
                                  Program in Table 9.7
                                  9.8–1 If you started with a larger pile of leaves in the forest,
                                        but used the same rate of decomposition, would the pile
128                                 Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


            be gone sooner, at the same time, or later? Change Q to
            160 and run both graphs.
      9.8–2 Double the rate of your spending of your bank account
            (change K to 0.02). How long does your money last?



                                      䉬
               9.9 SIMULATING PRODUCTION,
             CONSUMPTION, AND RECYCLE WITH
                     MODEL PC&CYCLE

         A model with the essence of production, consumption, and
      recycle of materials was simulated with EXTEND in Chapter 5
      (Figure 5.2). It is simulated again here using BASIC. Using num-
      bers for flow and storage on the energy systems diagram (Figure
      7.4a) and procedures from Chapter 7, coefficients were calculated
      in Figure 7.4b. With the equations in Figure 9.6a a BASIC pro-
      gram was written (Table 9.8). A simulation run with this program
      started with low initial values for the two storages, showing the
      pattern of growth, which takes some years for organic and nutri-
      ent storages to reach steady state (Figure 9.6c).
         We verbalize the energy systems diagram (Figure 9.6a) as
      follows. Nutrients flow into and out of the soil. Production by
      plants uses the energy source of the sun, rain, and the soil nutri-
      ents to make organics in plant and soil biomass. Consumers
      including animals and microbes use the organics and release
      nutrients to the environmental storage again. Included in the
      lower pathway is depreciation of the organic matter by chemical
      and physical processes— the degradation described by the second
      law of thermodynamics.



                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         Available energy R is the remaining difference between the
      inflow J and that drawn into plant production K0*R*N. Nutrients
      flow into the system Jn and flow out K7*N in proportion to
      nutrient storage N. Production K1*R*N is proportional to avail-
      able nutrients N and available energy R. Organics storage Q is
      a balance between production and losses by the animal–microbe
      consumption pathway K2*Q and a pathway of depreciation and
Simulating Production, Consumption, and Recycle with Model PC&CYCLE                           129




FIGURE 9.6.
Model of production,
consumption, and recycle
typical of ecosystems (program
PC&CYCLE.bas). (a) Systems
diagram with equations and
math terms on the pathways;
(b) diagram with values of
flows and storage used for
calibration; (c) typical
simulation result. See
simulation with other methods
in Figures 5.2 and 10.10.




                                 other losses K3*Q, both in proportion to the storage Q. Nutrients
                                 are released back to the soil by the pathway, K4*Q and K5*Q.




                                                 EXAMPLES OF PC&CYCLE

                                    Examples of this model are ecosystems on land such as deserts
                                 or grassland, and in water such as a pond or the ocean. Because
                                 there is no outflow from the system, it would have to be changed
                                 to use it for a farm or other yield system.
130                                  Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


      TABLE 9.8
      Program of Production, Consumption, and Recycle
      (PC&CYCLE.bas) (Figure 9.6)




      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems Using Program
      PC&CYCLE.bas in Table 9.8
      9.9–1 What would happen to the growth of organics and nutri-
            ents in the soil if there were more consumers? Make a
            prediction and then increase K3 to 0.25 and run the pro-
            gram. Explain the results.
      9.9–2 If there were less sunlight and rain (energy resource), how
            would it affect the system? Change J to 50 and run the
            program. Explain.
      9.9–3 If the soil started richer in nutrients, how would that affect
            the growth? Change N to 100. Predict the results. Explain
            why the nutrients’ line leveled off at the same place as in
            the original graph.
Simulating Production, Consumption, and Recycle with Model PC&CYCLE                               131


                                 TABLE 9.9
                                 Location of Useful Modeling and Programming Mechanisms

                                  Item                                      Model         Location

                                  Entering tabular data with READ,          WETLAND       Table 16.1
                                    DATA
                                  Modeling effect of temperature            MUSMOD        Figure 21.3a
                                  Plotting with expressions to get a        SPECAREA      Table 16.4
                                    straight line
                                  Integrating to derive equations for       EXPO          Figure 9.4
                                    graphs                                  DRAIN         Figure 6.8
                                  Steady state by setting change to equal   INTLIMIT      Table 12.3
                                    zero
                                  Conservation of recycling materials       AUTOCYCL      Table 12.6
                                    (nutrients)
                                  Conservation of recycling land area       ROTATION      Table 18.4
                                                                            RESERVE       Table 17.6
                                  Conservation of recycling money           ECONP&C       Table 17.4
                                  Values per area and per volume            LAGOONII      Figure 21.2a
                                    together
                                  Representing calibration on isolated      LAGOONII      Figure 21.2c
                                    units
                                  Generating a family of curves with        LOGISTIC      Table 13.5
                                    time
                                  Generating a family of curves relating    RESERVE       Table 17.6
                                    variables
                                  Plotting the steady-state values          SPECAREA      Table 16.4
                                  Plotting rates and net changes            CLIMAX        Table 16.2
                                  Plotting both with time and other         CHAOS         Table 15.6
                                    variables                               PREYPRED      Table 15.1
                                  Change of inputs after a time             DESTRUCT      Table 15.5
                                  Plotting lines between plotted points     FIRE          Table 15.3
                                                                            NETPROD       Table 12.1
                                  Use of sine wave to represent day-        DAYP&C        Table 12.4
                                     night inputs
                                  Turning on pathways by changing           TRADE         Table 19.1
                                     Z ⫽ 0 to Z ⫽ 1
                                  Setting upper limit to curves going off   EXPO          Table 14.2
                                     scale
                                  Plotting production rates                 FACTORS       Table 12.2
                                  ‘‘Force’’ proportional to purchases       TANKSALE Table 17.2
                                  Representing light with ‘‘flow            Most models in Pt III
                                     remainder’’
                                  Scarce materials with ‘‘flow              EARTHGEO      Table 20.3
                                     remainder’’
                                  One model driving another                 STATECON      Table 20.4
132                                 Chapter Nine Programming in BASIC


      9.9–4 If you increase or decrease the inflow of nutrients, how
            will this change the system? Change Jn to 1 and run the
            program; then change it to 20 and make another run.
            What do these graphs tell you about the effect of nutrients?
            What is the limiting factor in this system?



                                     䉬
                 9.10 USEFUL MODELING AND
                 PROGRAMMING MECHANISMS

         Whereas this chapter concentrates on the essential BASIC com-
      mands for programming energy systems minimodels, the exam-
      ples in Parts III and IV show other techniques and algorithms.
      Table 9.9 lists where some of these special methods are used.


              CHIPMUNK BASIC FOR MACINTOSH

         Since the older QUICKBASIC for Macintosh could not be
      included on the book disk, a similar freeware program Chipmunk
      BASIC for Macintosh developed by Ronald H. Nicholson was
      included on the CD-ROM along with manuals and tutorials.
      This form of BASIC is similar to BASICA and QUICKBASIC
      except for slight differences in statements for graphics and plot-
      ting as explained in Appendix B. Appropriate substitutions of
      graphics lines were made in many of this book’s BASIC programs
      and included in the book disk so that Macintosh users can do
      the exercises in this book with Chipmunk BASIC.
              Chapter Ten
                            䉬

  SIMULATING WITH
       STELLA
          Jay F. Martin* and David R. Tilley**

      *Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences,
      Louisiana State University, Coastal Ecology Institute,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803 and **Environmental Engineering
    Sciences and Center for Wetlands, University of Florida,
                   Gainesville, Florida 32611




  10.1 Simulating the TANK Model Using STELLA
           Construction of TANK Model
           Calibration of TANK Model
           Running Simulation and Graphing Output
  10.2 Simulating the EXPO Model Using STELLA
  10.3 Production–Consumption–Recycle
       Model (PC&CYCLE)
  10.4 Comparison of Systems Languages
           Exercises




                            133
A       nother tool for modeling dynamic systems with minimal
mathematical sophistication and little programming knowledge
is the iconographic modeling software STELLA. By not requiring
the user to develop computer programming code this software
allows more time for analyzing model behavior. This chapter
shows how to convert models from the energy systems language
into STELLA models by creating, calibrating, simulating, graph-
ing, and playing ‘‘What If ’’ with three minimodels: a single stor-
age model, TANK; an exponential growth model, EXPO; and a
production, consumption and recycle model, PC&CYCLE. Each
minimodel is diagrammed with energy systems language symbols
and STELLA icons, and PC&CYCLE is also diagrammed with
Forrester symbols, in order to compare the three systems lan-
guages. Figure 10.1 shows the equivalency of each language’s
symbols. The icons and modeling language of STELLA are based
on the system dynamic modeling methodology developed by Jay
Forrester (1961). The programming language DYNAMO was
introduced at that time also. DeWit and Goudriaan (1978) pro-
vided an introduction to simulation using DYNAMO.
    To create a simulation model in STELLA, symbol icons repre-
senting storages, flows, and system variables are pulled down from
the toolbar menu and placed on a worksheet. The symbols are
connected and mathematical equations written to relate the model
components. The four basic STELLA icons are displayed and la-
beled in Figure 10.2. The explanation in this chapter is applicable
to both the Windows PC and Macintosh versions of STELLA II.


                                  䉬
       10.1 SIMULATING THE TANK MODEL
                 USING STELLA

  The simulation of a single storage with one inflow and one
outflow is well suited for introducing the STELLA modeling

  STELLA is available from High Performance Systems, Inc., 45 Lyme Rd.,
Hanover, NH 03755.



              134
Simulating the TANK Model Using STELLA                                                         135




FIGURE 10.1.
Comparison of representations of basic modeling concepts using energy systems language, Forrester
symbols, and STELLA icons.




FIGURE 10.2.
The four basic icons used in
STELLA.
136                                                       Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA


                              software. The TANK model could represent the flow of water
                              entering and leaving a kitchen sink, deposits and withdrawals
                              from a bank account, or refrigerators entering and leaving a
                              warehouse. A step-by-step example of how to create such a model
                              using STELLA software follows. For comparison, the model is
                              presented using the energy systems language and the STELLA
                              icons (Figure 10.3).

                                      CONSTRUCTION OF TANK MODEL

                                1. After entering Windows, double click on the STELLA icon.
                              This opens the STELLA program group, where the STELLA icon
                              should be double clicked again.




FIGURE 10.3.
Diagrams of TANK model
using (a) energy systems
language, (b) STELLA icons,
and (c) output graph.
Simulating the TANK Model Using STELLA                                                        137


                                    2. The software will open into the Model Construction Layer.
                                If using a version of STELLA earlier than 5.0, the Mapping Layer
                                should be switched to the Model Construction Layer by clicking
                                once on the navigation arrow (Figure 10.2) on the left of the
                                screen.
                                    3. In the Model Construction Layer, use the hand icon to
                                select a storage icon from the toolbar and place it onto the
                                worksheet. This is accomplished by moving the hand to the
                                rectangular storage icon in the toolbar, clicking once, positioning
                                the storage on the worksheet, and clicking again to deposit
                                the icon. The storage will be shaded with the highlighted text
                                NONAME I appearing above. With the storage symbol high-
                                lighted, rename it Q QUANTITY by typing from the keyboard.
                                Press Enter.
                                    4. To add the J INFLOW pathway to the worksheet use the
                                hand icon to select the flow icon from the toolbar by clicking
                                on it once. Place the flow icon on the worksheet by moving the
                                mouse slightly to the left of Q QUANTITY, press the mouse
                                button down and hold it while dragging the flow icon to the
                                right until Q QUANTITY becomes shaded. Release the mouse
                                button to establish the connection between J INFLOW and Q
                                QUANTITY. The flow icon will be shaded with the highlighted
                                text NONAME I appearing below. With the flow icon symbol
                                highlighted, rename it J INFLOW by typing from the keyboard.
                                Press Enter.
                                    5. To add the outflow loss pathway to the model, obtain
                                another flow icon from the toolbar by clicking on it once with
                                the hand icon. Place the flow icon on the worksheet by moving
                                the mouse over Q QUANTITY and press the mouse button down
                                and hold it while dragging the flow icon to the right. Release the
                                mouse button when the flow icon is sufficiently long (refer to
                                Figure 10.3b). Rename this flow icon from NONAME I to OUT-
                                FLOW LOSS following the method described in step 4.
                                    Note: When a mistake is made placing an icon onto the work-
                                sheet, it may be deleted using the dynamite icon (Figure 10.2).
                                After obtaining the dynamite from the toolbar, position it above
                                the icon to be deleted and click once.
                                    6. The coefficient regulating the OUTFLOW LOSS from Q
                                QUANTITY should now be added to the model. After clicking
                                once on the circle icon from the toolbar, move the mouse below
                                the VALVE ON OUTFLOW LOSS and click once to position
                                it. Rename this circle icon from NONAME I to K1 following
                                the method described in step 4.
138                                                            Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA


                                      7. Information about Q QUANTITY and K1 are required at
                                   the OUTFLOW LOSS VALVE for controlling the flow rate from
                                   Q QUANTITY. The red arrow connector icon, symbolizing in-
                                   formation flow, is used to do this. Select a red arrow connector
                                   icon from the toolbar by clicking once on it with the hand.
                                   Position the red arrow connector icon over Q QUANTITY, de-
                                   press the mouse button and drag the arrow icon to the OUT-
                                   FLOW LOSS VALVE, releasing the mouse button when OUT-
                                   FLOW LOSS becomes shaded.
                                      8. The outflow coefficient, K1, and OUTFLOW LOSS
                                   VALVE must also be connected with a red arrow connector icon.
                                   Select a red arrow connector icon from the toolbar by clicking
                                   once on it with the hand. Position the red arrow connector icon
                                   over the K1, depress the mouse button and drag the arrow icon
                                   to the OUTFLOW LOSS VALVE, releasing the mouse button
                                   when OUTFLOW LOSS becomes shaded.



                                             CALIBRATION OF TANK MODEL

                                   1. Click on the global icon located on the left of the screen to
                                      switch from the Mapping Mode to the Modeling Mode, which
                                      is represented by X2. Question marks will now appear in the
                                      model where calibration information is needed.
                                   2. Double click on Q QUANTITY to bring up the dialog box
                                      shown in Figure 10.4. Enter the initial value of 1.0 in the




FIGURE 10.4.
Dialog box used to enter initial
value for storage in the TANK
model.
Simulating the TANK Model Using STELLA                                                           139


                                      highlighted Initial Value box at the bottom of the dialog box.
                                      This can be entered from the keyboard, or using the mouse
                                      and digit pad in the dialog box. Click OK to return to the
                                      model. The question mark should have disappeared from Q
                                      QUANTITY.
                                   3. To calibrate the inflow pathway, double click on J INFLOW
                                      to reveal a Flow dialog box (Figure 10.5). In the box located
                                      below the text labeled Inflow J ⫽ . . . enter 4.0. Click OK.
                                      This means that 4.0 units will enter Q QUANTITY for each
                                      time step.
                                   4. To set the value of K1, double click on it to open a dialog
                                      box. Enter a value of 0.05. This is the proportion to Q
                                      QUANTITY that flows out each time step.
                                   5. To add the equation which controls the outflow loss pathway,
                                      double click on the OUTFLOW LOSS VALVE to open the
                                      dialog box displayed in Figure 10.6. The model components
                                      (K1 and Q QUANTITY), which determine the outflow loss
                                      via the red arrow connectors, are listed in the Required Inputs
                                      box. With the mouse, select the outflow coefficient K1 to
                                      make it appear in the bottom box. Follow this by clicking on
                                      the multiplication symbol (*) on the number keypad, and
                                      Q QUANTITY in the Required Inputs box to establish
                                      the equation OUTFLOW LOSS ⫽ K1*Q QUANTITY.
                                      Click OK.
                                   6. The model is now calibrated and ready to run but should be
                                      saved first. From the menu bar select FILE and then the Save
                                      As . . . option to save the model as TANK.stm. Click OK.




FIGURE 10.5.
Dialog box used to calibrate the
inflow in the TANK model.
140                                                        Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA




FIGURE 10.6.
Dialog box used to calibrate
outflow in the TANK model.



                                           RUNNING SIMULATION AND
                                              GRAPHING OUTPUT

                               1. The graph icon (Figure 10.2) must be added to the model
                                  worksheet in order to plot the simulation output. Click once
                                  on the graph icon from the toolbar. Position the mouse hand
                                  anywhere on the worksheet and click the mouse button once
                                  again to add the graph icon. A blank graph will appear when
                                  the icon is released.
                               2. To open the graphics dialog box (Figure 10.7), double click
                                  anywhere on the blank graph. In the Allowable box double




FIGURE 10.7.
Graphics dialog box.
Simulating the TANK Model Using STELLA                                                           141


                                      click on Q QUANTITY. This places Q QUANTITY in the
                                      Selected box, allowing the model to plot its value as a function
                                      of time for the simulation run. Click OK. Close the graph
                                      screen by clicking on the Control Menu button located in the
                                      upper left corner of the screen.
                                   3. Before running the simulation you must first set the RUN
                                      specifications. From the menu bar select RUN and then Time
                                      Specs . . . to open a dialog box (Figure 10.8). The length of
                                      the simulation should be changed from the default value of
                                      12 time steps to 100. Do this by entering 100 in the To: box.
                                      Click OK to return to the model.
                                   4. To run a simulation, select RUN RUN from the menu bar.
                                   5. View the graphical output (Figure 10.3c) by double clicking on
                                      the graph icon in the worksheet. To view the graph during the
                                      simulation, open the graph screen before running the model.
                                   6. If you need to view the code for this model, click on the
                                      downward navigator arrow (triangle located to the left of
                                      the worksheet).

                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Experiments

                                     We will show how to change the characteristics of the TANK
                                   model so that ‘‘What If ’’ questions can be explored.

                                   10.1–1. What happens if the model is started with a higher
                                           amount in storage? If this TANK represented a sink,




FIGURE 10.8.
Dialog box to set simulation run
specifications.
142                                 Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA


              imagine starting with 100 liters of water instead of 1
              liter. Change the initial value of Q QUANTITY by dou-
              ble clicking on it and replacing 1.0 with 100.0. Click
              OK. Run the model by selecting RUN RUN from the
              menu bar. Double click on the graph icon to reveal the
              results (note the change in the scale of the vertical axis).
              After completing this experiment return Q QUANTITY
              to 1.0.
      10.1–2. What happens if the outflow coefficient K1 is doubled?
              Using the sink analogy again, imagine doubling the size
              of the drain pipe. Double click on K1 and change the
              value from 0.05 to 0.10, then run the model and view
              the results.



                                      䉬
             10.2 SIMULATING THE EXPO MODEL
                       USING STELLA

         This section demonstrates how to change the TANK model
      to EXPO, a model of exponential growth. It is assumed that
      the TANK model was created, calibrated, and simulated in the
      previous section. The following is a list of the steps necessary
      for converting the TANK model to the EXPO model. The EXPO
      model is diagrammed with the energy systems language and
      STELLA icons in Figure 10.9 (refer to energy systems representa-
      tion of this model (Chapter 9.7)). The EXPO model has as its
      main differences with the TANK model a force source rather
      than a flow, and an autocatalytic feedback (pathway from Q
      QUANTITY to interaction symbol).

         1. Open STELLA by double clicking on its icon. Once
      STELLA is open it is necessary to first close the model file that
      opens when STELLA does. Do this by selection FILE and then
      Close Model from the menu bar. Open the TANK model by
      selecting from the FILE menu Open, highlighting TANK.stm in
      File Name box, and clicking OK. Make sure you are in the
      Modeling Mode of STELLA (the X2 symbol should be showing
      on the left of the screen).
         2. Double click on the text K1 below the outflow pathway.
      Rename this coefficient K4. This will allow the use of K4 for an
      outflow coefficient in the EXPO model.
Simulating the EXPO Model Using STELLA                                                       143




FIGURE 10.9.
Diagrams of EXPO model using
(a) energy systems language,
(b) STELLA icons, and
(c) output graph.




                                   3. Double click on the Q QUANTITY storage icon and enter
                                a new initial value of 10.
                                   4. To change J INFLOW from a constant flow source to a
                                flow using a constant force source and to add an autocatalytic
                                feedback pathway it is necessary to add two more variables (Force
                                E and K1) and three connector pathways. To add the constant
                                force source Force E, add a circle icon from the toolbar to the
                                worksheet, placing it above and slightly to the left of J-Inflow.
                                Name this variable Force E once it is placed on the worksheet.
144                                 Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA


         5. Add another variable K1 following the same steps (refer
      to Figure 10.9b for placement).
         6. These added variables must now be connected to the J
      Inflow1 valve. Select the red arrow connector from the icon bar.
      Hold mouse over K1. Click and drag the arrow connector to the
      J Inflow valve until it becomes shaded, and release mouse button.
      Repeat for Force E.
         7. A red arrow connector must also be drawn from Q
      QUANTITY to the J Inflow1 valve. Refer to Step 6 for instruc-
      tions.
         8. There should now be a ‘‘?’’ in K1, Force E, and the J Inflow1
      valve indicating that calibration information is needed. Double
      click on K1 to open the dialog box so that the initial value 0.07
      can be set. Double click on Force E to set its value to 1.0. Double
      click on J Inflow to open its dialog box. In the highlighted box
      enter FORCE E*K1*Q QUANTITY to set the inflow equation.
      This should be done by clicking on these terms in the Required
      Inputs box. The TANK model is now converted to the EXPO
      model and is ready to run.
         9. Run the simulation by selecting RUN RUN from the menu
      bar. (The output should resemble Figure 10.9c.)


      ‘‘What If ’’ Experiments and Sensitivity Analysis

      10.2–1. Suppose the energy available for growth were doubled.
              Change E from 1.0 to 2.0. What happens to Q
              QUANTITY over the simulation run?
      10.2–2. STELLA has the ability to run multiple ‘‘what if ’s’’ at
              the same time. This is called sensitivity analysis. This
              allows the user to specify changes of the model parame-
              ters and run simulations consecutively, plotting the re-
              sults from each run on one graph for easy comparison.
              To try this, open the RUN menu and choose Sensi
              Specs. . . . Enter the number of simulation runs as 3
              in the # of Runs: box. Select the FORCE E variable by
              double clicking on it in the Allowable box. Highlight
              FORCE E in the Selected (Value) box by clicking on it.
              This will open the Start: and End: boxes in the lower
              middle of the dialog box. Then define a beginning value
              of 1.0 and an ending value of 12.0 in these boxes. Click
              Set. The values for E to be used in the sensitivity analysis
Production–Consumption–Recycle Model (PC&CYCLE)                                              145


                                         will appear in the Run # Value box. Click OK when
                                         finished.
                                            Double click on the graph icon, then double click
                                         anywhere on the graph page so that the graph type can
                                         be modified. In the graph dialog box under Graph Type
                                         click once in the Comparative box. This allows STELLA
                                         to plot multiple simulations on one graph. Note that
                                         only one parameter can be plotted in the comparative
                                         model. Click OK. Now run the simulation (select RUN,
                                         S-Run from the menu bar).



                                                               䉬
                                 10.3 PRODUCTION–CONSUMPTION–RECYCLE
                                           MODEL (PC&CYCLE)

                                   Multiple storage and flow icons can be linked together to
                                represent more complex models in STELLA. Figure 10.10 dis-
                                plays a production–consumption–recycle model, PC&CYCLE.
                                This model can demonstrate the dynamic relationship between
                                energy sources, nutrient inputs, and organic matter storages. The
                                flow-limited source used in the energy systems language is shown
                                as a combination of auxiliary variables (Energy Source, R, K0)
                                in the STELLA model.
                                   Both the interaction and linear flow symbols of the energy
                                systems language have heat sinks indicating that a transformation
                                process is occurring. To represent a transformation process in
                                STELLA, the Unit Conversion feature is employed. This feature
                                must be used to transform a flow entering a flow valve from the
                                left into a new product exiting to the right. The Unit Conversion
                                option is found at the top of the Flow dialog box (Figure 10.11).
                                Clicking on the Unit conversion activation box will allow the
                                selection of a UC auxiliary variable from the Required Inputs
                                box. Half of the circle on the flow icon will become shaded as
                                a result of activating Unit conversion.
                                   Using the Unit Conversion feature to represent a transforma-
                                tion process in STELLA requires a modification to the method
                                presented in the energy systems diagram. In Figure 9.6a the
                                flow leaving Q Organics and entering the Consumption box
                                (K2*Q ⫽ 2000) has a different value from the flow leaving the
                                Consumption box (K5*Q ⫽ 100) due to the transformation of
146                                                            Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA




FIGURE 10.10.
Diagrams of
production–consumption–recycle
model PC&CYCLE using
(a) energy systems language,
(b) Forrester symbols,
(c) STELLA icons, and
(d) simulation with STELLA.




                                 organic matter into nutrients. The Consumption Process could
                                 represent microbial decomposition of leaves into nutrients. To
                                 accomplish this transformation in STELLA the flow (K2*Q) en-
                                 tering Consumption is multiplied by UC2, a variable not present
                                 on the energy systems diagram. The UC2 variable equals K5/K2,
                                 which is the ratio of the coefficient of outflow to the coefficient
                                 of inflow. When UC2 is multiplied times K2*Q the resulting
                                 equation is K5*Q, the outflow from Consumption. The produc-
                                 tion and other loss pathways are treated similarly.
                                    Referring to Figure 10.1c, Table 10.1, the two previous exam-
                                 ples given in this chapter, and the PC&CYCLE model description
                                 given in Chapter 9.9, it should be possible to construct this model.
                                 The graphical output should resemble Figure 10.10d.
FIGURE 10.10.
(Continued)




FIGURE 10.11.
Dialog box of flow icon
showing unit conversion option.
148                                  Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA


      TABLE 10.1
      Description and Quantification of Terms for PC&CYCLE Model

      Model parameters           Description        Value/equation

      N Nutrients                Initial value      10000
      Q Organics                 ⬙                    500
      Energy Source              Constant             100
        Jn                       Constant inflow        10
        K0                       Coefficient             0.018
        K1                       ⬙                       0.6
        K2                       ⬙                       0.1
        K3                       ⬙                       0.2
        K4                       ⬙                       0.01
        K5                       ⬙                       0.005
        K6                       ⬙                       0.03
        K7                       ⬙                       0.02
        UC 1                     Equation           ⫽K1/K6
        UC 2                     ⬙                  ⫽K5/K2
        UC 3                     ⬙                  ⫽K4/K3
        R                        ⬙                  ⫽Energy Source/
                                                      (1 ⫹ K0*N)
      Production
        Nutrients used           Flow equation      ⫽K6*R*N Nutrients
        Organics produced        ⬙                  ⫽K6*R*N Nutrients
                                                     *UC 1
      Consumption
       Organics consumed         Flow equation      ⫽K2*Q Organics
       Nutrients produced        ⬙                  ⫽K2*Q Organics
                                                     *UC 2
      Other Loss
        Organics consumed        Flow equation      ⫽K3*Q Organics
        Nutrients produced       ⬙                  ⫽K3*Q Organics
                                                     *UC 3
      Nutrient Outflow           Flow equation      ⫽K7*N Nutrients




      ‘‘What If ’’ Experiments

      10.3–1. What if the microbes are able to produce a larger
              amount of nutrients from the same amount of organic
              input? Simulate this by changing K4 from 0.01 to 0.05.
              What happens?
      10.3–2. What if a similar system is modeled at a lower latitude
              where the intensity of sunlight is double the present
              amount? Simulate this by increasing the auxiliary vari-
Comparison of Systems Languages                                                                149


                                           able Energy Source from 100 to 200. What happens to
                                           the level of organics? Nutrients?




                                                                 䉬
                                   10.4 COMPARISON OF SYSTEMS LANGUAGES

                                     Converting from an energy systems diagram to a STELLA
                                  model can be accomplished, however fundamental differences
                                  between the two modeling languages should be recognized. A
                                  key difference involves the visual representation of mathematical
                                  relationships. The energy systems language shows the mathemati-
                                  cal relationships explicitly. For example, the EXPO model dem-
                                  onstrated in this chapter (Figure 10.9a) contains an interaction
                                  symbol which shows that the production of Q QUANTITY
                                  equals the energy source E times Q QUANTITY (via the feed-
                                  back). The STELLA representation of this same interaction (Fig-
                                  ure 10.9b) does not reveal the mathematics involved in producing
                                  more Q QUANTITY.
                                     Inherent in the energy systems language is the flow of energy
                                  to the heat sink in any transforming or storing process due to
                                  the second law of thermodynamics. The Forrester and STELLA
                                  languages do not incorporate this energetic principle in their
                                  symbols. The contrast between the STELLA and energy systems
                                  versions of the PC&CYCLE model illuminates this important
                                  difference between the two languages (Figure 10.10). The energy
                                  systems diagram shows the consumption of organics transform-
                                  ing a flow of 2000 to 100. In this transformation a different
                                  product results and some of the available energy is lost to the
                                  heat sink. In STELLA the Unit Conversion feature located within
                                  the Flow dialog box is used to simulate transformations. If the
                                  Unit Conversion option is not chosen then the amount that exits
                                  a storage through a flow icon equals the amount which enters
                                  the downstream storage, as when material flow is conserved. The
                                  energy systems representation clearly shows the loss of available
                                  energy to the heat sink, whereas the STELLA representation
                                  does not.
                                     Another difference concerns the representation of an autocata-
                                  lytic or exponential system. The energy system representation of
                                  the EXPO model in Figure 10.9a shows feedback from the storage
                                  interacting with the outside energy source to produce more of
150                               Chapter Ten Simulating with STELLA


      the storage. This feedback flow is an actual flow from storage
      necessary to obtain more of the outside energy source. In the
      STELLA representation of this same model (Figure 10.9b), the
      connector between the storage and the inflow represents only
      information, not material. This approach results in the same
      equations for inflow to the storage, K1*E*Q. However, in the
      energy systems language K1 ⫽ K2 ⫺ K3, while in STELLA the
      feedback flow from the storage is not incorporated into K1.


                              EXERCISES

         More instructions and practice with STELLA can be found in
      books by Hannon and Ruth (1994) and Ruth and Hannon
      (1997). These books have interesting minimodels. They use the
      STELLA icons for their network diagrams. As an exercise to
      relate to concepts in this book, we suggest translating some of
      these into energy systems diagrams.
      Chapter Eleven
                       䉬

   SIMULATING
   EMERGY AND
  TRANSFORMITY



11.1 Concepts
        Definitions
        Emergy of Flows
        Emergy of Storages
11.2 Procedure for Simulating Emergy
     and Transformity
        Notation
11.3 Simulation Model EMFISH
        Equations for Emergy of Storage
11.4 Emergy Storage Model EMGTANK with
     Depreciation Outflow Only
        Equations
11.5 Emergy in Inflow-Limited Autocatalytic
     Model RENEMGY
11.6 Simulating International Emergy Exchange
11.7 Emergy Simulation with EXTEND




                       151
C      hapter 11 provides procedures for simulating emergy
(spelled with an ‘‘m’’) and transformity. Emergy measures previ-
ous work that produced a product or service. Transformity is
the emergy per unit energy. These are energy-based measures of
value, useful for putting environment and economy on the same
basis. A full explanation is provided in a recent book (Odum,
1996).
   In this chapter we show how to add equations for emergy and
transformity to models so that simulations can include graphs of
emergy per time (empower), emergy storages, and transformities.
When equations are added to a minimodel to calculate emergy
and transformity, the outputs plot or print emergy flows, emergy
ratios and transformities.



                               䉬
                     11.1 CONCEPTS

    In Chapter 1, Figure 1.5, we explained the way all phenomena
fit into a hierarchy of energy in which processes that require
more work have higher emergy, operate on a larger scale, and
have a higher transformity. Expressing everything as emergy or
its economic equivalent, emdollars, helps simulation models gen-
erate public policy. According to the maximum power principle,
systems that reinforce emergy production and use prevail and
generate the most benefit.



                       DEFINITIONS

    Emergy is the energy of one type required directly and indi-
rectly to make a product. Its unit is the emjoule. Transformity
is the energy of one type required to make one joule of another
type. Because energies of different kinds are not equal in their
work contributions, calculating emergy is a way to put everything


             152
Concepts                                                                 153


           on a common emjoule basis. For example, a joule of human
           effort contributes more to real wealth than a joule of tree growth,
           and this contributes more than a joule of sunlight. Transformities
           indicate the position in the energy hierarchy that we recognize
           in energy systems diagrams by placing units from left to right
           (Chapter 1). Transformity increases with scale (Figure 1.6).


                              EMERGY OF FLOWS

              To calculate emergy flow from sources or storages, multiply
           an energy flow by its transformity. For example, a block of wood
           containing 1 million joules (1 E6 J) of wood energy has a solar
           emergy content of 4 E9 solar emjoules obtained by multiplying
           the energy content (1 E6 joules) by the solar transformity of
           wood (4E3 solar emjoules per joule):

                   (Solar emergy) ⫽ (energy) * (solar transformity)
           (1 E6 joules wood) * (4E3 solar emjoules/joule) ⫽
              4 E9 solar emjoules (4E9 is computer notation for 4 ⫻ 109.)

           You can also evaluate emergy flow from the flow of matter or
           dollars. If data are in grams (rather than energy), energy quality
           may be expressed as emergy per unit mass. If data for goods and
           services are expressed in dollars, an emergy/money ratio results
           and may be expressed as solar emjoules per dollar. Emergy/
           money ratios are obtained from a nation’s annual emergy budget
           divided by its gross economic product. There are many published
           values for transformity, emergy/mass, and emergy/money, many
           of which are cited in a summary book on environmental account-
           ing (Odum, 1996). Where two independent pathways join in a
           production interaction, the emergies of both pathways are added
           (providing the sources of the two are independent and not from
           a closed loop feedback).


                            EMERGY OF STORAGES

              Rate equations of simulation models are first calibrated in
           units of energy, matter, and other units. These quantities follow
           laws of matter and energy conservation: Matter inflowing must
           equal that stored and outflowing; energy inflowing must equal
154                    Chapter Eleven Simulating Emergy and Transformity


      that stored and outflowing. Emergy, however, is a tabulation of
      what was previously processed in making the product. It is not
      reduced by the drain pathways necessary for dispersal of energy
      according to the second energy law. It is a memory evaluation.
      You can tally the emergy for each storage and calculate trans-
      formities as needed to compute emergy storages, flows, and em-
      ergy indices at each transformation step of the model’s simula-
      tion. Transformities and emergy should be of only one energy
      type, such as the solar transformities used in the examples.




                                       䉬
       11.2 PROCEDURE FOR SIMULATING EMERGY
                 AND TRANSFORMITY

         To include emergy and transformity calculations in a simula-
      tion program, first draw the systems diagram, derive the equa-
      tions, calibrate the constants, complete the simulation equations,
      run the program, and debug as may be necessary to generate
      graphs in the usual way. Then add emergy flow equations to the
      diagrams and to the program and print the statements.



                                NOTATION

         Emergy flows and storages are designated with E as the first
      letter. ES is flow of emergy from the source; EQ is emergy in the
      storage. Transformities are designated with Tr for the first letters.
      For example, TrQ is the transformity of stored quantity Q; TrF is
      the transformity of fishing pressure F from the economy (Fig-
      ure 11.1).
         After drawing an energy systems diagram with numbers and
      rate equations, prepare a second diagram on which emergy flows,
      storages, and transformities are designated (example: Figure
      11.1b). Use that diagram to write equations for emergy flow
      and storage. Terms from the first diagram are multiplied by
      transformities to get terms for emergy flow. Three equations are
      required: one for the period of growth, one for time of constant
      storage, and one for declining storage. We supply three examples
      in the following sections to illustrate the methods.
Simulation Model EMFISH                                                                       155




FIGURE 11.1.
Model EMFISH and equations
for simulating emergy.
(a) Energy system diagram
and equation; (b) notation for
simulating transformity and
emergy; (c) simulation using
BASIC (program EMFISH.bas in
Table 11.1).




                                                                䉬
                                         11.3 SIMULATION MODEL EMFISH

                                   A demonstration of emergy and transformity definitions and
                                 behavior is provided with the model EMFISH in Figure 11.1
                                 and the BASIC program EMFISH.bas (Table 11.1). Figure 11.1a
                                 shows the rate of change equation for a storage of any quantity
                                 with one inflow, one outflow, and one depreciation pathway.
                                 The simulation uses these to calculate flows of energy in and out
156                  Chapter Eleven Simulating Emergy and Transformity


      TABLE 11.1
      Program of Emergy Storage and Use (EMFISH.bas) (Figure 11.1)
Simulation Model EMFISH                                                                   157


                          of a tank and graphs the change in the quantity stored (Figure
                          11.1c).


                                EQUATIONS FOR EMERGY OF STORAGE

                             Shown below the regular equations in Figure 11.1b are equa-
                          tions for the emergy of a storage. Heat sinks are omitted because
                          their emergy flow is zero. Three emergy equations are required
                          to cover three stages of storage change: increasing, constant, and
                          decreasing. These are used in the computer program to calculate
                          emergy and transformity.
                             The energy dispersed in heat sink depreciation is a necessary
                          part of the process of storing emergy. Therefore, emergy storage
                          is what is required to build the storage in spite of the concurrent
                          dispersal of some energy and matter through the depreciation
                          pathway. Because the energy in the heat sink has no availability
                          (no ability to do work), its emergy flow is zero. Therefore, the sum-
                          ming of what goes into emergy storage does not include a term for
                          the dispersal pathway. There is no depreciation term in emergy
                          storage equations, whereas there is in the regular equations.
                             The program chooses one of three emergy equations to tally
                          the emergy, depending on whether storage is growing, constant,
                          or decreasing, as discussed next.

                             If Storage is Increasing (dQ/dT ⬎ 0). When storage is in-
                          creasing, then the equation for its emergy storage is the sum of
                          the inflows of emergy minus the outflows of usable emergy,
                          but the concurrent necessary depreciation is not subtracted. The
                          energy lost from availability in depreciation is a necessary part
                          of the process of storing emergy. By definition, emergy only
                          includes a tally of the available energies contributing positively
                          to its formation and all expressed in joules of one kind of energy.
                          The computer equations are:

                                        IF DQ ⬎ 0 THEN DEQ ⫽ EJ ⫺ EH
                          where:        EJ ⫽ TrJ*J
                          and           EH ⫽ TrQ*K2*Q*F

                            If Storage is Constant (dQ/dT ⴝ 0). When there is no
                          change in storage or change in its nature, there is no change in
                          emergy storage. The computer equation is:
158                   Chapter Eleven Simulating Emergy and Transformity


                       IF DQ ⫽ 0 THEN DEQ ⫽ 0

         If Storage is Decreasing (dQ/dT ⬍ 0). When the change
      in emergy storage is negative, the loss in emergy is the loss of
      the energy times the transformity of the storage, whether it is
      due to depreciation loss or whether it is due to the transfer of
      useful emergy out. The computer equation is:

                         DEQ ⫽ TrQ*DQ
                          EQ ⫽ EQ ⫹ DEQ*DT

      The transformity of the stored quantity TrQ is calculated on
      each iteration by dividing the emergy tally for that storage EQ
      by its energy storage Q. By definition, the transformity of the
      storage at any time is the emergy of the storage divided by the
      energy stored:

                               TrQ ⫽ EQ/Q

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the EMFISH.bas
      Program in Table 11.1

      11.3–1 If more of the yield were sent to users, what happens to
             values of natural capital? Increase K2 and observe the
             emergy level.
      11.3–2 What indicates the quality of the fish stock? How does
             it change in a year when there is less input? Reduce input
             by half and rerun.



                                     䉬
         11.4 EMERGY STORAGE MODEL EMGTANK
            WITH DEPRECIATION OUTFLOW ONLY

         The simulation of a storage model (EMGTANK), with one
      inflow and only depreciation outflow in Figure 11.2, shows what
      happens when there is a growth of a quantity to a steady state
      (balance between inflow and outflow). The emergy and the trans-
      formity also increase. The storage reaches a value within 5% of
      the steady state quickly, but a longer time is required to reach
      the steady state as it approaches a constant level asymptotically.
Emergy Storage Model EMGTANK with Depreciation Outflow Only                                      159




FIGURE 11.2.
Simulation of emergy and
transformity in storage with the
convention of ending emergy
growth at 95% of asymptotic
steady state. (a) Systems
diagram and equation;
(b) notation for simulation
of emergy flows and storage;
(c) simulation with BASIC
(program EMGTANK.bas in
Table 11.2).


                                   During the last 5% of the growth in real-world examples, the
                                   emergy input is not really adding new storage value because
                                   fluctuations of this magnitude are present from the smaller scale,
                                   sometimes called noise. It is within the range of fluctuations
                                   caused by statistical fluctuations (Chapter 22). Therefore, pro-
                                   grams are given a statement that stops adding new emergy when
                                   the growth is within 5% of the steady state.

                                                           EQUATIONS

                                      Emergy is calculated for the growth to 95% of the asymptotic
                                   level only. Qs (the steady state) equals J/K1 (found by setting
160                     Chapter Eleven Simulating Emergy and Transformity


      DQ ⫽ 0 where DQ ⫽ J ⫺ K1*Q). Equations used to tally the
      emergy depend on whether storage is growing, within 5% of the
      asymptote, or decreasing.

      When                         Q ⬍ Qs
      The equation is              IF Q ⬍ 0.95*Qs THEN DEQ ⫽ EJ
      Where:                       EJ ⫽ TrJ*J
      When                         Q ⫽ Qs, DQ ⫽ 0 and DEQ ⫽ 0
      When                         DQ ⬍ 0
                                   DEQ ⫽ TrQ*DQ
      And                          TrQ ⫽ EQ/Q
                                   EQ ⫽ EQ ⫹ DEQ*DT

      The simulation of EMGTANK (Figure 11.2c) shows the emergy
      storage and its transformity growing like a ramp, stopping at
      the 95% level.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      EMGTANK.bas in Table 11.2
      11.4–1 If depreciation were faster, how would the emergy of
             the storage change? Increase K1.
      11.4–2 If the storage and its inputs were higher in the scale of
             size and energy hierarchy, how would its emdollar value
             change? Make a change and rerun the simulation. For
             the United States in the late 1990s, the emergy/money
             ratio is 1.3 ⫻ 1012 solar emjoules per dollar.



                                      䉬
              11.5 EMERGY IN INFLOW-LIMITED
              AUTOCATALYTIC MODEL RENEMGY

         Simulation equations are given for RENEW, a model of auto-
      catalytic growth on a source limited flow, shown in Chapter 13,
      in Figure 13.1. The same model with emergy calculations is
      RENEMGY (Figure 11.3), which simulates emergy and trans-
      formity with the program in Table 11.3. Whereas Figure 11.3a
      has the regular rate of change equations, Figure 11.3b also has
      the emergy equations obtained by multiplying the terms in each
      pathway by the transformity from the source of flow at the left.
      There is one input source, the sun (solar transformity: TrS ⫽ 1).
Emergy in Inflow-Limited Autocatalytic Model RENEMGY                                           161


                                 TABLE 11.2
                                 Program for Emergy in Simple Storage (EMGTANK.bas)
                                 (Figure 11.2)




                                 Emergy inflow is EJ ⫽ TrJ*K0*R*Q. The emergy within the stor-
                                 age is the net balance between the input emergy flow minus the
                                 yield outflow EY ⫽ TrQ*K3*Q. Because depreciation dispersals
                                 are not included in equations for stored emergy, equations that
                                 cover the growth period (while Q is increasing) omit depreciation.
162                                             Chapter Eleven Simulating Emergy and Transformity




FIGURE 11.3.
Autocatalytic model RENEMGY
with equations for simulating
emergy. (a) Energy systems
diagram, equations, and
numbers for calibration;
(b) notation for simulating
transformity and emergy;
(c) simulation using BASIC
(program RENEMGY.bas in
Table 11.3).




                                  The computer equations are as follows:


                                        IF DEQ ⬍ 0 THEN DEQ ⫽ DQ*TrQ
                                                         EQ ⫽ EQ ⫹ DEQ*DT


                                Transformities of storage increase with growth (Figure 11.2c),
                                representing the higher quality of stored energy concentrated
                                over its inflow. Its emergy is transmitted forward with a higher
                                transformity because of the dispersal and degrading necessary to
                                the storing process.
Emergy in Inflow-Limited Autocatalytic Model RENEMGY                                        163


                                 TABLE 11.3
                                 Program for Autocatalytic Emergy Storage Using Renewable
                                 Energy (RENEMGY.bas) (Figure 11.3)




                                 ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the RENEMGY.bas
                                 Program in Table 11.3

                                 11.5–1 How does the output transformity of the storage and its
                                        output flow compare with that of the input? Compare
                                        the dialog box of the input with that of the simulation.
                                 11.5–2 What happens to the quality of the storage if the inputs
                                        stop? Referring to Figure 11.3, identify and change the
                                        input source in the program and rerun.
164                   Chapter Eleven Simulating Emergy and Transformity



                                     䉬
              11.6 SIMULATING INTERNATIONAL
                     EMERGY EXCHANGE

         Emergy is useful in evaluating the net benefit of foreign trade
      and other financial exchanges where emergy per unit money
      differs by country and where the emergy value of products and
      services does not correspond to their prices. In Part III, Chapter
      19, a model of international trade (FREEMARK) is simulated.
      Then emergy equations are included (program EMEXCHNG.
      bas) to simulate the benefits as evaluated on a common basis
      (Figure 19.2e).



                                     䉬
         11.7 EMERGY SIMULATION WITH EXTEND

         The general systems blocks for EXTEND (Chapters 4 and 5)
      automatically calculate the emergy and transformity of storages
      and outputs based on the transformity of the inputs. The equa-
      tions used in the scripts of icon blocks for EXTEND programs
      are similar to those in Figures 11.1, 11.2, and 11.3.
         To use them, add and connect the special plotters for emergy
      storage, empower (emergy flow), and transformity from the
      GNSYSLIB library to the models assembled on screen. The simu-
      lation plots graphs of these properties along with the usual plots
      of storage and flow.
              PART THREE
                               䉬


FUNDAMENTAL
 MINIMODELS
The minimodels in Part III have configurations and energy rela-
tionships like those found in many kinds of systems. Chapters
12 through 16 contain general systems models. Chapters 17
and 18 contain fundamental microeconomic and macroeconomic
models with flows of money. Chapter 19 covers international
exchange, and Chapter 20 aggregates features of global perspec-
tive. Each model is accompanied by a brief explanation, a systems
diagram, change equations, explanation of equations, BASIC
program, examples from more than one field, and a plot of a
typical simulation. Appendix C provides answers to the ‘‘What
If ’’ questions. The programs are included in the book disk (Ap-
pendix E).
     These minimodels include mathematical relationships found
in many fields, often introduced as fundamental concepts in text-
books on biochemistry, biophysics, biology, populations, geol-
ogy, ecology, and economics. Learning to recognize basic rela-
tionships in network form enhances the ability to use them in
more complex systems. The study of and simulation of these
minimodels develop the ability to relate and think interchange-
ably about systems in five languages: verbal description, network
diagrams, change equations, BASIC programs, and graphs of
functions. By example, different models illustrate different ways
of introducing data and displaying output.
166                                        Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


         In this book each of the model sections stands alone. They
      can be used in any order. The chapters in Part III are arranged
      in order of the chapters in the book Ecological and General
      Systems, available from the University Press of Colorado, where
      more complete discussions of their mathematics are given (Odum,
      1994; a reprint of Systems Ecology, 1983). Other models and
      simulations of energy webs and material cycles are given by
      DeAngelis (1992).
         Starting in this Part III, coefficients are shown on pathways
      of the systems diagram, but not the whole mathematical term
      found in the equation below the diagram.


                SUGGESTIONS FOR SIMULATION

         To study a minimodel, read the text, peruse the diagram noting
      the way the equations follow from the network, and run the
      program. Using a PC or Macintosh, load this book’s CD-ROM
      onto the computer. To run a minimodel, load some form of
      BASIC and use its menus to open a program file (example:
      TANK.bas). Because the programs are text files, they can also
      be used by other kinds of programs and computers. The programs
      can be modified for other kinds of BASIC by changing a few
      statements; for example, the statements for plotting may differ.
      Rerun the programs with the suggested ‘‘What If ’’ changes. Com-
      pare your results with answers given in Appendix C. To disable
      a line without erasing it, type REM just after the number. The
      program ignores anything on the line after the REMARK
      command.

      Directions for PC

         Load Qbasic.exe (Quickbasic) from PC Windows. Then load
      the book CD-ROM. Use the Qbasic File Menu to load a program
      from the folder called Basicprg in the Windows part of the CD.
      The program listing is displayed in the upper part of a split
      screen. In the small lower screen (command window) you can
      type instructions, such as requests to print values. Toggle between
      screens with the F6 key. Toggle from program screen to output
      screen with the F5 key. To ‘‘screen dump’’ the output graph to
      the clipboard, use the Print Screen key. From the clipboard you
      can paste the graph into a drawing or word processing program.
      Toggle between the graph and the desktop with Alt-Tab.
Suggestions for Simulation                                                             167


                     To print the numerical values of quantities, rates, flows, etc,
                  at the end of a run, use the command window to type in ? T,
                  K2*N*Q (or whatever items you wish), each separated by a
                  comma. The question mark means print. The numbers appear
                  at the top of the screen. More details are provided in Appendix
                  B including use of the old BASICA.

                  Directions for Macintosh

                     Load the book CD-Rom, find the Macintosh section, and click
                  on the folder called Basicprg. Open CHIPMUNK BASIC and use
                  menus to open a simulation program. Type Run or use the control
                  menu to RUN the program. The graph plot appears in the middle
                  of the screen. Type LIST or use the control menu to list the
                  program. You can drag the graph window to the right so that
                  the list is visible. Below the list you can type the next command
                  or use the menu.
                     To compare one run with another after making a change, you
                  can plot the new graph with the first graph. If you make a change
                  after the first run type at the bottom of the program list Run 60
                  (or whatever the line number is below the graphics statements
                  at the tope of the program). To save a modified program, use
                  SAVE AS and assign a different name. To print the graph, pull
                  down PRINT from the FILE menu. More details on use of the
                  programs are provided in Appendix B including use of the older
                  Macintosh QUICKBASIC.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
      Chapter Twelve
                         䉬

      MODELS OF
     PRODUCTION
     AND RECYCLE

12.1 Model of Net Production (NETPROD)
        Explanation of Equations
        Simulation with Calculation Tables
        Examples
12.2 External Limiting Factors (FACTORS)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples
12.3 Internal Limiting Factors (INTLIMIT)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples
12.4 Model of Production and
     Consumption (DAYP&C)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples
12.5 Model of Production and Oxygen in Aquatic
     Ecosystems (OPENAQ)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples
12.6 Model of Logistic Autocatalytic Production
     and Recycle (AUTOCYCL)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples




                        169
T     his chapter considers the production process and material
cycles found in systems on all scales. NETPROD shows how net
production results from the balance of production and consump-
tion. The minimodel FACTORS simulates an external limiting
material, whereas INTLIMIT simulates a limiting internal cycle.
In DAYP&C a production–consumption–recycle system re-
sponds to a day–night sunlight regime. OPENAQ relates produc-
tion and changes of dissolved oxygen in open aquatic ecosystems
in exchange with the air. AUTOCYCL is a logistic model of
autocatalytic production limited by an internal cycle. These mod-
els illustrate systems principles on materials and energy. The
designs are common building blocks in more complex systems.




                                䉬
12.1 MODEL OF NET PRODUCTION (NETPROD)

   The model NETPROD (Figure 12.1a) illustrates net produc-
tion, the difference between gross production and consumption.
For example, plant photosynthesis produces organic matter
(gross production) that flows into storage Q. At the same time
the organic matter is being utilized from that storage by plant
respiration and animal consumption. The difference is net pro-
duction, which is added to or subtracted from the stored organic
matter Q. In this example gross production is proportional to
the incoming sunlight, which is changed in each of four seasons,
and the same sequence repeated in the years following. Consump-
tion is proportional to the stored quantity Q.
   The net production rate can be measured in the field as the
observed changes in organic matter storage with time. Net pro-
duction is less than the gross production rate. Large errors result
when people try to use net production as a measure of gross
production or vice versa.
   The simulation with the computer program (Table 12.1) in
Figure 12.1b starts with a low initial storage that increases over


             170
Model of Net Production (NETPROD)                                                               171


                                    a




                                    b




FIGURE 12.1.
Model of net production
(program NETPROD.bas). (a)
Systems diagram; (b) simulation
of energy input, production
rates, and storage with one
point plotted every 3 months.



                                  an 8-year period. The graphs plot the seasonal inputs of light
                                  energy, the gross production rate, the net production rate by
                                  difference, and the accumulated storage of product. Whereas
                                  gross production is always positive, net production is negative
                                  when consumption exceeds gross production. In Figure 12.1b
                                  net production is positive in the summer and negative in the
                                  winter. Net production is greatest during early growth, declining
                                  as the system gets close to steady state. (A steady state is one in
                                  which storages are constant due to the balance of inflows and
                                  outflows.) The state in Figure 12.1b is slightly fluctuating around
                                  a steady average.
172                      Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


      TABLE 12.1
      Program for Net Production (NETPROD.bas) (Figure 12.1)




                 EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         Production (P ⫽ K1*S) is proportional to the incident light S.
      Consumption (C ⫽ K2*Q) is proportional to the storage of prod-
      uct Q. The net production during each time interval is the differ-
      ence: DQ ⫽ P ⫺ C. In the program (Table 12.1) each time unit
      is 3 months. Instead of plotting isolated points for each season,
Model of Net Production (NETPROD)                                                             173


                                the program plots short lines between the last point and the one
                                for the previous season (lines 340–365).



                                    SIMULATION WITH CALCULATION TABLES

                                   With only two pathways, this model can also be simulated by
                                hand easily (without a computer) by creating a calculation table
                                like that shown earlier in Figure 9.2. Suggested headings for the
                                columns are Iteration Number, Season (Winter, Spring, Summer,
                                or Autumn), Sunlight S, Gross production P ⫽ 0.001*S, Con-
                                sumption Rate C ⫽ 0.2*Q, Change in Storage DQ ⫽ P ⫺ C;
                                and Q ⫽ previous Q ⫹ DQ. These headings can also be entered
                                into a spreadsheet for automatic calculation (see Chapter 8).



                                                          EXAMPLES

                                   Net production and gross production are the basis for all the
                                ecological, agricultural, and forestry systems of the world. These
                                include ponds, lakes, rivers, oceans, fields, forests, swamps, etc.
                                In agriculture and forestry where emphasis is on yields, consump-
                                tion by competing insects and microbes is reduced in order to
                                make net production as high as possible. However, wild ecosys-
                                tems prevail by putting their production into a diversity of other
                                organisms that contribute to soils and improve gross production
                                in this and other ways.
                                   The principles also apply to economic production such as the
                                work of an industry. For example, the total output of shoes
                                is gross production, whereas the net production is the balance
                                between the shoes made and those consumed and dispersed.
                                   The term net production has been used in one way in this
                                chapter. However, net production can be used to refer to the
                                difference between any two flows and thus be misunderstood.
                                Diagrams can be drawn for clarity.

                                ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                in Table 12.1
                                12.1–1 What is the effect of increasing the rate of consumption
                                       by increasing K2?
                                12.1–2 What coefficient in Figure 12.1a represents the efficiency
174                                                    Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


                                           with which the sunlight S is converted into gross produc-
                                           tion? What is the effect of increasing this coefficient?
                                    12.1–3 Predict what kinds of graphs will result if the product
                                           storage starts off at a higher value than the steady state
                                           in the first simulation in Figure 12.1b. Set Q ⫽ 1000.



                                                                   䉬
                                    12.2 EXTERNAL LIMITING FACTORS (FACTORS)

                                        The model FACTORS (Figure 12.2a) relates production to
                                    the availability of necessary materials coming from outside.
                                    Whenever two or more different items are required for a process,
                                    the relationship is shown with the interaction symbol. The output
                                    is a new product, and the process is called production. Increasing
                                    the amount of any one of the required inputs increases the output,
                                    unless the rate of supply of another factor is limited. In Figure



                                    a




FIGURE 12.2.                            b
Model of production as a
function of two interacting
inputs (program FACTORS.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) typical simulation
graphs of production as it
varies with changing
availability of energy E for
several levels of materials
inflow J.
External Limiting Factors (FACTORS)                                                              175


                                  12.2a, the two required factors are indicated by the letters E and
                                  M. The amount of material M available to the production process
                                  depends on the supply provided by flow J. If you increase the
                                  source concentration (force) E, the production increases rapidly
                                  at first, but as E is increased further, the other factor M is used
                                  up faster than it can be supplied by inflow J. In this situation,
                                  M is limiting because of the fixed rate of inflow J. The flow of J
                                  is the external limiting factor keeping production from increasing
                                  further. The limitation of an external factor to production is
                                  sometimes called a Monod model, named after its author who
                                  showed the appropriate equation for an example of external
                                  nutrient limitation.
                                      Whereas most of our simulations graph quantities with time,
                                  Figure 12.2b shows production as the factor E is increased. In-
                                  creasing E has a large effect at first, which becomes less and less
                                  as the other factor M begins to limit more because of limited
                                  flow J.
                                      An example is the photosynthetic production of organic matter
                                  by grass in a field. Term E refers to light intensity (insolation),
                                  J is inflow of nutrients from rain, and M is the concentration of
                                  nutrients in the soil next to the plant roots. When light first
                                  increases, more grass is produced. But soon production is limited
                                  by nutrients: Even with more and more sunlight, there can be
                                  little increase in production. At high light intensities the amount
                                  of production depends on the supply of available nutrients, in
                                  this case from rain.
                                      The simulation (Figure 12.2b) plots a point representing the
                                  calculated production P as a function of the energy concentration
                                  E with J held constant. Then E is increased, P is recalculated,
                                  and another point plotted. The program (Table 12.2) repeats the
                                  process in an iteration (lines 120–160). After the curve is com-
                                  plete the program increases J, resets E to 0 (lines 170–190), and
                                  returns to the first iteration, generating another curve. Figure
                                  12.2b shows a family of four curves.



                                              EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                     The FACTORS model uses the ‘‘flow use’’ design (Chapter 6,
                                  Section 6.4) for representing what is still available in a flow J as
                                  some of the flow K2*E*M is drawn into a production process
                                  (interaction symbol). The resulting production P by that interac-
176                       Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


      TABLE 12.2
      Program of External Limiting Factors
      (FACTORS.bas)
      (Figure 12.2)




      tion unit is proportional to the available concentrations of both
      E and M and thus a product of the two K1*E*M. J/(1 ⫹ K2*E)
      is the form of the equation that provides a continuous value of
      available material M to go into the interaction process. The
      model has no storages and thus no time delay.




                                EXAMPLES

          Another example is the production of cars on an island using
      a flow of metals from another country that is unchanging. Increas-
      ing the energy to the process has a diminishing effect as the
      available stock of metals locally available gets lower and lower.
      Limiting factor curves like this are found in all fields of science
      and are called diminishing returns in economics. There are thou-
      sands of experimental studies with graphs similarly shaped.
      Think of a different example. What are J, E, and P in your ex-
      ample?
Internal Limiting Factors (INTLIMIT)                                                              177


                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                   in Table 12.2

                                   12.2–1 In the external limiting model what is the effect of in-
                                          creasing the inflow of limiting factor J?
                                   12.2–2 How and why would the graph be different if the produc-
                                          tion process were more efficient? Increase K1 and run
                                          the program.
                                   12.2–3 Efficiency of energy use is the ratio of P to E (P/E).
                                          Explain when efficiency is greatest by examining the
                                          output graphs (Figure 12.2b). How is efficiency related
                                          to the energy level used, E?




                                                                   䉬
                                       12.3 INTERNAL LIMITING FACTORS (INTLIMIT)

                                      The model INTLIMIT (Figure 12.3a) shows how the materials
                                   recycling within a system can limit its production. For example,
                                   an ecosystem in an aquarium receiving only light energy has a
                                   photosynthetic production rate that is dependent on the nutrient
                                   materials available to recycle.
                                      As shown in the diagram, the model has an unlimited energy
                                   source E, a production process requiring materials M, storing of
                                   the product Q, and a consumption process that recycles the
                                   materials. The total quantity of materials is held constant (conser-
                                   vation of materials) so that materials are either in the available
                                   pool M or bound within the product storage Q. Whereas limita-
                                   tions in Figure 12.2a were controlled from outside the system
                                   boundary, in this model similar mathematics results from relating
                                   production to the total materials available inside the system for
                                   production and recycle. If the recycle process is too slow, it can
                                   limit the production process so that an increase in factor E has
                                   a diminishing return. This model is sometimes called a Michaelis-
                                   Menten relationship, named after the authors, which recognizes
                                   the appropriate equations for a biochemical example of internal
                                   cycle limitation.
                                      When the quantity of product storage is simulated starting at
                                   a low value (Figure 12.3b), it grows rapidly at first and then
                                   levels off as the availability of materials M becomes limited by
                                   the rate of recycle. The rate of production P is highest at the
178                                                     Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle



                                     a




FIGURE 12.3.
Model of production and
consumption which becomes
limited by the rate of recycle of    b
materials M when input energy
E is increased (program
INTLIMIT.bas). (a) Systems
diagram and equations;
(b) simulation of product            c
storage over time; (c) simulation
graph of steady-state
production Ps as a function of
increasing energy availability E
for several levels of total
materials Mt.




                                    start. The slope of the growth curve of Q is steepest at the start.
                                    The growth curve is convex (not S shaped).
                                       To show the diminishing returns of increasing the energy
                                    where there are internal material limits, the steady-state level Ps
                                    is plotted as a function of energy E. Level Ps was calculated by
                                    setting DQ to zero and substituting the expression for production
                                    P (Figure 12.3a).
                                       After the program (Table 12.3) plots one graph of Q with
                                    time in the upper panel, it calculates the steady-state production
                                    Ps and plots it as a function of the energy E (Figure 12.3c).
                                    The rate of production achieved at steady-state Ps increases with
                                    increased E but with diminishing returns. Materials M become
Internal Limiting Factors (INTLIMIT)                                                             179


                                   TABLE 12.3
                                   Program of Internal Limiting Factors (INTLIMIT.bas)
                                   (Figure 12.3)




                                   less and less available to production because there are not enough
                                   total materials Mt in the cycle. After plotting one graph, the
                                   program increases the total material Mt and plots another graph,
                                   making a family of curves. As shown by Figure 12.3c, increasing
                                   the total materials in the system Mt increases the productivity.
                                   Higher productivity means energy use is more efficient.

                                              EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                     The production process K1*E*M is a product of the available
                                   energy concentration E and the available materials M. Available
180                       Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


      materials M are the total materials Mt minus those bound in the
      products f*Q, where f is the material fraction in the product
      storage Q. The storage consumed by the consumption process
      K2*Q returns its material to the pool. For example, consumers
      in an aquarium ecosystem release the nutrient materials that were
      in the food to the water.
         The value of production at steady state is labeled Ps, which is
      the value after the materials have become optimally distributed
      between storages M and Q. For steady state, set DQ equal to zero
      and algebraically solve for Q so that Q ⫽ P/K2. Then substitute Q
      in the materials equation: M ⫽ Mt ⫺ f*Q, and substitute the
      new expression for M in P ⫽ K1*E*M. The result, Ps ⫽
      (K1*K2*E*Mt)/(K2 ⫹ K1*f*E), is the equation for the curves that
      the program generates in Figure 12.2b.



                                EXAMPLES

         An example of internal limitation is the recycle of chlorophyll
      from a state ready to receive light, after which it becomes electri-
      cally charged, to the dark process where it is recycled for use
      again. One of the first examples ever studied as a simulation
      model was the process of using an enzyme in biochemistry. In
      Figure 12.3a the enzyme is M and the input ‘‘substrate’’ (energy
      source) is E. In economic production, the recycle of aluminum
      cans may be an internal limiting factor M with a diminishing
      returns curve (Figure 12.3b) when other inputs E are increased.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 12.3
      12.3–1 From the family of curves generated by the simulation
             what is the effect of increasing the total materials MT
             available for recycle?
      12.3–2 What is the effect of increasing the coefficient K2 (the
             fraction of the storage Q recycled per unit time)? Explain.
      12.3–3 What happens to the organisms in a system with a small
             nutrient content but large energy availability like the
             open tropical sea or the plants growing on granite rock
             outcrops? Run the simulation with MT at a very low
             value. Considering the quantity stored and its turnover,
             comment on the size of organisms.
Model of Production and Consumption (DAYP&C)                                                     181


                                                                   䉬
                                            12.4 MODEL OF PRODUCTION AND
                                                 CONSUMPTION (DAYP&C)

                                       The model DAYP&C (Figure 12.4a) examines production,
                                    storage, and recycle of systems driven by a limited flow source
                                    supplying energy that varies with night and day. Examples are
                                    ecosystems of ponds or grassland based on sunlight. The sunlight
                                    J increases and then decreases each day, with none coming in
                                    at night. The available nutrient materials M are used by the
                                    photosynthesis in the daytime and released by respiration (by
                                    plants and animals) day and night. The quantity of organic matter
                                    Q produced goes up with photosynthesis in the daytime and
                                    down as it is consumed during both day and night. Quantity Q
                                    also represents oxygen, which is produced by photosynthesis and


                                       a




                                       b
FIGURE 12.4.
Model of production and
consumption simulated to show
diurnal effects (program
DAYP&C.bas). (a) Systems
diagram and equations;
(b) simulation of accumulated
storages Q and available
materials M for a several day
period also plotting the sunlight
input J typical of clear days
(half sine wave).
182                       Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


      used by respiration. In the daytime the quantities of organic
      matter and oxygen produced by photosynthesis are greater than
      those used in respiration; at night there is only respiration using
      both organic matter and oxygen.
         In Figure 12.4b, the top section shows the daily variation of
      the sun, the second the organic matter and the bottom the nutri-
      ents. The simulation program (Table 12.4) plots a half sine wave
      in the upper panel of the graph, representing the sunlight input
      J for each day. The inflow J rises and falls in a pattern very
      similar to sunlight intensity on a clear day. Inflow J is turned off
      to represent the night. For details on use of sine waves to represent
      sunlight, see Appendix B. The organic storage Q rises fastest in
      the morning when nutrients pool M is greater. As storage Q
      rises, so does the consumption rate. Nutrients are least when the


      TABLE 12.4
      Program of Diurnal Production and Consumption (DAYP&
      C.bas) (Figure 12.4)
Model of Production and Consumption (DAYP&C)                                                   183


                                organic storage is greatest. The organic storage decreases most
                                rapidly as the light stops at sunset. This program was calibrated
                                for an aquatic system with small storages and rapid turnover
                                time. The model can be use for the labile storages of organic
                                matter in leaves and soils by not including the large storages of
                                wood and soil organic matter that are not affected much by
                                diurnal processes.



                                               EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    Available light energy R is that remaining after the uses
                                K0*R*M in production. Shown in Figure 12.4a, the labile organic
                                matter storage Q is increased by photosynthetic production
                                K1*R*M and decreased by consumption (respiration and dis-
                                persal of plants, animals, and microbes) K2*Q. Production is
                                proportional to the available sunlight R and the soil nutrients
                                M. Respiration K2*Q is proportional to the organic content Q
                                that is labile enough to be involved in the diurnal cycle.
                                    The pool of materials (nutrients) M required for production
                                is calculated as the difference between the total materials Mt and
                                that bound in products stored f*Q, where f is the fraction of
                                organic storage Q that is nutrient material.



                                                          EXAMPLES

                                   Many biological systems show diurnal responses that fit this
                                model including forest leaves, algae in ponds, whole microcosms,
                                plankton in the sea, and coral reefs. A similar model can be used
                                for the seasonal variations in solar-based resources. The model
                                can represent economic processes where goods are produced,
                                used, and then the worn-out parts and wastes are recycled into
                                making new goods. Many parts of our economy operate on
                                diurnal pulses associated with the daily cycle of activity and sleep
                                of humans.

                                ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                in Table 12.4

                                12.4–1 Suppose half of the nutrient materials blow away in a
                                       fire. How is the diurnal pattern affected? How does this
184                      Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


             situation compare with the experiment reducing materi-
             als with the INTLIMIT model (Figure 12.3)?
      12.4–2 What happens if the daily input energy is increased as
             in summer? In line 170, change the energy flow: J ⫽ 60
             * SIN (T/15.9).
      12.4–3 Suppose severe environmental conditions interfere with
             consumption (for example Arctic cold, briny waters).
             After your original run, use the command line to print
             the last value for the production rate by typing a question
             mark (which means print) followed by K1*R*M. Reduce
             K2 to 0.01 and run again. How does the productivity
             with reduced consumption compare when consumption
             is more normal?
      12.4–4 Suppose a biotic system that fits this model is put in a
             greenhouse with continuous light equivalent to daylight.
             Disable line 170 by typing REM after the line number
             (thus not erasing the original statement). To make light
             constant, insert a line 175 J ⫽ 40 and rerun. Is the
             production rate affected? Print out the last value of pro-
             duction as explained in What If 12.4–3.




                                     䉬
      12.5 MODEL OF PRODUCTION AND OXYGEN IN
            AQUATIC ECOSYSTEMS (OPENAQ)

         The model OPENAQ (Figure 12.5a) relates production, con-
      sumption, and recycle including dissolved oxygen and its ex-
      change with the air. Examples are ponds and aquarium ecosys-
      tems open to the air. When light is shining, production of oxygen
      and organic matter occurs. These are then used by consumers,
      which in turn regenerate the nutrient raw materials N (including
      carbon dioxide) that are recycled back to plant use. Oxygen
      diffuses back and forth between the gas phase in the air and
      the dissolved oxygen state within the water. When oxygen is
      supersaturated it diffuses or bubbles into the gas phase. When
      respiratory consumption uses up dissolved oxygen at night, it is
      somewhat replenished by diffusion in from the air.
         The simulation in Figure 12.5 shows diurnal variations over
      a 5-day period. At the top is sunlight (without clouds). The
Model of Production and Oxygen in Aquatic Ecosystems (OPENAQ)                                    185



                                    a




                                     b




FIGURE 12.5.
Model of an open aquatic
ecosystem with atmospheric
oxygen exchanging with
dissolved oxygen in the water
(program OPENAQ.bas).
(a) Systems diagram and
equations; (b) typical simulation
for 5 days showing metabolic
rates, levels of dissolved
oxygen, and nutrients.



                                    dissolved oxygen rises and falls with the maximum level occurring
                                    late in the day and the minimum at sunrise. Plotted below is rate
                                    of production P, rate of respiration R, and the net production
                                    DQ, which is the difference between the two. Net production is
                                    positive in the daytime and negative at night. This is a good
                                    model to use with measurements of day–night oxygen change
                                    for purposes of evaluating aquatic productivity.
186                       Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         As shown in Figure 12.5a, available light energy is R remaining
      after light use K0*R*N is drawn from the inflowing sunlight S.
      The production of oxygen K2*R*N and the concurrent produc-
      tion of organic matter K1*R*N are both dependent on the light
      energy R and the nutrients available N (in parts per billion,
      abbreviated ppb). The available nutrients N are those not bound
      up in organic storages f*Q, where f is the fraction of the nutrients
      that is part of the organic biomass Q. The organic biomass is a
      balance between inflowing production K1*R*N and the con-
      sumption K4*X*Q, which is dependent on the dissolved oxygen
      X and the metabolically active biomass Q.
         The dissolved oxygen is a balance between the oxygen produc-
      tion K2*R*N, the use of oxygen by consumption K3*X*Q, and
      the diffusion exchange with the atmosphere. The oxygen at satu-
      ration, Xs, is the parts per million (ppm) oxygen in the water in
      equilibrium with oxygen in the air. Oxygen passes from air into
      the water when the water is undersaturated in proportion to the
      difference in the pressure exerted by the gas molecules. For a
      diffusion equation, oxygen pressure in the air is taken as 1 and
      that by the dissolved oxygen in the water as the fraction of
      saturation X/Xs. When the dissolved oxygen is less than satura-
      tion, X/Xs is less than 1. In the middle of the day the oxygen
      may be much greater than saturation, with X/Xs larger than 1.
      The diffusion pathway in Figure 12.5 is K7*(1 ⫺ X/Xs), where
      K7 is the rate of diffusion, mainly dependent on the stirring of
      the water by currents, winds, waves, etc. Rate K7 is very low in
      a quiet aquarium.




                                EXAMPLES

         Ponds, pools, lakes, and shallow seas often fit this model.
      Aquaria are found in the school rooms of the world by the
      millions. Some grow in bright light; some have animals; some
      contain saltwater ecosystems. Some have been observed working
      for decades. Because these small contained ecosystems have many
      of the features of larger ecosystems, they are sometimes called mi-
      crocosms.
Model of Logistic Autocatalytic Production and Recycle (AUTOCYCL)                                  187


                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Experiments for the Program in Table 12.5

                                   12.5–1 What would be the effect of adding a larger quantity of
                                          organic matter? Set initial value of Q ⫽ 40. Explain.
                                   12.5–2 What would happen if light were turned on continu-
                                          ously? Change line 405 S ⫽ 1. What happens to dis-
                                          solved oxygen? To net production? Why?
                                   12.5–3 What would be the effect of reducing the inorganic nutri-
                                          ents? Set NT ⫽ 0.3.
                                   12.5–4 What is the effect of increasing the diffusion coefficient
                                          K5 to 1.0? What is analogous in a pond and in an
                                          aquarium? Suppose the coefficient were reduced to 0.1
                                          and many fish added, or suppose a large amount of
                                          organic matter were added (excess fish food in the aquar-
                                          ium and excess wastes in a pond).




                                                                    䉬
                                     12.6 MODEL OF LOGISTIC AUTOCATALYTIC
                                      PRODUCTION AND RECYCLE (AUTOCYCL)

                                      The model AUTOCYCL (Figure 12.6a) is an autocatalytic
                                   consumer unit with materials (example: nutrients) cycling be-
                                   tween an available pool N and bound state in the consumer
                                   assets C. The energy source E is constant and thus unlimited, an
                                   example of autocatalytic growth on a constant energy source
                                   being exponential (Figure 9.4). Growth in this model is limited
                                   by the availability of nutrient materials Tn. The role of the cycling
                                   materials is dramatized in the diagram by the heavily shaded
                                   recycle loop. The production process is affected both by the en-
                                   ergy level E and by the available materials N. Where the nutrients
                                   are free, they are darkly shaded; where nutrients are incorporated
                                   in the products they are stippled. The model may apply to phyto-
                                   plankton in tropical seas where the nutrients are much more
                                   limiting than the light.
                                      The typical simulation in Figure 12.6b shows an S-shaped
                                   growth of assets Q and a matching down curve of available
                                   nutrients as they are used in the production process. With the
                                   autocatalytic feedback to production, growth accelerates at first
                                   and then levels off as the nutrients required for new production
                                   are tied up in the storage C.
188                     Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


      TABLE 12.5
      Program of Production and Oxygen in Aquatic Ecosystems
      (OPENAQ.bas) (Figure 12.5)




                EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

        As shown in Figure 12.6b, autocatalytic production
      K1*E*N*C is proportional to the energy concentration E, the
Model of Logistic Autocatalytic Production and Recycle (AUTOCYCL)                                189


                                     a




FIGURE 12.6.
Model of autocatalytic growth        b
with a limiting material cycle,
which is logistic (program
AUTOCYCL.bas). (a) Systems
diagram and equations.
Nutrient materials when free
are shown by dark shading and
by stippling when they are
combined in stored products
and assets; (b) simulation of
stored assets C and available
nutrients N.



                                   nutrient availability N, and the feedback use of the stored struc-
                                   ture C. The stored assets C is a balance between the production
                                   inflow and the various losses K2*Q in proportion to the quantity
                                   stored. The nutrients bound up in the stored assets are f*Q,
                                   where f is the fraction of the stored quantity that is nutrient
                                   material. For example, the phosphorus in biomass may be 0.01
                                   or less. With total nutrients Tn held constant, the nutrients N
                                   available to production are the difference between the total in
                                   the system Tn and that bound in assets.
                                      When the equation for consumer growth (DC ⫽ K1*E*N*C
                                   l ⫺ K2*Q) is algebraically combined with the expression for
                                   conservation of materials (N ⫽ Tn ⫺ f*C), a combined equation
190                       Chapter Twelve Models of Production and Recycle


      for change per unit time step results (Figure 12.6a). It has a
      positive growth term proportional to storage C and a negative
      drain that is quadratic (C2). E and Tn are included and can increase
      the growth rate and the steady-state level.
         Such equations with the general form DQ ⫽ aQ ⫺ bQ2 (with
      a and b constants) are said to be logistic. Units with logistic
      growth equations have a very stable steady state, since the nega-
      tive square term increases faster than the positive term as the
      quantity increases.



                                EXAMPLES

         Many ecosystem models have constant coefficients of growth
      (unlimited energy), but are stabilized by including limited nutrient
      cycles. Some authors suggest that civilization could ultimately
      be limited by difficulties in recycling critical materials. Bernard
      cells are hexagonal patterns in viscous heated liquids (structural
      assets C). As the heated water in the pattern cools, it recirculates
      to the bottom of the container N, where it is available to be
      heated again.


      TABLE 12.6
      Program of Logistic Autocatalytic Production and Recycle
      (AUTOCYCLE.bas) (Figure 12.6)
Model of Logistic Autocatalytic Production and Recycle (AUTOCYCL)                             191


                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Problems for the Program in Table 12.6

                                   12.6–1 Can you increase the growth and steady-state level of
                                          assets by increasing the material nutrient pool TN? What
                                          happens with more nutrients added (TN ⫽ 300)?
                                   12.6–2 Can you increase the growth and steady-state level of
                                          assets by increasing energy level E?
                                   12.6–3 Compare the shapes of the growth curve in the simula-
                                          tion of AUTOCYCL with that in the simulation of INT-
                                          LIMIT, which is also limited by its internal material
                                          cycle. Explain.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
      Chapter Thirteen
                         䉬

MODELS OF GROWTH




13.1 Model of Autocatalytic Growth on a Renewable
     Source (RENEW)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
13.2 Slowly Renewable Growth (SLOWREN)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
13.3 Growth on a Nonrenewable
     Source (NONRENEW)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
13.4 Growth on Two Sources: Renewable and
     Nonrenewable (2SOURCE)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
13.5 Model of Logistic Growth (LOGISTIC)
       Explanation of Equations
       Other Examples




                        193
I   ntroduced in this chapter are minimodels for growth of a
single storage that apply to many kinds of systems and scales.
In introductory chapters, the models RAMP, TANK, and DRAIN
were used to simulate the behavior of a storage with simple
inflows and outflows. EXPO and the models in this chapter
are autocatalytic with feedback of storage to accelerate input
production—designs that self-organize for maximum power.
RENEW grows on a source-limited inflow. NONREN grows on
a stored reserve without other sources. 2SOURCE grows on
both renewable and nonrenewable sources. SLOWREN grows
on storage reserves that are slowly renewed. LOGISTIC has expo-
nential growth limited by quadratic losses. These are different
ways of connecting energy to a storage. These models are often
used to overview complex systems simply. These designs are also
the building blocks of more complex designs.




                                䉬
13.1 MODEL OF AUTOCATALYTIC GROWTH ON
      A RENEWABLE SOURCE (RENEW)

    The model RENEW (Figure 13.1a) has an autocatalytic unit
based on an inflow of energy limited from outside. For example,
a forest grows biomass (leaves, trunks, roots, animals, bacteria,
etc.) using the regular inflows of sunlight energy. This kind of
energy source is renewable but externally limited. How the sun-
light is used cannot affect the amount that is flowing in. A forest
that uses the sunlight grows, increasing biomass until it is using
almost all the sunlight that falls each day. When the amount
of biomass growth equals the amount that is decomposed, the
quantity of stored biomass Q becomes constant, and the system
is in a steady state.
    In the simulation (Figure 13.1b) the growth in biomass Q is
almost exponential at first, while there is more sunlight than the
organisms can use. Then Q levels off at a steady state as the


             194
Model of Autocatalytic Growth on a Renewable Source (RENEW)                                   195


                                    a




                                    b



FIGURE 13.1.
Model of growth on a
renewable source (program
RENEW.bas). (a) Systems
diagram and equations;
(b) typical simulation graph.


                                  light becomes limiting, and production balances the losses due
                                  to depreciation, dispersal, etc.


                                              EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                     As shown in Figure 13.1a, J is the steady inflow of energy,
                                  (sunlight in the example discussed). The energy used by the pro-
                                  duction process is K0*R*Q. Energy R is the energy remaining
                                  that is available for further use: R ⫽ J ⫺ K0*R*Q.
                                     Because the flows of light energy are almost instantaneous,
                                  the equation has to be changed into a form that represents R at
                                  any time without requiring iteration. Algebraically solving for
                                  R, the expression to use in the program is:

                                                         R ⫽ J/(1 ⫹ K0*Q).
196                                    Chapter Thirteen Models of Growth


      The quantity stored Q is a balance between the positive contribu-
      tion by autocatalytic production flow K1*R*Q and the drains
      by linear loss pathway K4*Q and by the feedback from the storage
      to aid production K2*R*Q. In the forest example, the production
      of biomass K1*R*Q is proportional to the sunlight available R
      and the amount of biomass Q already growing. As in many other
      autocatalytic growth models (Figure 13.1a), the production and
      feedback loops are combined as a net production flow K3*R*Q,
      where coefficient K3 is a difference between coefficients K1 and K2.
         The death and decomposition of biomass K4*Q is a proportion
      K4 of the stored biomass of forest organisms Q. Therefore, the
      equation for the change in forest biomass on each iteration DQ is:

                          DQ ⫽ K3*R*Q ⫺ K4*Q.

      The amount of biomass at the end of each calculation by the
      program is the biomass at the beginning Q plus the change DQ
      during the iteration interval DT:

                             Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*DT.

      The changes are multiplied by DT (the time change) so that the
      amount of change added is appropriate for the time interval of
      each iteration.



                                EXAMPLES

          This model is appropriate for natural systems (forests, fields,
      marshes, rivers, lakes, oceans) growing on inputs that are renew-
      able source limited (sun, rain, wind, tides, waves). An example
      is successional growth of vegetation on a bare field, from herbs
      to mature forest trees. At first the weeds grow quickly, then
      shrubs, tree seedlings, and finally a forest using all the inflowing
      energy of the sun and rain as it becomes available.
          An economic example is a business that has a steady inflow
      of a raw material such as leather. The business uses the leather
      to produce belts and gain capital to buy more. The number of
      belts in stock increases quickly. Then the stock levels off when
      the number of belts is limited by the rate of supply of leather
Model of Autocatalytic Growth on a Renewable Source (RENEW)                                     197


                                  from the source. Human civilizations that are based on limited
                                  renewable energies may also follow this model.

                                  ‘‘What If ’’ Experiments for the Program in Table 13.1

                                  13.1–1 Compare and contrast systems that grow exponentially
                                         on unlimited energy (Figure 9.7) with those that grow
                                         up and then level off because of source-limited energy
                                         (Figure 13.1). How do the equations differ?
                                  13.1–2 How would an increase in environmental sun and rain
                                         affect forest growth represented with this minimodel?
                                         Run the simulation with increased J. What is the effect
                                         of reducing energy inflow by half?
                                  13.1–3 Let’s consider a successional forest that is already at the
                                         shrub stage. Increase the starting value of biomass on
                                         line 50: set Q ⫽ 25. Does the new graph support a higher
                                         biomass level? Explain why.
                                  13.1–4 Compare the growth rate and sustainable level of this
                                         forest to one that has higher decomposition rates. What
                                         do you change to simulate this? Why?



                                  TABLE 13.1
                                  Program of Growth on a Renewable
                                  Source (RENEW.bas) (Figure 13.1)
198                                                              Chapter Thirteen Models of Growth



                                                                䉬
                                               13.2 SLOWLY RENEWABLE
                                                  GROWTH (SLOWREN)

                                    The model SLOWREN (Figure 13.2a) has two storages in
                                 series. Inflow J, from an outside source into the system, accumu-
                                 lates in the first storage E. The storage E becomes a reserve that
                                 supplies resource for growth of an autocatalytic consumer unit,
                                 storing assets Q. Without the consumer unit, a large reserve
                                 storage E develops because outflows are small. Then, if a con-
                                 sumer unit with feedback actively increasing consumption is con-
                                 nected, it has a surge of growth of its assets A, which reduces E
                                 to a low level. The growth based on feedback from the consumer
                                 storage to pump more input is autocatalytic. Thus, it starts its
                                 growth like the minimodel EXPO of Figure 9.4.
                                    The simulation plotted in Figure 13.2b starts with a large
                                 accumulated reserve E before the consuming unit starts its use.
                                 The storage of consumer unit Q grows rapidly, drawing more
                                 and more energy, reducing the reserve E to a low level. With less


                                  a




                                  b



FIGURE 13.2.
Model of growth on a slowly
renewable source (program
SLOWREN.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) typical simulation graph.
Slowly Renewable Growth (SLOWREN )                                                             199


                                energy available, assets Q decline again, and the reserve recovers
                                a bit. Although the reserve storage still receives its slow, steady
                                inflow J from outside, its storage is used by the consumer unit
                                as fast as it added. A new balance develops between the inflow
                                and outflows, with the consumer unit thereafter sustained at a
                                lower level.
                                   This simulation graph resembles that generated by the
                                2SOURCE model, discussed in Section 13.4. In both there is a
                                surge of growth based on using a previous reserve, growth that
                                cannot be supported after the reserve is used.


                                            EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    The reserve energy storage E is a balance between inflow J
                                and two outflows. As shown in Figure 13.2a, losses K4*E are in
                                proportion to storage E. The use K0*E*Q by assets development
                                is autocatalytic. Changes in assets are a balance between autocat-
                                alytic production K1*E*Q and losses K3*Q, representing depreci-
                                ation, consumption, and dispersal.


                                                          EXAMPLES

                                   The arrangement of a tank and an ‘‘autocatalytic’’ consumer
                                unit is found in many kinds of geological, chemical, biological,
                                and economic systems. This minimodel is not a bad representa-
                                tion of the way resources are supplying our high energy consum-
                                ing civilization. The reserve tank represents the great storages of
                                coal, oil, natural gas, soil, wood, and minerals available a hun-
                                dred years ago. We have been in steep accelerating growth, using
                                up these reserves, and are now slowing in growth. If our economic
                                system follows this oversimplified model, our civilization will
                                have to be reduced in quantity to be supported because the
                                generation of organic matter (biomass and fuels) is slower than
                                our present rate of use of them.
                                   Another example is the population of fishes and other aquatic
                                animals in a reservoir behind a new dam that drowns a forest.
                                All the dead organic matter from the decomposing trees supports
                                a very high level of fish for a few years, but later the populations
                                are reduced, living only on the regular inflow of organic matter
                                from the tributary stream and local photosynthesis.
200                                    Chapter Thirteen Models of Growth


         Another example is a town that develops around the cutting
      of a virgin forest, but later has to live on the regular, renewable
      growth of replanted trees, cutting them about as fast as they grow.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 13.2

      13.2–1 What happens if the reserve tank is initially zero? In
             statement 60, set E ⫽ 0. In this run how does the quantity
             of consumers Q compare with the run that starts with
             a large initial reserve? Explain.
      13.2–2 The level attained by the consumer in the long run is its
             carrying capacity. What would happen to the carrying
             capacity if the regular inflow were doubled? Make J ⫽
             4 in statement 50.
      13.2–3 What would happen if there were no inflow? Set J ⫽ 0
             in line 50.



      TABLE 13.2
      Program of Growth on a Slowly Renewable
      Source (SLOWREN.bas) (Figure 13.2)
Growth on a Nonrenewable Source (NONRENEW)                                                      201


                                                                 䉬
                                       13.3 GROWTH ON A NONRENEWABLE
                                              SOURCE (NONRENEW)

                                    The model NONRENEW (Figure 13.3a) represents the pulse
                                 of consumption when autocatalytic consumers use a stored re-
                                 source that is not being replaced. Because there are no inflows,
                                 such a resource is said to be nonrenewable. For example, a dead
                                 log downed by a storm is a large storage of wood available to
                                 be eaten by beetles. The population of beetles will increase almost
                                 exponentially as they eat the log, and the quantity of log decreases



                                  a




                                  b




FIGURE 13.3.
Model of growth on a
nonrenewable source (program
NONRENEW.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) typical simulation graphs.
202                                     Chapter Thirteen Models of Growth


      rapidly. However, after the log is used up, the population of
      beetles disappears also.
         In the simulation (Figure 13.3b), the assets Q grow in a pulse
      and return to zero. The energy reserve E is pulled down to a low
      value, but in this particular calibration is not entirely used. There
      is a minimum quantity of log necessary to support beetles.


                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         In Figure 13.3a, E is the nonrenewable resource being used
      by the autocatalytic consumers Q at a rate K0*E*Q that depends
      on both the resource concentration E (the log) and the quantity
      of consumer assets Q (beetles). The production of consumers
      (beetles) K1*E*Q is also a function of the resource quantity E
      and the consumer assets Q. The term K2*E*Q represents the
      feedback effort by the feeding consumers. The change in the
      consumer assets Q is a balance between the production, feedback,
      and the other losses K4*Q (depreciation, dispersal, and mortal-
      ity). In the program, the production and feedback pathways in
      the autocatalytic loop are combined into one term, K3*E*Q,
      where K3 ⫽ K1 ⫺ K2 (shown with a bracket in Figure 13.3a). At
      the end of each iteration by the program, the quantity of con-
      sumer assets Q (beetles) is the number at the beginning Q plus
      the change DQ multiplied by the time interval of iteration: Q ⫽
      Q ⫹ DQ*DT.


                                EXAMPLES

         This model represents systems using storages that are not being
      renewed. An economic example is a mining town based on a
      limited source of gold ore. As the ore is mined, the town grows
      on its revenues from the gold. When the mine runs out, the
      town economy decreases until everyone leaves and it becomes a
      ‘‘ghost town.’’

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 13.3

      13.3–1 What would happen to the beetle population if the log
             that fell in the storm were larger? Would the population
             be greater, live longer, or both? Change E to 250 in
Growth on a Nonrenewable Source (NONRENEW)                                                   203


                               TABLE 13.3
                               Program of Growth on a Nonrenewable Source
                               (NONRENEW.bas) (Figure 13.3)




                                      line 40. To show both graphs on the screen on some
                                      computers, type RUN 40 in the command panel.
                                         If this model applies, what would you predict our
                                      world economy would do if large new deposits of fossil
                                      fuels were found? Would the system use up the fuels
                                      faster or would the fuels sustain the economy longer?
                               13.3–2 What would happen to the log E and beetles Q if you
                                      started with 100 times more beetles? Change Q from
                                      0.1 to 10 in line 50. Explain the result using the beetle
                                      example and then the mining town example.
                               13.3–3 What effect does a different species of beetles have if its
                                      growth is more efficient? Change K1 to 0.0015. What
                                      happens to Q? To E? Then assume you have another
                                      beetle species that is less efficient; change K1 to 0.0004.
                               13.3–4 What would you change to increase the death rate of
                                      the beetles? How would E and Q change? Simulate and
                                      explain your results.
204                                                              Chapter Thirteen Models of Growth



                                                                䉬
                                 13.4 GROWTH ON TWO SOURCES: RENEWABLE
                                       AND NONRENEWABLE (2SOURCE)

                                    In the model 2SOURCE (Figure 13.4a), energy for the growth
                                 of assets by an autocatalytic consumer comes from two sources,
                                 one a steadily flowing renewable source J. The other source is
                                 a storage that is not being replenished, a nonrenewable stor-
                                 age E. The model combines two other models (RENEW and
                                 NONRENEW), and the equations are a synthesis. This mini-
                                 model represents one view of our own global society. The world
                                 economy grew up on both fossil fuel reserves and renewable
                                 sources. If the model is correct, the economy will have to adjust
                                 to a lower level as the nonrenewable fossil fuels get scarce.
                                    The simulation in Figure 13.4b is typical, with the nonrenew-
                                 able storage E being reduced as the growth of assets Q surges,
                                 decreasing again as the energy reserve disappears.



                                 a




                                   b

FIGURE 13.4.
Model of growth on two
sources, one renewable, one
nonrenewable (program
2SOURCE.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) typical simulation graph.
Growth on Two Sources: Renewable and Nonrenewable (2SOURCE )                                   205


                                             EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    Referring to the diagram (Figure 13.4a), nonrenewable energy
                                 storage E outside the system is decreased by autocatalytic use
                                 K4*E*Q. At the interaction symbol, part of the energy is trans-
                                 formed into production flow K7*E*Q. Energy flow K0*R*Q is
                                 drawn into use from the inflow of renewable energy J, and at
                                 the second interaction symbol is used to generate production
                                 flow K3*R*Q. The available renewable energy R is the difference
                                 between the inflow J and the use. The quantity of assets Q is a
                                 balance between the two production inflows and the losses K8*Q
                                 that are in proportion to the storage.
                                    As indicated by brackets and explained in previous models,
                                 the gross production and feedback loops of autocatalytic produc-
                                 tion are combined, with one coefficient each (K7 and K3) repre-
                                 senting the contributions of net production.




                                                          EXAMPLES

                                    An example is the growth of a population of microbes that
                                 decomposes leaves raked into a pile. The microbes grow up
                                 quickly, but when the pile of leaves is used up, their population
                                 decreases to the number that can live on the fewer leaves that
                                 fall regularly from evergreen trees.


                                 ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                 in Table 13.4

                                 13.4–1 If more fuels are found for the reserve E, will the assets
                                        peak higher? Last longer? Set E ⫽ 200. On the command
                                        line on some computers, type RUN 40 to display both
                                        graphs on the screen together. Explain.
                                 13.4–2 Suppose pollution reduces renewable resource inflow J.
                                        How are assets Q affected? Decrease J to 30. Explain.
                                 13.4–3 If the depreciation rate of society increases as structures
                                        get older, how will this affect assets? Add line 195: IF
                                        T ⬎ 80 THEN K8 ⫽ .04. Explain the results.
                                 13.4–4 If the simulation is started with Q high, will the graph
                                        differ from the first run? Describe what you changed in
                                        the program and explain the results using an example.
206                                    Chapter Thirteen Models of Growth


      TABLE 13.4
      Program of Growth on Renewable and Nonrenewable
      Sources (2SOURCE.bas) (Figure 13.4)




                                      䉬
      13.5 MODEL OF LOGISTIC GROWTH (LOGISTIC)

         The model LOGISTIC (Figure 13.5) is a combination of auto-
      catalytic production using a constant (unlimited) energy source
      and a quadratic drain representing the effect of crowding. The
      equation that results has been widely used to represent growth
      and leveling of populations. An example is a population of mi-
      crobes that grows with a food supply that is in excess. At first
      the population increases exponentially, as in Figure 9.4. How-
      ever, the death rate increases even more rapidly than the produc-
      tion because of interactions and crowding, which cause stress
      and toxicity. Because of the quadratic term representing these
      negative interactions, the population levels off. Even though there
Model of Logistic Growth (LOGISTIC )                                                             207


                                       a




FIGURE 13.5.
Model of autocatalytic growth          b
and quadratic loss that is
mathematically logistic
(program LOGISTIC.bas).
(a) Systems diagram and
equations; (b) a family of
simulation graphs of storage
with time. Each curve was
generated by increasing the
energy source E between runs.




                                   is no lack of food to limit growth, crowding rapidly increases
                                   the death rate until the deaths equal the births and the population
                                   reaches a steady state.
                                      A family of simulation curves is shown in Figure 13.5b. After
                                   each simulation curve is plotted, the lines at the bottom of the
                                   program (lines 160–200 in Table 13.5) increase the outside en-
                                   ergy available E and restart the simulation, plotting another
                                   curve. In the first simulation graph, the production does not
                                   exceed the drains and the assets decrease with time. In the next
                                   runs with more energy, growth starts off nearly exponential and
                                   then levels, making an S-shaped growth curve. Seven such curves
                                   are shown evenly spaced, each growing faster and leveling with
                                   a greater storage.
                                      This model is only one of many system designs that gener-
                                   ate logistic equations for different reasons. For another, see
                                   AUTOCYCL in Section 12.6.
208                                    Chapter Thirteen Models of Growth


      TABLE 13.5
      Program of Logistic Growth with
      Quadratic Losses (LOGISTIC.bas)
      (Figure 13.5)




                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         The form of the logistic equation in Figure 13.5a was derived
      from the arrangement of pathways in the systems diagram. Stored
      quantity Q is increased by the flow of net production K3*E*Q
      (the gross production K1*E*Q minus the feedback K2*E*Q). The
      storage is decreased by the outflow, which is proportional to the
      square of Q (K4*Q*Q), a self-interactive, quadratic drain. At
      steady state DQ is zero, and by algebraic rearrangement of the
      change equation, steady-state Qs is found to be proportional to
      the energy level E, with the relationship: Qs ⫽ K3*E/K4.
         However, a different form of the logistic equation is often
      found in ecological textbooks: DQ ⫽ r*Q*(K ⫺ Q)/K. It is often
      verbalized by saying that the change in population DQ for each
      time step is the product of the population Q times a constant
      intrinsic reproduction rate r but diminished by the fraction that
      the difference (K ⫺ Q) is of the steady-state level K. The logistic
Model of Logistic Growth (LOGISTIC )                                                             209


                                   derived in this way can be related to the one in Figure 13.5 as
                                   follows: Because r is constant, an unlimited energy source is
                                   implied, and r can be replaced with K3*E. Then if K is the steady-
                                   state quantity Qs, it can be replaced by K3*E/K4. The result of
                                   algebraic substitutions is the equation in Figure 13.5:

                                                     DQ ⫽ K3*E*Q ⫺ K4*Q*Q.

                                   To make the model more realistic in following the second energy
                                   law, there should be a linear depreciation pathway on the storage
                                   (i.e., ⫺K5*Q). To keep this model in its simplest form, the term
                                   was not included.


                                                       OTHER EXAMPLES

                                     When mice are crowded into cages, their frequent interactions
                                   cause physiological stress that interferes with breeding and stops
                                   population growth.

                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                   in Table 13.5

                                   13.5–1 Suppose a city growth is following the logistic model.
                                          What is the effect of increasing the availability of fuels
                                          and electric power? Examine the series of plots in Figure
                                          13.5b, each with a higher value of E.
                                   13.5–2 Consider a population of mice in a cage that has a steady
                                          inflow of food pellets each day. What happens to the
                                          size of the population if you start with a larger number
                                          of mice? Set Q ⫽ 160 in line 50 and in line 180 and rerun.
                                   13.5–3 If you tried to substitute growth of stressed mice with
                                          another species that was less sensitive to crowding, which
                                          variable would you change? How does that affect the
                                          final population level? Explain.
                                   13.4–4 Not all of the losses from a population are quadratic.
                                          What is the effect of adding a linear depreciation path-
                                          way ⫺K5*Q to the DQ equation in line 120 and adding
                                          a new line 75 K5 ⫽ 0.005?
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
    Chapter Fourteen
                       䉬

   MODELS OF
COMPETITION AND
  COOPERATION



14.1 Model of Competition for a Limited
     Source (EXCLUS)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
14.2 Model of Two Populations in Exponential
     Growth (TWOPOP)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
14.3 Model of Two Populations in Competitive
     Interactive Growth (INTERACT)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
14.4 Model of Two Populations That
     Cooperate (CO-OP)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples of Cooperation between Populations




                      211
C      hapter 14 contains pairs of autocatalytic units in parallel
for the study of populations and other fields. Depending on their
relationship to energy sources and their interactions with each
other, units in parallel may be independent, competing, or coop-
erating. In some models, competitive exclusion by one population
drives the other population to low levels. In others, coexistence
occurs. The model EXCLUS has two similar units competing
for a limited energy source. The model TWOPOP compares
the exponential growths of two populations in the same place
with unlimited energy and without interactions. The model
INTERACT has two logistic populations with negative interac-
tions. The model CO-OP has two mutually beneficial populations
using the same limited energy source.
   Words like cooperation and competition have many meanings
that can cause confusion. Relationships are clarified when given
as minimodels and simulated. More parallel designs are included
in models in Chapter 19 on international relationships. Readers
are encouraged to generate other models.
   The models in this chapter are labeled and discussed as popula-
tions measured as numbers of individuals. Production flows are
reproduction, and losses are mortality and emigration. However,
the models also apply to parallel relationships in other systems
where the storages may be in mass or energy units.
   Minimodels have been well used to understand laboratory
experiments where two populations have been isolated. Rarely
are two populations isolated the way they are in the models of
this chapter, but the behavior of these designs helps us understand
the larger systems in which parallel pairs may be included.




                                䉬
14.1 MODEL OF COMPETITION FOR A LIMITED
            SOURCE (EXCLUS)

  If two species are using a common source of food that is in
short supply, the growth of one may deprive the other of its

             212
Model of Competition for a Limited Source (EXCLUS )                                             213


                                   source of food (see Figure 14.1a). Under some conditions the
                                   species that grows faster causes the other population to die out,
                                   as in Figure 14.1b. This process is called competitive exclusion.
                                   With other values of their growth coefficients, the two species
                                   may coexist without competitive exclusion.
                                      The simulation generates curves of population number with
                                   time in Figure 14.1b, and plots the same points on a graph of
                                   one population as a function of the other (phase plane) in Figure
                                   14.1c. At first both populations increase. Then as population Q1
                                   grows more, population Q2 decreases to nearly zero.


                                                EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                      The available energy R is that left unused as the two popula-
                                   tions draw energy on pathways K1*R*Q1 and K2*R*Q2. These


                                     a




FIGURE 14.1.                        b                                c
Model of two populations
competing for a limited inflow
of energy (program
EXCLUS.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) graph of population with
time; (c) phase plane, graph of
one population as a function of
another.
214                Chapter Fourteen Models of Competition and Cooperation


      pathways feed back action of the storages to aid production for
      itself, a design we call autocatalytic. Both populations Q1 and Q2
      are a balance between autocatalytic production (reproduction)
      K5*R*Q1 and K6*R*Q2 and losses. The mortality, consumption,
      dispersal, and other losses are represented by the linear pathways
      K3*Q1 and K4*Q2.


                               EXAMPLES

         An ecological example of competitive exclusion is competition
      between two species of water fleas in a jar, which are supplied
      some yeast cells to eat each day. If a few of either species are
      put into the jar alone, the number of animals increases up to a
      steady level, as in the logistic example of Chapter 13 (Figure
      13.5). If put together, the more efficient species consumes more
      of the food, and the other species dies out.
         An example from business is competition between two timber
      companies developing a limited area of growing trees. The one
      that is more efficient with more production may drive the other
      out of business.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 14.1

      14.1–1 What is the effect on the growth of the populations if
             you start with large populations? Set Q1 and Q2 ⫽ 100.
      14.1–2 Suppose one population Q1 has cooperative self-
             interactions (like helping each other), so that the growth
             rate is quadratic (proportional to Q*Q ⫽ Q2, introduced
             in Figure 6.3d). To compare growth of a species with
             quadratic growth with a species with ordinary autocata-
             lytic growth, revise two lines in the program EXCLUS.
             bas to read:

                 230 R ⫽ I / (1 ⫹ K8*Q1*Q1 ⫹ K2*Q2)
                  250 DQ1 ⫽ K7*R*Q1*Q1 ⫺ K3*Q1

             where K7 and K8 are the coefficients for the quadratic
             growth already included in the program (Table 14.1).
             Describe and explain the result.
      14.1–3 By varying the growth rate and decay rate coefficients,
             find a set of values of constants that allows for coexis-
             tence.
Model of Two Populations in Exponential Growth (TWOPOP )                                       215


                                  TABLE 14.1
                                  Program of Competitive Exclusion (EXCLUS.bas)
                                  (Figure 14.1)




                                                                 䉬
                                        14.2 MODEL OF TWO POPULATIONS IN
                                           EXPONENTIAL GROWTH (TWOPOP)

                                     There is a natural tendency for populations with unlimited
                                  food supplies to grow increasingly rapidly with exponential
                                  growth, as was shown in Figure 9.4. As storage grows, the auto-
                                  catalytic feedback also increases, accelerating growth. In Figure
216                                           Chapter Fourteen Models of Competition and Cooperation


                                  14.2a two populations are shown, both growing from the same
                                  unlimited source.
                                     The simulation in Figure 14.2b shows the steep upward curve
                                  of exponential growth for both populations, one faster than the
                                  other because its growth coefficient K1 is larger. When growths
                                  are both exponential, the difference expands. Even though re-
                                  sources are not in short supply, and even though there are no
                                  negative interactions, one population becomes increasingly domi-
                                  nant. The business that borrows wins competition by starting
                                  sooner.



                                   a




                                    b




FIGURE 14.2.
Model of two populations in
the same place, both using an
unlimited energy source (source
with constant force) (program
TWOPOP.bas). (a) Energy
system diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.
Model of Two Populations in Exponential Growth (TWOPOP )                                         217


                                              EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                     In Figure 14.2 reproduction of new individuals of population
                                  Q1 and Q2 is proportional to the population numbers and also
                                  to the concentration of available energy E. Reproduction of new
                                  individuals in the systems diagram (Figure 14.2) is drawn as a
                                  feedback loop from the storage to the interaction symbol interact-
                                  ing with the energy source. A loop reinforcing an inflow back
                                  to its own storage is called autocatalytic, named after chemical
                                  reactions where stored quantities help in their own duplication.
                                  Where a flow is proportional to the interaction of two factors
                                  both necessary to the process, the flow is a mathematical product
                                  of the two. The birth flows are K1*E*Q1 and K2*E*Q2. Loss of
                                  population by mortality flows is linear in this model. This means
                                  that deaths are in proportion to the populations, and the flows
                                  are K3*Q1 and K4*Q2.
                                     Some populations have individuals that work cooperatively
                                  in their production processes. That kind of population growth
                                  is proportional to the interaction among its individuals, which
                                  makes growth proportional to the square of the population num-
                                  ber. It is said to be quadratically autocatalytic. If one of the
                                  populations has a quadratic feedback and is not energy limited, it
                                  grows faster. (For its simulation, see ‘‘What If ’’ problem 14.2–3.)



                                                            EXAMPLES

                                     Examples of the rapid growth of populations on unlimited
                                  food resources are the early stages of growth of microorganisms
                                  in food, the growth of new plants when a field is abandoned,
                                  and the growth of new industries during human colonization of
                                  a new area.
                                     Examples of quadratic growth are the growth of fishes that
                                  school and birds that nest in colonies. The growth of the economy
                                  of the United States prior to 1973 was autocatalytically quadratic.

                                  ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                  in Table 14.2

                                  14.2–1 If the two populations have the same initial number of
                                         individuals, but the efficiency of growth is greater in
                                         one than the other, the first outdistances the other very
218                Chapter Fourteen Models of Competition and Cooperation


      TABLE 14.2
      Program Comparing Two Populations in Exponential Growth
      (TWOPOP.bas) (Figure 14.2)




             rapidly, as shown in Figure 14.2b. Can you generate this
             result by leaving the initial conditions for Q1 and Q2
             the same in lines 50 and 60 of the program, making the
             production coefficients the same, and changing the death
             rates K3 and K4? Did one population begin to outdis-
             tance the other?
      14.2–2 What happens if the growth characteristics are the same,
             but one starts ahead of the other? Change the starting
             numbers for each population so that one population
             starts out with more, but with the same growth rates
             (K1 ⫽ K2). How does the graph compare with that in
             Figure 14.2b?
      14.2–3 To see the effect of having one population grow with
             quadratic feedback, substitute the following line:
Model of Two Populations in Competitive Interactive Growth (INTERACT )                        219


                                                250 DQ1 ⫽ K5*E*Q1*Q1 ⫺ K3 *Q1.

                                             Which population has the faster growth?



                                                                    䉬
                                            14.3 MODEL OF TWO POPULATIONS IN
                                                 COMPETITIVE INTERACTIVE
                                                   GROWTH (INTERACT)

                                     In the model INTERACT (Figure 14.3a), two populations
                                   compete by negative effects of their interaction. In this model



                                       a




                                        b
FIGURE 14.3.
Model of two populations, both
using an unlimited energy
source but affecting each other
through an energy draining
interaction (program
INTERACT.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) graphs with time.
220                Chapter Fourteen Models of Competition and Cooperation


      each of the populations has autocatalytic production and qua-
      dratic losses, which make their growth equations logistic (Chap-
      ter 13). Both populations have unlimited food concentrations,
      because E is constant. Without interactions each population
      grows and levels off as in Figure 13.5. With negative interactions,
      neither can maintain as much growth nor as high a population
      at steady state. With sufficient negative effects, one population
      may drive out the other, an example of competitive exclusion.
      (See competitive exclusion that occurs via a different mechanism
      in Figure 14.1b.)
         In the simulation (Figure 14.3b), population Q2 predominates,
      displacing population Q1 because of a more efficient growth rate,
      lower mortality rate, and fewer losses from interactions.
         This minimodel has unlimited energy sources and thus is unre-
      alistic in only being limited by the quadratic crowding effects or
      interunit interactions. The model is included here because it is
      the one used most often in introductory textbooks to consider
      competition. Usually the production term (growth production)
      is given as r*Q1, where r is a constant ‘‘intrinsic rate of natural
      increase,’’ a specific reproduction rate (reproduction rate per indi-
      vidual):

                   DQ1 ⫽ r*Q1 ⫺ (r/K)*Q21 ⫺ K5*Q1*Q2.

      The equation says that the change on each iteration is the growth
      at the intrinsic rate, with a negative effect proportional to self-
      interaction, minus a negative effect due to interaction with the
      competing population. When rearranged algebraically the equa-
      tion is

                  DQ1 ⫽ r*Q1*(K ⫺ Q1)/K ⫺ K5*Q1*Q2,

      which says that the rate of change is the growth according to
      the intrinsic rate, but decreased by the difference (K ⫺ Q1) relative
      to the steady-state level K.


                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         In our equations (Figure 14.3a), we break r into an external
      energy-driven force and a growth constant r ⫽ K1*E, which
      recognizes the energy basis. For the first population the autocata-
Model of Two Populations in Competitive Interactive Growth (INTERACT )                           221


                                   lytic production (reproduction) is K1*E*Q1, and the mortality
                                   drain is K3*Q12, written in the program as Q1*Q1. The death
                                   rate per individual K3*Q1 (calculated by dividing K3*Q12 by Q1)
                                   is proportional to Q1 and is described as density dependent.
                                   The interaction with the other population is proportional to the
                                   product of the numbers of each K5*Q1*Q2.
                                      To find the population steady state, set DQ1 ⫽ 0 and solve
                                   for Q1. Without interaction, the steady-state population level is
                                   Q1 ⫽ K1*E/K3, increasing with energy concentration. With the
                                   interaction between populations, the steady-state population
                                   level is Q1 ⫽ (K1*E ⫺ K5*Q2)/K3, less because of the second
                                   population Q2.



                                                              EXAMPLES

                                      An example of competitive exclusion is competition between
                                   two species of grain beetles in a jar supplied with abundant flour
                                   on which they feed. If only one species is present, the population
                                   grows and levels off. With two species together, one species
                                   displaces the other. This model is appropriate if the actions of
                                   one species negatively affect the other through waste products,
                                   crowding, disturbing of egg production, or other means. Another
                                   example is the competition between two species of weeds, where
                                   each secretes chemical substances that inhibit the root growth
                                   of the other.

                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                   in Table 14.3
                                      Study the way the two logistic-growing populations interact
                                   by making changes and running the simulation. After each simu-
                                   lation run, type ? Q1, Q2 (the question mark used in this way
                                   means PRINT), and the last values of populations Q1 and Q2
                                   will appear on the screen. In this way you can see which popula-
                                   tion curve is Q1 and which is Q2.

                                   14.3–1 First, set the two interaction coefficients (K5 and K6) to
                                          equal zero. Then run. What happens to each population?
                                          Is there competitive exclusion? How does your result
                                          compare with Figure 14.3b?
                                   14.3–2 Next, with interactions K5 and K6 still set at zero, de-
222                Chapter Fourteen Models of Competition and Cooperation


      TABLE 14.3
      Program of Competitive Interactive Growth (INTERACT.bas)
      (Figure 14.3)




             crease the available food supply (energy concentration
             maintained E) to half of what it was in simulation problem
             14.3–1. How were growth and steady-state levels
             changed?
      14.3–3 Next decrease the interaction coefficient. Set K5 ⫽
             0.0005 and run again. What happens to populations
             now? Is there competitive exclusion? Explain.
      14.3–4 Next set the second interaction coefficient K6 ⫽ 0.002
             and run again. How is competition affected now? Can
             you increase K6 to a high enough value to displace, the
             other species? (Change the coefficient and run again.)



                                      䉬
         14.4 MODEL OF TWO POPULATIONS THAT
                  COOPERATE (CO-OP)

        In the model CO-OP (Figure 14.4a) two populations grow
      on the same renewable, limited-flow energy source as in the
Model of Two Populations That Cooperate (CO-OP )                                               223


                                    a




                                     b




FIGURE 14.4.
Model of two populations using
the same limited inflow source
but with an interaction of
mutual benefit (program CO-
OP.bas). (a) Energy systems
diagram and equations;
(b) graphs with time.



                                   competition model EXCLUS (Figure 14.1a). However, in this
                                   system some of the assets of each population are used to aid the
                                   growth of the other population, resulting in mutual cooperation.
                                   In the simulation (Figure 14.4b) both populations grow and level
                                   off. Instead of one displacing the other, they both coexist. The
                                   growth of each population is dependent on the other.



                                               EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                      The production (reproduction) of each is autocatalytic and
                                   also a function of the other K5*R*Q1*Q2 and K6*R*Q1*Q2. The
                                   available energy R is that remaining from uses by both popula-
224                Chapter Fourteen Models of Competition and Cooperation


      TABLE 14.4
      Program for Cooperative Coexistence (CO-OP.bas)
      (Figure 14.4)




      tions K1*R*Q1*Q2 and K2*R*Q1*Q2. Losses include the linear
      pathways K3*Q1 and K4*Q2 and the losses from the interaction
      K7*R*Q1*Q2 and K8*R*Q1*Q2.



                   EXAMPLES OF COOPERATION
                     BETWEEN POPULATIONS

        Many examples of cooperation are seen, both in the natural
      world and between human populations. In ecology this is called
      symbiosis. Insects pollinate flowers, which supply pollen as insect
Model of Two Populations That Cooperate (CO-OP )                                               225


                                   food. Squirrels plant acorns, which grow into trees, which pro-
                                   duce acorns to feed the next generations of squirrels. Trade is
                                   an example of cooperation between countries that is considered
                                   further with models in Chapter 19.

                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                   in Table 14.4

                                   14.4–1 Is cooperation necessary for the survival of both popula-
                                          tions? If you make Q1 ⫽ 0 and run the program, what
                                          happens to Q2? Explain.
                                   14.4–2 If you start with a much greater population in country
                                          Q1 than in Q2, with the same rate of exchange, how
                                          do the final populations differ from the original graph?
                                          Explain.
                                   14.4–3 What changes in the program would you make to have
                                          both populations grow to the same level?
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
         Chapter Fifteen
                           䉬

 MODELS OF SERIES
 AND OSCILLATION



15.1 Model of Prey–Predator Oscillation (PREYPRED)
        Explanation of Equations
        Other Systems
15.2 Model of Oscillation at Three
     Levels (OSCILLAT)
        Explanation of Equations
        Other Examples
15.3 Model of Switching Oscillation (FIRE)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Switch Models
15.4 Model of Pulse and Recycle (PULSE)
        Explanation of Equations
        Other Examples
15.5 Model of Energy Applied to
     Recycle (DESTRUCT)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples
15.6 Model of the Chaos of One Oscillating Pair
     Driving Another (CHAOS)
        Explanation of Equations
        Other Systems


                          227
S    ometimes called a pulsing paradigm, is a general systems
concept that says self-organizing systems on all scales pulse. Stor-
ages in one unit accumulate, followed by pulsed consumption and
momentary surge of temporary structure in another unit. Then the
sequence repeats its oscillation. There is no steady state in the short
run, but the repeating pattern has average levels when viewed over
a longer range. This chapter contains models with units in series
that pulse. For example, one species of mammals builds up a popu-
lation that is consumed by a surge of growth of a consuming popu-
lation of carnivores. These models are standard for introducing
population studies, in which case the storages are in numbers of
individuals, growths are reproductive (birth) rates, and losses are
death rates. However, the same models are used in other fields,
calibrated in mass or energy units. Similar phenomena are ob-
served from the molecules to the stars. Apparently pulsing designs
prevail during self-organization because pulsing designs maximize
performance and are a reinforcing pattern.
   PREYPRED is a simple model with two autocatalytic units in
series, often representing prey–predator relationships in introduc-
tory ecological textbooks. OSCILLAT connects the prey–predator
design to a more realistic source of energy and production. The
FIRE model pulses with an on–off switch mechanism. In the very
general model PULSE, a typical consumer unit pulses its system
because of the combination of linear and autocatalytic pathways.
In the model DESTRUCT, a pulse from outside aids processes of
recycle and reset. When pulsing flows are large relative to the turn-
over times of storages, the oscillations vary in a complex pattern
called mathematical chaos, illustrated in the model CHAOS.



                                  䉬
          15.1 MODEL OF PREY–PREDATOR
              OSCILLATION (PREYPRED)

   The model PREYPRED (Figure 15.1a) is a diagram of the
standard textbook model relating two autocatalytic populations


              228
Model of Prey–Predator Oscillation (PREYPRED )                                                    229




FIGURE 15.1.
Textbook model showing the
idea of prey–predator
oscillation with unlimited
energy source (program
PREYPRED.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation plot with time;
(c) phase plane plot relating the
quantities in the two units.




                                    in series. Since the equations assume a constant intrinsic rate of
                                    increase, a constant food concentration is implied. The diagram
                                    indicates constant availability E by the way the line connects
                                    directly with the interactive production symbol. The populations
                                    oscillate. The prey population starts to grow exponentially. Then
                                    the population of predators grows so fast that the numbers of
                                    prey are reduced again. With less to eat, the carnivore population
                                    declines again. The turnover time of the predators is larger than
                                    that of the prey, and consequently their pulses last longer.
                                       The simulation generates Figure 15.1b, the traditional graph
                                    of a prey–predator model system. Shown in Figure 15.1c is the
                                    concurrent plot of one population as a function of the other (a
                                    phase plane plot).
230                        Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation


                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

          In the diagram, E is a source with constant concentration of
      food for the prey; H is the quantity of prey and C the quantity
      of predators. The production of prey is K1*E*H. The production
      of predators is K4*H*C, which draws energy from the prey
      K3*H*C. Loss of prey due to other causes (death or emigration)
      is term K2*H; loss of predators is pathway K5*C.


                           OTHER SYSTEMS

         Similar oscillations are observed in host–parasite relationships
      and in other carnivore–herbivore relationships. Examples are
      spruce trees and spruce budworms in Canada, and week-to-week
      pulses of phytoplankton and zooplankton in the sea. Supply and
      demand processes in economics show these oscillations. When a
      product Q is made, its stock on the market increases and prices
      decline until consumers H buy it, then its supply goes down until
      more is produced in another cycle.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 15.1
      15.1–1 If the efficiency of growth of the carnivores doubles, how
             does the graph change? Increase K4. Explain.
      15.1–2 Decrease the turnover time of predators by reducing the
             death rate of the predators: K5 ⫽ 0.1. What happens to
             the quantities and frequency of oscillations as a result?
      15.1–3 What is the effect of reducing the energy source in half?
             What would this mean in an ecosystem with wildcats
             and rabbits?



                                      䉬
          15.2 MODEL OF OSCILLATION AT THREE
                   LEVELS (OSCILLAT)

         A more realistic model for ‘‘prey–predator’’ type oscillations
      is OSCILLAT (Figure 15.2a), a system that uses a storage P,
      being maintained within the system by a steady source-limited
      inflow energy J (e.g., sun and rain). The design has linear produc-
Model of Oscillation at Three Levels (OSCILLAT )                                                 231


                                    TABLE 15.1
                                    Program of Prey–Predator with Constant Force Source
                                    (PREYPRED.bas) (Figure 15.1)




                                    tion, which aggregates the details of plants. The herbivores H
                                    and the carnivores C are an oscillating pair as in the model
                                    PREYPRED (Figure 15.1a). The growth of herbivores stimulates
                                    a surge of growth of carnivores, which consume most of the
                                    herbivores. This causes the carnivores to decrease or emigrate.
                                    Then the cycle repeats. The OSCILLAT model is dependent on
                                    an energy storage being maintained by the outside source. If
                                    the prey–predator chain is connected to a limited-flow source
                                    without storage P, the oscillation is damped out, becoming a
                                    steady state.
                                       The simulation in Figure 15.2b shows the plants oscillating
                                    as the consumption varies with ups and downs of the herbivores.
                                    In many ecosystems like this, oscillating pairs cause the rest of
                                    the system to oscillate.
232                                                   Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation




FIGURE 15.2.
Model of prey–predator
oscillation with an energy
source from plant productivity
(program OSCILLAT.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation
results.



                                            EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    The plant storage P is a balance between the linear production
                                 inflow K1*J, the plants consumed by the herbivores K3*P*H,
                                 and the other losses K2*P (includes respiration, depreciation,
                                 mortality, emigration). Because the plant production flow is lin-
                                 ear, it is entirely dependent on the external energy inflow J.
                                 With a linear production, a constant J does not make the source
                                 unlimited. The storage of herbivores H is a balance between
                                 their autocatalytic production K4*P*H, the consumption by the
                                 carnivores C, and other losses and outflow K5*H. The storage
                                 of carnivores C is a balance between the autocatalytic production
                                 K7*H*C and losses and outflows K8*C. Inflow J is constant.



                                                     OTHER EXAMPLES

                                    Oscillations are observed in many Arctic populations. The
                                 oscillations of lemmings and carnivores are often accompanied
                                 by sharp variations in stored vegetation biomass. Since there is
Model of Oscillation at Three Levels (OSCILLAT )                                                233


                                    a storage of plant matter on which herbivores depend and which
                                    oscillates with the animal populations, the model in Figure 15.2
                                    better represents Arctic ecosystems than Figure 15.1. The preda-
                                    tors of the lemmings, foxes and owls, oscillate with the lemming
                                    population. Thus, the populations of producers and two levels
                                    of consumers go up and down, following each other.

                                    ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                    in Table 15.2
                                    15.2–1 In the model in Figure 15.2, change to a system for a
                                           lower latitude where there is more sun: Increase J to


                                    TABLE 15.2
                                    Program for Prey–Predator with Limited Source (OSCILLAT.bas)
                                    (Figure 15.2)
234                        Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation


             40,000 kilocalories per square meter per year. What
             happens to the oscillations? Explain why. Remember the
             original oscillations in this model are about every 10
             years. Now move to a higher latitude where the sun’s
             energy is less: Decrease J to 2,000. What happens to
             the oscillations?
      15.2–2 Do the animal populations oscillate if the plants are
             constant? Insert line 325 P ⫽ 500.
      15.2–3 What happens if the carnivores are absent? Insert
             line 295 C ⫽ 0. To see the herbivores’ graph, make
             H0 ⫽ 10. Suppose the turnover time of the carnivores
             is increased, which might happens if parasites were sub-
             stituted for the carnivores. Increase K6 to 0.3, K7 to
             0.15, and K8 to 6.


                                      䉬
                   15.3 MODEL OF SWITCHING
                       OSCILLATION (FIRE)

         FIRE (Figure 15.3a) is a pulsing model that includes a switch
      symbol (labeled ‘‘fire’’). Plants grow using available sunlight en-
      ergy R and pool of nutrients N while some biomass is used in
      consumption (respiration, animals, microbes). When the vegeta-
      tion biomass Q has reached a critical mass G1, then the fire
      switches on. When the grass has burned down to a low concentra-
      tion G2, there is no longer enough to burn and the fire switches
      off. While the fire burns, it releases nutrients to the storage of
      available nutrients N, which stimulate growth, and nutrients are
      bound up in the grass again. This model has a ‘‘conservation
      of nutrients’’ provision with no inflows or losses of nutrients.
      Nutrients are either free in the environmental pool N or bound
      in the biomass Q.
         In the simulation (Figure 15.3b) with the switch off, growth
      of biomass B occurs accompanied by decrease of the nutrient
      pool N. When the fire switch turns on, vertical lines mark the
      reset of conditions to high nutrients and low biomass again.


                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         Plant production K1*R*N requires both energy (sun, wind,
      rain) and nutrient, and thus is a product of these resources avail-
Model of Switching Oscillation (FIRE )                                                               235




FIGURE 15.3.
Model of oscillation based on
threshold switching (program
FIRE.bas). ‘‘Cons.’’ is
abbreviation for animal and
microbial consumers. (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.



                                     able (R and N). Available energy R is the difference between the
                                     inflow I and that used by plant production K0*R*N. The total
                                     nutrients in the system Nt include the nutrients in the soil N plus
                                     those bound up in the grass (f*Q), where f is the fraction of the
                                     biomass that is nutrients.
                                         In the program (Table 15.3), K2*Q is the respiration of the
                                     biomass without fire. The fire switch is turned on when Q ⬎ G1
                                     (line 200). Value G2 is the quantity of grass left after the fire; G1
                                     and G2 are thresholds and are shown at the top of the switch
                                     symbol in the figure. The program statements 180 and 190 draw
                                     lines from the values Q and N just before the fire to their values
                                     right after the fire. When these are plotted in red, they illustrate
                                     the fire dramatically.
236                        Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation


      TABLE 15.3
      Program for Fire with Recycled Nutrients (FIRE.bas) (Figure 15.3)




                 EXAMPLES OF SWITCH MODELS

         Many natural systems have fire as part of their normal pattern.
      Pine forests in southeastern United States, chaparral in southern
      California and the Mediterranean lands, and grasslands around
      the world have regular fires. Sometimes fire comes every 4 or 5
      years as in the Southeast; sometimes it’s every 100 years or so,
      as in the lodge pole pine forest in Yellowstone National Park.
      A spurt of growth follows the fire as the nutrients are recycled
      into the soil.
         An example from business is a buildup of inventories in a
      store to surplus, followed by a special sale to sell most of them.
      The money from the sales is used to restock the shelves.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 15.3
      15.3–1 What is the effect of adding more solar energy? Increase
             I to 15. Why? With the original solar energy, increase
Model of Pulse and Recycle (PULSE )                                                                   237


                                             nutrients. How does a change due to nutrients compare
                                             with the change due to solar energy? Why?
                                      15.3–2 What happens to the fire regime if the total nutrients
                                             are reduced by half? Why?
                                      15.3–3 What happens to a fire-cycle system if fire is kept out
                                             completely? Bypass the fire statements by adding a line:
                                             175 GOTO 210.
                                      15.3–4 Suppose a type of vegetation grows that is more fire
                                             resistant. Set a higher threshold for burning: G1 ⫽
                                             10000. What happens?




                                                                       䉬
                                       15.4 MODEL OF PULSE AND RECYCLE (PULSE)

                                          PULSE (Figure 15.4a) is a production–consumption–recycle
                                      model that pulses without switches because the autocatalytic
                                      consumer unit has both linear and quadratic-autocatalytic intake
                                      pathways. A process accumulates a storage Q, which is being
                                      consumed by the consumer unit C.
                                          There are two modes of consumption, the slow gradual one
                                      and an epidemic destructive one. As the consumer unit grows,
                                      it reaches a point where the autocatalytic pathway accelerates in
                                      a frenzy, using up the storage Q while giving a brief surge to the
                                      consumer storage C. Recycled outputs of consumption (wastes)
                                      are used by production again. Because pulsing designs prevail in
                                      self-organization by generating more production in the long run,
                                      we can expect to find features of this model in all kinds of systems.
                                          PULSE is a more realistic model for producer–consumer sys-
                                      tems than the prey–predator models (Figures 15.1a and 15.2a).
                                      For example, arid grasslands have grasshoppers (locusts) that
                                      have two modes of behavior: a slow consumption mode and a
                                      frenzied consumption mode. For several seasons the quantity of
                                      grasshoppers increases slowly, eating only a small portion of
                                      accumulating grasses. When there is enough accumulated vegeta-
                                      tion for the grasshoppers to have a surge of reproduction and
                                      rapid consumption, they change behavior, developing hordes that
                                      consume vegetation to a low level (Figure 15.4b).
                                          The simulation (Figure 15.4b) shows the buildup of product
                                      storage Q followed by the pulse of consumers C, reduction of
                                      products, and increase of materials. The available free materials
238                                                   Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation




FIGURE 15.4.
A pulsing model of production,
consumption, and recycle based
on linear and autocatalytic
consumption (program
PULSE.bas). (a) Energy systems
diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.



                                 M used up during the product storing phase are released during
                                 the consumer pulse.



                                            EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    Primary production K1*R*M requires both energy and mate-
                                 rial, and thus is a product of these resources available (R and
                                 M). Available energy R is the difference between the inflow I and
                                 the use K0*R*N by the primary production process. Materials
                                 are conserved in this model: Total materials Mt include those
                                 available for production M, those incorporated in the producers
                                 (f1*Q) and those in the consumers (f2*C). Storage of accumulating
                                 products Q is a balance between the primary production
                                 K1*R*M, the steady losses K2*Q (depreciation and consump-
Model of Pulse and Recycle (PULSE )                                                                239


                                      tion), and two pathways of consumption K4*Q and K3*Q*C*C.
                                      The linear pathway of slow consumption is proportional to the
                                      quantity of producers K4*Q. The rapid consumption pathway is
                                      caused by a superaccelerated growth of consumers. Mathemati-
                                      cally, this is quadratic autocatalytic (K3*Q*C*C), which repre-
                                      sents processes that go faster due to self-interactions. (See the
                                      discussion on quadratic feedback in Section 9.7.) The surge of
                                      consumer growth C is initiated automatically without switches
                                      when the quadratic-autocatalytic term K6*Q*C*C for producing
                                      new consumers exceeds the term for consumer recycling and
                                      depreciation K7*C.



                                                          OTHER EXAMPLES

                                         In rainforest areas like the Amazon River basin, tribal people
                                      practiced ‘‘slash and burn’’ shifting agriculture. Trees were cut
                                      and burned, the area was planted and harvested for several years,
                                      and then it was abandoned to regrow when the people moved
                                      to a fresh site. In 30 years or so, after some trees had regrown,
                                      the process was repeated.
                                         This model applies to geological cycles where a process gradu-
                                      ally builds up a storage of energy that later sets up a frenzied
                                      consumption process, such as an earthquake or volcanic eruption
                                      that disperses energy and materials.
                                         The model fits some theories for the rise and decline of human
                                      civilizations such as the Mayan developments of Mexico. For
                                      example, productive processes of the landscape build up storages
                                      of soil and forests until there is enough to support a pulse of
                                      human development including new architecture, knowledge, and
                                      armies. Perhaps our own civilization is a pulse of consumption
                                      based on the previous long accumulation of fossil fuels and min-
                                      eral deposits.

                                      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                      in Table 15.4

                                      15.4–1 What happens if the total materials are reduced a tenth
                                             or increased by 10 times?
                                      15.4–2 What happens if the energy available is reduced a tenth
                                             or increased by 10 times? Consider at what level energy
                                             is well used.
240                         Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation


      TABLE 15.4
      Program in BASIC for Pulse and Recycle (PULSE)
      (Figure 15.4)




                                       䉬
             15.5 MODEL OF ENERGY APPLIED TO
                   RECYCLE (DESTRUCT)

         The model DESTRUCT (Figure 15.5a) illustrates an important
      feature of many, if not all, systems that develop assets A in excess
      of that necessary to maximize production. The model applies
Model of Energy Applied to Recycle (DESTRUCT )                                                   241




FIGURE 15.5.
Model of energy-assisted
destruction and recycle (program
DESTRUCT.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.



                                   pulses of available energy D to destroy structures A and make
                                   materials M available again.
                                      Normally energy transformations use considerable energy of
                                   one quality R to make products of higher quality, assets A. Some
                                   processes of dispersal and deterioration reduce the assets and
                                   recycle the materials (disorder). We sometimes call this an order–
                                   disorder cycle. As in photosynthesis, most of the energy is re-
                                   quired on the left of the cycle, building up the products (order).
                                   It takes less energy to complete the down cycle because it is
                                   downhill thermodynamically.
                                      However, when the normal depreciation processes are not fast
                                   enough, energy can be applied to the down-recycle side of the
                                   system. Since energy is being applied in the direction of deprecia-
                                   tion (downhill), a smaller amount of energy is required for the
242                        Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation


      destruction than for the production. The model DESTRUCT
      directs downhill energy D to a simple design of production and
      recycle. This model has provision for conservation of materials,
      since total materials are the sum of those available M and those
      bound within assets f*A.
         In the simulation (Figure 15.5b) the model starts with available
      materials and few assets. After growth has occurred for 100 time
      units, the pulse D is turned on for 50 days and then turned off
      again (lines 200 and 210 in the program in Table 15.5). During
      the pulse, assets decrease and materials increase. Afterward
      growth continues.
         Although not included in this model, the downhill effects may
      release energy that causes temporary storms of destruction.
      Excess energy may self-organize temporary turbulent autocata-
      lytic systems in the environment, which may become disasters
      (Alexander, 1987). In Figure 15.5 this can be drawn by adding



      TABLE 15.5
      Program Illustrating a Destructive Energy Pulse
      (DESTRUCT.bas) (Figure 15.5)
Model of Energy Applied to Recycle (DESTRUCT )                                                  243


                                  another autocatalytic consumer unit drawing energy from the
                                  interaction of the energy from D and assets A.




                                                 EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                     In DESTRUCT, production is an autocatalytic process
                                  K1*R*M*A requiring externally limited inflow energy R, avail-
                                  able materials M, and the structure of the assets A. The steady
                                  depreciation–consumption–dispersal process K2*A is in propor-
                                  tion to assets A. The pulse starts when the program (Table 15.5,
                                  line 200) makes X ⫽ 1, which turns on the pulse pathway
                                  X*K3*A*D. Materials available M are those not bound in as-
                                  sets f*A, where f is the fraction of the assets that are mate-
                                  rials.




                                                            EXAMPLES

                                     Although human and forest systems are breaking down all
                                  the time, hurricanes and fires speed up the destruction and recycle
                                  of materials. War adds destructive energy to breaking down a
                                  society and, in this model, causes it to rebuild. In briny waters
                                  where organic matter has accumulated, photorespiration uses
                                  the sun to speed the processes of respiration and recycle by the
                                  pink bacterial populations of Halobacteria. Organelles and genes
                                  in living cells are organized to destroy structures as they become
                                  nonfunctional. In ecosystems diseases destroy accumulated popu-
                                  lations that become ill adapted.


                                  ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                  in Table 15.5

                                  15.5–1 In the example of a hurricane impacting a forest, de-
                                         scribe the process from Figure 15.5a: What are D, A,
                                         and M?
                                  15.5–2 What does increasing the energy source I do to the quan-
                                         tities of A and M? Explain.
                                  15.5–3 What is the effect of increasing the energy of the pulse
                                         D 10 times?
244                                                      Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation



                                                                    䉬
                                            15.6 MODEL OF THE CHAOS OF ONE
                                                OSCILLATING PAIR DRIVING
                                                    ANOTHER (CHAOS)

                                        The CHAOS model (Figure 15.6a) illustrates the phenomenon
                                     of mathematical chaos, which is common where complex systems
                                     oscillate. With mathematical chaos, pulsing causes variation in
                                     patterns of oscillation. The word chaos was selected because the
                                     values on graphs appear erratic. However, choice of the word
                                     chaos was unfortunate because it implies disorder, whereas the
                                     patterns of mathematical chaos are determined exactly by the
                                     equations just like other dynamic models. Chaotic pulsing is
                                     usually increased with increased energy level.




FIGURE 15.6.
Model of chaos generated by
one oscillating pair connected to
another (program CHAOS.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) oscillations by the
pair on the left; (c) oscillations
by the pair on the right;
(d) phase plane plot of the pair
on the left; (e) phase plane plot
of the pair on the right.
Model of the Chaos of One Oscillating Pair Driving Another (CHAOS )                               245


                                      One type of chaos occurs when pulsing of part of a system
                                   affects oscillations elsewhere within the network. The CHAOS
                                   model (Figure 15.6a) shows how one oscillating pair of units on
                                   one time scale interacting with another oscillating pair on a faster
                                   time scale causes both to change their patterns of pulsing. In other
                                   words, there are oscillations in oscillation. Putting the model in
                                   terms of an example can help the reader visualize the way units
                                   of different size have different scales of oscillation. Although
                                   this model does not have other features necessary to represent
                                   ecosystems well, the four storages are labeled phytoplankton P,
                                   zooplankton Q, small fish H, and larger carnivores C.
                                      The simulations in Figures 15.6b and 15.6c contain the graphs
                                   with time. All the units are oscillating, but the magnitudes are
                                   changing as they affect each other. Turnover times increase up
                                   the scale of units from left to right in order of size and position
                                   in the energy chain (unit order: P, Q, H, C). The duration of the
                                   pulses increases in the same order as turnover times. The same
                                   oscillations are plotted on phase plane graphs (one storage as a
                                   function of another) in Figures 15.6d and 15.6e. Without chaos,
                                   the loops formed by an oscillation at steady state are simple rings
                                   on a phase plane as shown in the PREYPRED model (Figure
                                   15.1). However, in this CHAOS model the rings shift back and
                                   forth. The outer border of the family of curves is called the at-
                                   tractor.



                                                EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                   The equations for the four autocatalytic units are similar. For
                                   example, the rate of change DP of stored phytoplankton P is a
                                   balance between the production K3*E*P minus losses K7*P minus
                                   the autocatalytic consumption by the next unit K8*P*Q. The
                                   source E is constant (unlimited). In this model the only loss
                                   pathway from carnivores is the linear pathway K10*C, since no
                                   higher level carnivore is included.



                                                          OTHER SYSTEMS

                                      Mathematical chaos has been widely found in almost every
                                   kind of system where searches were conducted. Chaos may be a
246                       Chapter Fifteen Models of Series and Oscillation


      TABLE 15.6
      Program for Oscillator Pair at One Scale Driving Another
      (CHAOS.bas) (Figure 15.6)




                                                                (continues)
Model of the Chaos of One Oscillating Pair Driving Another (CHAOS )                              247


                                   TABLE 15.6 (Continued)




                                   complex way in which designs formed by self-organization use
                                   excess energy to increase productivity.
                                      Regular oscillations of populations of the snowshoe hare, its
                                   predator, the lynx, and other animals were recorded by pelt
                                   counts in Canada by the Hudson Bay Company from 1845 to
                                   1935. The oscillations shift somewhat over time, suggesting cha-
                                   otic mechanisms.
                                      In Chapter 6 we explained how chaotic high–low jumping of
                                   values can occur in digital simulation when the flows of each
                                   iteration are large compared to the tanks into which they flow.
                                   The storages fill to high values, which causes their outflows on
                                   the next iteration to become excessive and the tank storages
                                   drop to low values again. Where continuous processes are being
                                   simulated with the discrete iterations of digital simulation, such
                                   chaos is an artifact of using too large a time step (DT) for Euler
                                   integration. To make sure that this artifact is not present in a
                                   simulation, it can be tested by running with smaller and smaller
                                   DT values until no change is observed.
                                      High–low jumping may occur in the real world where a stor-
                                   age quantity receives frequent high-energy pulses.

                                   ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                   in Table 15.6
                                   15.6–1 What happens with less available energy? Reset E to 50.
                                   15.6–2 What happens if the two oscillating pairs are discon-
                                          nected. Set K2 to zero and apply available energy to the
                                          equation for small fish H in place of zooplankton. Dis-
                                          able line 370 by inserting REM and a space after the
                                          line number. Insert a line 372 DH ⫽ K1*E*H ⫺
                                          K4*C*H ⫺ K10*C
                                   15.6–3 Increase the iteration time DT from 0.01 to 0.1. What
                                          happens? Why?
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
     Chapter Sixteen
                        䉬

 MINIMODELS
OF SUCCESSION
AND EVOLUTION



16.1 Model of Wet Grassland (WETLAND)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples
16.2 Model of Succession (CLIMAX)
       Explanation of Equations
       Examples of Succession and Climax Systems
16.3 Model of Excess Resource and
     Diversity (NUTRSPEC)
       Explanation of Equations
       Other Systems
16.4 Model of Species and Support
     Area (SPECAREA)
       Explanation of Equations
       Other Examples
16.5 Model of Island Speciation and
     Diversity (SPECIES)
       Explanation of Equations
       Other Examples




                       249
T    he sequence of stages in self-organization of systems is called
succession on the time scale of ecosystems and evolution on
longer scales. This chapter discusses minimodels for the growth
and development of ecosystems, but the principles of growth and
organization of species diversity may apply to other systems also.
WETLAND is a simple model of an ecosystem accumulating
peat. CLIMAX relates growth of biomass to species diversity.
NUTRSPEC shows an inverse relationship of nutrient excess and
diversity. The model SPECAREA relates species diversity to the
square root of the support area. SPECIES includes migration and
evolution in development of diversity on islands. After growth
and organization these models develop steady states. However,
steady states are normally reset and restarted later by pulses on
a larger scale (Chapter 15).




                                䉬
 16.1 MODEL OF WET GRASSLAND (WETLAND)

   The model WETLAND (Figure 16.1a) contains the main fea-
tures of a wetland ecosystem. In a wet grassland nutrients flow in
with rain and runoff. Grasses photosynthesize using the nutrients
rapidly and building up standing vegetation biomass Q2. As the
grass dies, some is decomposed and recycled back to nutrients
in the soil and waters Q1. The rest of this dead grass accumulates
as peat Q3. Consumption processes of animals and fire are in
proportion to the organic accumulations. When excess nutrients
flow in, they are readily filtered and bound into the vegetation
and peat.
   The simulation (Figure 16.1b) shows growth of plants and
peat over a 10-year period. The program inputs monthly averages
for solar energy I from Florida with seasonal maximum in early
summer and minimum in winter. The same set of data is repeated
each year. Grasses grow in the summer and decrease in the winter.
During the 10 years there is an increasing buildup of peat until


              250
Model of Wet Grassland (WETLAND )                                                              251


                                 a




                                 b




FIGURE 16.1.
Model of wet grassland
(program WETLAND.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation.



                                 its decomposition equals its production, and the nutrient outflow
                                 equals the inflow. The figures used to calibrate the program
                                 (Table 16.1) were obtained from a class study of Paynes Prairie
                                 in northcentral Florida.


                                            EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    Nutrients are increased by outside inflow J and by recycle of
                                 nutrients released from consumption K3*Q3 and K8*Q2. Nutri-
                                 ents are decreased by water outflows K4*Q1 and uptake by plants
                                 K5*R*Q1 as part of production. Photosynthetic production is
                                 represented as a product K1*R*Q1 of the unused light R and
                                 the nutrients in the waters and soil Q1. By not including an
                                 autocatalytic action of the vegetation Q2, the production function
                                 does not have short-term growth acceleration that might be of
252                Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


      TABLE 16.1
      Program for the Wet Grassland Model (WETLAND.bas)
      (Figure 16.1)
Model of Succession (CLIMAX)                                                                   253


                               interest on a smaller time scale. Losses of vegetation Q2 to respira-
                               tion, consumption, and fire are represented by K7*Q2, and losses
                               of peat by K6*Q3.
                                  The changes in sunlight are programmed as an array with the
                               monthly averages listed as DATA in line 11 of the Table 16.1
                               program. How to program an array is explained in Appendix B.
                               In this program TX is the number of days; the time spaces are
                               divided by TX to get the scale for time T0 (lines 135 and 140).


                                                         EXAMPLES

                                  All around the world are wetlands that accumulate peat in
                               freshwaters and saltwaters. This model is appropriate for tropi-
                               cal, temperate, and arctic areas. The model may apply to other
                               kinds of systems that use a material to build products and later
                               pass remainders to a waste storage before being recycled.

                               ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                               in Table 16.1

                               16.1–1 What would change if a city used this wetland to dump
                                      its treated sewage? Increase the inflow of nutrients J to
                                      0.025. Would it change the looks of the wetland?
                               16.1–2 If this area were partially drained so that the peat decom-
                                      posed twice as fast, how would you change the program
                                      to indicate this? How would the graph change?
                               16.1–3 What happens if this model is adapted to some arctic
                                      conditions? Reduce the consumption rates K6 and K7 to
                                      one-tenth of the original, representing lower temperature
                                      and shorter season for animals. Also change the solar
                                      regime by subtracting 2000 kcal/m2/day in line 150: I ⫽
                                      A(M) ⫺ 2000.



                                                                䉬
                                     16.2 MODEL OF SUCCESSION (CLIMAX)

                                  Figure 16.2a shows a model of succession (CLIMAX) for
                               the development of complex systems. Succession starts with the
                               production of organized material followed by the acquisition and
                               organization of information. Labeled and calibrated for a tropical
254                                            Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution




                                  a




                                 b




FIGURE 16.2.
Model of succession (program
CLIMAX.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.



                                 rain forest ecosystem in Puerto Rico, the model develops biomass
                                 B first, which provides the habitat and energy basis for acquisition
                                 of species (information) D from seeding sources S outside. In
                                 typical succession starting with a bare field, a few grasses and
                                 herbs grow, first producing a small amount of biomass (B in
                                 Figure 16.2a). In later seasons there are taller grasses and shrubs,
                                 tree seedlings, and eventually large trees. The growth of this
                                 biomass depends on renewable outside energy sources I, but also
                                 on species diversity D, which represents the number of different
                                 kinds of plants and animals.
                                    As the quantity of biomass increases, it provides niches for
                                 seeding from outside to increase the diversity. In this model,
                                 diversity is the number of species per 1000 individual organisms
                                 counted. The number of species D is a balance between new
Model of Succession (CLIMAX)                                                                  255


                               species seeded and those lost by local extinction. Losses on one
                               extinction pathway K7 are caused by competition of species.
                                   The more biomass and the more diversity in a system, the
                               more productivity required to maintain them. In the model the
                               extra energy needed to support the diversity is indicated by the
                               quadratic drain from the biomass storage.
                                   For example, in the tropical rain forest there are many species
                               of frogs. It has been necessary for them to use extra energy to
                               develop different colors, habitats, croaks, and mating behaviors
                               to enable them to occupy different niches and survive together.
                               However, diversity increases division of labor and improves effi-
                               ciency. Net production is the increase in biomass in excess of
                               that used by respiration, consumption, and support of diversity.
                                   The simulation graph in Figure 16.2b shows changes in the
                               production rate Pg, biomass B, and diversity D. Gross production
                               Pg, which is proportional to the outside energy sources I, increases
                               with biomass and diversity and levels quickly. Net production
                               DB is the growth of biomass minus its respiration and use for
                               diversity. At first most of gross production is net gain going into
                               biomass. When gross production is no longer increasing, net
                               production decreases as more of the production goes for mainte-
                               nance.
                                   In Figure 16.2b the rate of production and biomass increase
                               first. Then as the species diversity increases, more of the organic
                               matter is required for supporting the complexity, and the biomass
                               decreases somewhat. The production rate is sustained with the
                               help of increased efficiency aided by the diversity. At first most
                               of the production is net production contributing the growth of
                               biomass. Later more and more of the production goes into con-
                               sumption and diversity, and the net production decreases. Some
                               biomass is yielded to humans who selectively harvest wood or
                               wildlife without clear cutting. At one stage the net production is
                               temporarily negative and biomass declines briefly. The simulation
                               develops a steady state, which in ecology has been called a climax.
                               Not included in this model is the restart necessary when the
                               system is pulsed by large-scale phenomena such as hurricanes.


                                           EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                 Renewable resources remaining for use R are the inflow I
                               minus that used for production, including K1*R*B, the autocata-
256                Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


      lytic use in producing green biomass B, and additional use
      K0*R*D for diversity-aided production. Gross production is the
      sum of the two production processes K2*R*D and K3*R*B. De-
      preciation and respiration of biomass are through pathway K6*B,
      and the yield from the system is pathway K4*B. The drain on
      biomass due to number of species is quadratic K5*D*D because
      the number of species interactions increases as the square of
      the number. These interactions drain energy either because of
      negative effects or because of the energy used to make separate
      niches and prevent negative effects. New species are added
      K8*B*S in proportion to biomass B and seeding that is available
      S. Some biomass is used K9*B*S by the introductions (e.g., soil
      providing initial habitat for animals and microbes). Diversity D,
      the numbers of different species of organisms, is a balance be-
      tween the additions and extinctions. Linear extinction K11*D is
      proportional to the number of species; K7*D*D is quadratic
      extinction due to species interactions and K10*D*R is stress losses
      of species not adapted to the energy conditions.


                EXAMPLES OF SUCCESSION AND
                     CLIMAX SYSTEMS

         Ecosystems with similar species of plants and animals are
      found in similar climate zones. The major types of ecosystems
      with their typical organisms are called biomes. The climax species
      in the grasslands biome are grasses; in coral reefs they are coral;
      in the tundra special grasses and herbs develop that can live in
      a short growing season and permafrost soil. Different species
      occupy the same niche in different areas. An example is the large
      herbivores in the tundra: The caribou live in the tundra in North
      America and the reindeer in the same niche of the tundra in
      Northern Europe.
         Human civilizations also go through succession and climax.
      They start with a few people in an area; the population grows
      as the economic assets grow. The culture may reach a climax
      with high diversity of occupations (comparable to species in
      ecosystems). Businesses may go through stages of growth and
      diversification.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 16.2
      16.2–1 What happens if there is no seeding from outside?
             Change statement 80 to S ⫽ 0. Run the original program,
Model of Succession (CLIMAX)                                                                257


                               TABLE 16.2
                               Program for Model of Succession (CLIMAX.bas) (Figure 16.2)




                                      make your change, and run it again. Some computers
                                      will graph both runs, if you run it again with the state-
                                      ment RUN 70.
                               16.2–2 If you increase the harvest yield, K4*B 20 times, what
258                 Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


             happens to the biomass and diversity? Change K4 to
             0.0005.
      16.2–3 What would happen to the system if rain was the princi-
             pal limiting environmental resource, and a climate
             change reduced the rain in half? Change I to 0.5.



                                      䉬
           16.3 MODEL OF EXCESS RESOURCE AND
                  DIVERSITY (NUTRSPEC)

         According to Lotka’s concept of self-organization for maxi-
      mum power, systems designs prevail that maximize the intake
      of available unused resources as a first priority. In that case
      maximum performance occurs when the species most adapted
      to fast colonization overgrow the others. However, after excess
      resources have been incorporated into the system, a systems de-
      sign develops that is more efficient at recycling materials so mate-
      rials are not limiting. Maximum performance at this stage is
      provided by high diversity of species that provide specialization
      and division of labor, getting more out of the energy budgets
      and efficiently recycling the materials. If there is steady inflow
      of excess nutrients, the succession may be arrested in a stage
      with a few weed species (low diversity) depositing the excess
      nutrients in organic matter. The principle that diversity is inverse
      to resource excess was suggested by Yount (1956).
         The minimodel NUTRSPEC (Figure 16.3a) contains both
      mechanisms, the one that develops overgrowth by weedy coloni-
      zation B and the complex M of efficient, mature, high-diversity
      species. When excess inflow of nutrients Jn is supplied, the weedy
      overgrowth occurs, organic matter deposits Y develop, and diver-
      sity M remains small. When there is no excess of unused resource,
      high-diversity species displace the weedy components without
      organic matter deposition.
         In the first simulation (Figure 16.3b) the nutrients Jn flowing
      in are few, and the concentrations in the water are too small to
      plot. Weeds B do not overgrow, and organic matter Y does not
      accumulate. Species diversity M and its productivity gradually in-
      crease.
         In the second simulation shown (Figure 16.3c) the nutrient
      inflow Jn was much increased, causing high concentrations of
Model of Excess Resource and Diversity (NUTRSPEC )                                               259


                                   a




FIGURE 16.3.
Model of inverse relationship of
excess nutrients and diversity         b                            c
(program NUTRSPEC.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation with
little nutrient inflow;
(c) simulation with high
nutrient inflow.



                                   nutrients in the system. Weeds B grow rapidly, with net growth
                                   that goes into organic storage deposits Y. The complex of high-
                                   diversity species M did not develop.


                                               EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                      The model has two autocatalytic units competing by drawing
                                   on the same sunlight I and same nutrients N. Both the solar
                                   energy and the nutrients are represented with flow junctions R
                                   and N so that they provide a running average without developing
                                   artificial chaos, even when values are small. Thus the solar energy
                                   remainder equation was calculated by subtracting the uses
                                   K0*R*N*B and K1*R*M*S from the inflowing light I. The nutri-
                                   ent remainder equation was calculated by subtracting the uses
                                   K5*R*N*B and K10*R*M*S from the sum of the inflow Jn and
260                Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


      recycle K6*B. The coefficient K10 is the net use (intake by species
      M minus their recycle). Nutrients are a main factor in weed
      production K2*R*N*B. Because weed production is greater than
      its respiration K3*B, there is net flow of organic matter K4*B
      into stored organics Y.
         The production K7*R*M*S, which supports species complex
      M in this model, is not dependent on the nutrients because the
      mature complex recycles most of what it needs. Loss of species is
      represented with linear pathway K9*M and a quadratic pathway
      K8*M*M recognizing the interactions of species (explained in
      Sections 16. 2 and 16.4). The high respiration and consumption
      of high-diversity species complex are recognized with no deposi-
      tion of organic matter. Whereas there is a wide range of properties
      in the species of real ecosystems, this model brings out the conse-
      quences of the differences between colonizing and mature vegeta-
      tion by exaggerating the different factors in the two production
      functions K2*R*N*B and K7*R*M*S.



                           OTHER SYSTEMS

         The concepts of maximum power, materials, and diversity can
      be applied not only to ecosystems but to self-organization on
      any scale. The inverse relationship of excess resources and diver-
      sity has been observed in the history of human societies. For
      example, the spread of Europeans colonizing America first pro-
      duced a society of low occupational diversity with a preponder-
      ance of flimsy, temporary housing. In the nineteenth century
      there was capitalistic expansion by a few corporations that were
      developing monopolies. Later more complex, diverse, and effi-
      cient societies developed.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 16.3
      16.3–1 What happens if the nutrient inflow is intermediate be-
             tween the extremes used in the simulations of Figures
             16.3b and 16.3c? In line 170, set JN ⫽ 0.8.
      16.3–2 For low nutrient condition, what is the effect of more
             or less seeding of species? After setting JN ⫽ 0.1, in line
             180 set S ⫽ 3; then try S ⫽ 0.5.
      16.3–3 For high nutrient condition, what is the effect of more
Model of Excess Resource and Diversity (NUTRSPEC )                                          261


                                  TABLE 16.3
                                  Model of Nutrients and Diversity (NUTRSPEC.bas) (Figure
                                  16.3)
262                                             Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


                                           seeding of species? After setting JN ⫽ 3, set S ⫽ 3; then
                                           try S ⫽ 10.




                                                                  䉬
                                        16.4 MODEL OF SPECIES AND SUPPORT
                                                 AREA (SPECAREA)

                                      The model SPECAREA in Figure 16.4a relates the number of
                                   species to the area of energy support. When species are counted
                                   in a forest or other ecosystems, a graph can be plotted of species
                                   found as more and more area is surveyed. The resulting graphs
                                   curve up to the right as in Figure 16.4b. The SPECAREA model
                                   generated the curve in Figure 16.4b according to a theory relating
                                   species to their resources. The idea is that the energy necessary
                                   for each species increases as more species are added. The possible
                                   interactions between species increase as the square of their num-



                                   a




FIGURE 16.4.
Model of species in relation to    b                                  c
support area (program
SPECAREA.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation of species
supported as a function of
increasing area; (c) same
simulation with species plotted
as a function of the square root
of the support area.
Model of Species and Support Area (SPECAREA)                                                    263


                                 ber. Either energy is lost in competition or energy is used to
                                 organize species to avoid interference and competition.
                                    If the model is simulated plotting number of species as a
                                 function of time, growth occurs at a decreasing rate until the
                                 curve levels. Then if the area of support A is increased, the growth
                                 reaches a higher level. By repeating this procedure over and over,
                                 the simulation arranged by the program in Table 16.4 plots the
                                 species supported as a function of the support area (Figure 16.4b).
                                 The program has a time iteration within an area iteration. For
                                 each value of area A the program increases time and species
                                 numbers N in steps until the species number is near its limit
                                 (until the change in species number DN is small). Then the pro-
                                 gram makes an increase in area (line 310). Then it plots the point,


                                 TABLE 16.4
                                 Model of Species and Support Area (SPECAREA.bas)
                                 (Figure 16.4)
264                Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


      increases the area, resets time and N to 0, and builds up N to
      its carrying capacity, again plots another point, etc.
          If the area A necessary to add species increases as the square
      of the number of species N2, the number of species increases as
      the square root of the area, which is written as A⵩0.5, the one-
      half power of the area. Figure 16.4c is the graph that is plotted
      when a print statement is substituted that plots species number
      N as a function of the square root of area. (See remark in program
      line 210.)




                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

          The inflow of resources J is a product E*A of the energy inflow
      per area E and the area A. The energy available R is that remaining
      after the uses K0*R by the production process. The productive
      support of species depends on that energy P ⫽ K1*R. In this
      model the species number N is a balance between additions
      dependent on area and energy and two pathways of loss. One
      is linear K2*N; the second is quadratic K3*N*N, representing the
      increasing energy drain of species interactions or its prevention.
          At steady state the change in species number DN is zero,
      and the diversity equation in Figure 16.4a can be algebraically
      solved. Omit term K2*N, which is negligible except when N is
      small. Then species numbers are proportional to the square root
      of the energy resource. Where constants are combined, N ⫽
      (K*E*A) ⵩0.5.




                          OTHER EXAMPLES

         The model may apply to the number of occupations in human
      societies in relation to the resource base. Curves of number of
      occupations sampled have a similar shape to the species-area
      graph. The model may represent information and resources re-
      quired more generally. The ability to organize, retrieve, and main-
      tain information may go up as the square of the number of units.
      As you add more resources, the number of books that can be
      supported and well used in a library may follow curves like that
      shown in Figure 16.4.
Model of Island Speciation and Diversity (SPECIES )                                                265


                                     ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                     in Table 16.4

                                     16.4–1 What happens if the budget of energy is greater? Dou-
                                            ble E.
                                     16.4–2 Suppose pathway K2*N represents the rate of loss of
                                            information due to the depreciation of the structures
                                            on which information is stored. What is the effect of
                                            increasing the depreciation rate? Increase K2.
                                     16.4–3 What would be the shape of the graph of species and
                                            area if the horizontal scale were put on a logarithmic
                                            scale? Substitute a plot statement with log function; mul-
                                            tiplying by 50 spreads the scale as needed:

                                                  220 PSET (50*log (A), 180 ⫺ N*N0).

                                              When species-area curves are plotted with a semi-log
                                              scale (horizontal scale on log paper and vertical scale
                                              regular), they curve upward. How does the simulation
                                              compare?



                                                                    䉬
                                        16.5 MODEL OF ISLAND SPECIATION AND
                                                 DIVERSITY (SPECIES)

                                         The model SPECIES (Figure 16.5) relates the processes devel-
                                     oping diversity of species and ecosystem productivity on isolated
                                     islands over long periods of time. Islands and other isolated
                                     locations do not receive as many species by dispersal as in conti-
                                     nental areas. Diversity develops slowly, and high levels cannot
                                     be sustained. In the famous example of the Galapagos Islands
                                     studied by Darwin, some of the species were found transported
                                     from the mainland. Other kinds evolved within the islands by
                                     the speciation process, apparently by being isolated temporarily
                                     on separate islands long enough to develop different characteris-
                                     tics. Although located 800 miles from the mainland of South
                                     America, some species became part of the island ecosystem’s self-
                                     organizational process seeded from the mainland. Birds fly, often
                                     carrying seeds; other species may be transported by wind or
                                     water.
                                         When there are only a few species available for self-organiza-
266                                             Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


                                  a




                                   b



FIGURE 16.5.
Model of species on isolated
islands (program SPECIES.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) family of curves
simulated by increasing
distances between the island
and the source of species.


                                  tion, the community production may be less than its full potential.
                                  This is because some of the species may not be as well adapted
                                  to perform the various functions as the diversity of species.
                                     On the left in Figure 16.5 the model has species evolving as
                                  one of the long-term outputs of the ecosystem production P based
                                  on renewable energy flow J. On the right, species are being seeded
                                  at a slow rate from distant sources S, but inverse to the square
                                  of the distance. Energy required for diversity is increased as the
                                  square of the number (explained in Section 16.4).
                                     In the simulation, species increase, causing production to in-
                                  crease. Both level off as the system becomes limited by resources,
                                  including the resource of species availability. Each unit of time
                                  represents 100 years, and the horizontal scale represents 160,000
                                  years. After the program has plotted one graph, the distance
                                  from the mainland, initially 250 kilometers, is increased by 200
                                  and run again. The result is a family of curves, each for a different
Model of Island Speciation and Diversity (SPECIES )                                                 267


                                     distance. As shown in Figure 16.5b, increasing distance causes
                                     lower diversity and reduces productivity.


                                                 EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                         The model in Figure 16.5 shows the interplay of dispersal,
                                     local speciation, and production. As the diagram shows, the more
                                     species there are, the more the renewable environmental resources
                                     are efficiently used to form products, although production is
                                     ultimately limited by the inflow of these resources (sun, wind,
                                     rain, nutrients). The production available for use is R2, which is
                                     the difference between the production P and the flows already
                                     in use. Respiration and consumption are in proportion to the
                                     production K2*R2. Production used to support the diversity is in
                                     proportion to the square of the number of species K3*N*N, thus
                                     representing the additional energy that goes into competition
                                     or into various niche separation mechanisms that prevent that
                                     competition. Some energy goes into the speciation process K4*R2
                                     at a very slow rate (microevolution). The energy for speciation
                                     is the energy to support extra individuals with variations that
                                     are necessary to the process of isolation and selection.
                                         Shown in Figure 16.5a the diversity N (expressed as species
                                     per 1000 individuals counted) is increased by evolution of species
                                     K4*R2 and by immigration from a source of species S. Immigra-
                                     tion is diminished as the inverse square of the distance 1/d2 from
                                     the species source. Species are lost by two pathways. One flow
                                     is in proportion to the number of species K6*N; the other is in
                                     proportion to the square of the species K5*N2, representing the
                                     effects of competition, consumption, and other interactions
                                     among species in causing extinction.
                                         Lines 410–430 in the program (Table 16.5) demonstrate how
                                     to make a simulation run successive curves. Time and initial
                                     conditions are reset, the change is made in the variable under
                                     study (in this case distance D), and then the program is sent back
                                     to its cycle of iteration starting with line 200.


                                                          OTHER EXAMPLES

                                        The model may be applied to other situations where seeding
                                     of information is limited by distance so that the rate of developing
268                Chapter Sixteen Minimodels of Succession and Evolution


      TABLE 16.5
      Model of Island Speciation and Dispersal (SPECIES.bas)
      (Figure 16.5)




      information anew is occurring at the same rate as dispersal.
      Another biological example is species developing on isolated
      mountain tops where species that can provide seedings are far
      away.
         This model represents the principles of developing and main-
      taining information, since the seeding of species is really the
      seeding of genetic information. The model can also be used for
      information transfer and maintenance in human systems. Cul-
      tural information affecting human productivity was transmitted
      by travelers to remote areas slowly, before the days of cheap
      transportation. There was a limit to the information and technol-
      ogy that could be sustained on a small area.
Model of Island Speciation and Diversity (SPECIES )                                               269


                                     ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems

                                     16.5–1 What is the effect on the diversity of increasing the re-
                                            newable energy? Increase J.
                                     16.5–2 What is the effect of starting with a large diversity? Set
                                            N in line 60 to 100.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
     Chapter Seventeen
                          䉬

   MODELS OF
MICROECONOMICS



17.1 Model of Sales with Price Inverse to
     Supply (SALES)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of SALES Models
17.2 Model of Economic Use of Mined
     Resources (TANKSALE)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Economic Use of Reserves
17.3 Model of Loans, Interest, and Banking (BANK)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of the BANK Model
17.4 Model of Production, Consumption, and
     Circulating Money (ECONP&C)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples
17.5 Model of Economic Use of Renewable
     Resources (ECONUSE)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Economic Use
17.6 Model of the Economic Role of Biodiversity
     Reserve Areas (RESERVE)
        Explanation of Equations


                         271
T    his chapter highlights models of microeconomics, the eco-
nomic use of resources. These models contain the interface be-
tween environment and the economy. With the model SALES,
money from selling environmental production is received with
varying price. TANKSALE simulates the sales from mining a
slowly renewable reserve. BANK simulates a bank receiving de-
posits and making loans. ECONP&C is a production and con-
sumption model controlled by a countercurrent of money in a
closed circulation. ECONUSE models production and sales from
a renewable environmental process. RESERVE models the role
of biodiversity areas in economic yields requiring land rotation.
These models couple the circulation of money to the production
and use of real wealth.



                               䉬
  17.1 MODEL OF SALES WITH PRICE INVERSE
            TO SUPPLY (SALES)

   The SALES model (Figure 17.1a) shows an environmental
production process generating a stock of products sold for
money. The price is inverse to the quantity of product, represent-
ing the inverse relationship of supply and demand. When the
program (Table 17.1) is run (Figure 17.1b), products accumulate
and level off, prices go down, and money increases and levels as
a steady state is reached. Although prices vary, income to the
producer is stable.



           EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

  Products Q are sold in proportion to the stock K2*Q, and
money received in exchange is a product of sales and price
p*K2*Q. According to the economic principle of supply and
demand, the price p goes up if the supply of products is less and


             272
Model of Sales with Price Inverse to Supply (SALES )                                               273




FIGURE 17.1.
Model of sales with price
inverse to supply (program
SALES.bas). (a) Energy systems
diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.



                                     down when the supply Q is greater. Price p is set to be inverse
                                     to the supply K4/Q. People pay more when supply is scarce. The
                                     money received is stored in a bank account M, and then paid
                                     out K3*M in proportion to the amount in the account. The small
                                     rectangle on the Q tank and the line from it to the price box is
                                     a ‘‘sensor’’ expressing the influence of the quantity Q without
                                     reducing it. Depreciation of the stock is K1*Q.



                                                  EXAMPLES OF SALES MODELS

                                       Citrus farmers produce oranges, store them, and sell them.
                                     The price they receive fluctuates according to the supply. In this
                                     model the more money the farmer earns, the more he spends.
274                          Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics


      TABLE 17.1
      Model for Price Effect on Sales
      (SALES.bas) (Figure 17.1)




      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 17.1
      17.1–1 What happens to the business if the depreciation of the
             stock increases 10 times?
      17.1–2 What effect does doubling production J have on the
             accumulation of money M and on the amount of product
             per dollar the consumer can buy? What is the difference
             between the effect on the business and the effect on con-
             sumers?

                                        䉬
         17.2 MODEL OF ECONOMIC USE OF MINED
                RESOURCES (TANKSALE)

         TANKSALE (Figure 17.2a) is a model of mining and sale of
      a nonrenewable resource reserve, like coal, oil, or copper. It is
Model of Economic Use of Mined Resources (TANKSALE )                                           275




FIGURE 17.2.
Model of economic use of
mined resources (program
TANKSALE.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.




                                 called a nonrenewable resource because mining and sales (interac-
                                 tion symbol) occur at a much faster rate than the natural earth
                                 process of renewal. Money received from product sales is used
                                 to pay for goods and services to do the work of mining. In this
                                 model the market prices are constant.
                                    The simulation (Figure 17.2b) starts with large resource re-
                                 serves. The mining company uses purchased goods and services
                                 F to mine, sort, store, and transport the product. At first large
                                 quantities are mined with little effort, and money accumulates.
                                 Later when reserves are reduced, yield is less, and sales are less.
                                 Money required to maintain the mining process is reduced. At
                                 the prices used in this simulation, money runs out with some ore
                                 left in the ground.
276                          Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics


                 EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         The reserve in the ground Q is slowly renewed by a steady
      geological process of concentration K1*E. Some of the concen-
      trated ore disperses without use K2*Q. The mining is a product
      K3*Q*F of the quantity Q in the reserve and the availability of
      necessary inputs F. Most of that mined is sold K5*F*Q at price
      p1. The money on hand M is a balance between the income from
      sales p1*K5*F*Q and the payout for necessary inputs K4*M. The
      availability of input force F is generated by money spent for
      purchases K4*M divided by the price p2 of these goods and ser-
      vices K4*M/p2.

        EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIC USE OF RESERVES

         This model represents use of any source where use is much
      faster than its renewal. Other examples are natural gas, gold,
      uranium, phosphate for fertilizer, slow growth forests, and soils
      where agriculture is not based on land rotation.
      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 17.2
      17.2–1 How do money M and storage Q react if the price you
             receive for the yield is increased? Change p1 to 7. Can
             you select a price that uses almost all of the reserve?
      17.2–2 Will the operation get started if you begin with almost
             no capital (M ⫽ 0)? How would it be different if you
             had twice as much capital as the original program? Try
             M ⫽ 2.
      17.2–3 What is the effect of finding more reserves after the
             operation has been going for 100 months? Type a new
             statement to add 300 more units of Q: 730 IF T*T0 ⫽
             100 THEN Q ⫽ Q ⫹ 300.
      17.2–4 What would happen if the initial reserve were small and
             less available? Make Q ⫽ 300.


                                     䉬
           17.3 MODEL OF LOANS, INTEREST, AND
                    BANKING (BANK)

         The BANK model (Figure 17.3a) represents financial processes
      involved with banking. Depositors on the left supply money Jd
Model of Loans, Interest, and Banking (BANK )                                                     277


                                    TABLE 17.2
                                    Program for Economic Use of Reserves
                                    (TANKSALE.bas)
                                    (Figure 17.2)




                                    to the bank’s storage of money M. Dollars given to the bank go
                                    into the money storage M, and the amounts are also tallied in
                                    the deposit account (tank D). D is not a storage of money; it is a
                                    record of the money owed to depositors. The quantity D decreases
                                    when the deposits are repaid. The bank pays interest to the
                                    depositors according to a depositor’s interest rate. Money is also
                                    drawn out by depositors.
278                                                     Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics




FIGURE 17.3.
Model of banking (program
BANK.bas). (a) Energy systems
diagram and equations;
(b) simulation of profitable
regime.


                                    Shown to the right in the diagram, the bank loans its money
                                (in excess of a required cash reserve), and the amounts are tallied
                                in the loan account L. From its borrowers, the bank receives
                                interest at a higher rate than it pays its depositors. Money also
                                goes for costs of bank operations. The money in the bank M is
                                a balance between the money it gets from its loans and the money
                                it pays its depositors. It makes a profit by paying less interest to
                                its depositors than it charges its borrowers.
                                    The simulation (Figure 17.3b) represents the start-up of a
                                bank. Deposits and the deposit account build to a steady level
                                limited by the number of depositors. The money increases with
                                deposits. There is a profit if the rate at which money is deposited
                                plus that earned from loans is greater than the rate at which
                                money is loaned and paid to depositors. If there is a net profit
                                (Figure 17.3b), there is an accelerating growth of money. How-
                                ever, if there is not a net profit, the money spirals downward
                                reaching zero, stopping the program and printing the word
                                ‘‘BANKRUPT.’’
Model of Loans, Interest, and Banking (BANK )                                                     279


                                                EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                       The change in the bank’s money M is a balance between
                                    receipts and payments. Receipts include the money deposited Jd,
                                    the interest on its loans Li*L, and borrowers paying back the
                                    loans K4*L. Money paid to depositors in interest is the product
                                    of the going interest rate and deposit account In*D. In proportion
                                    to the account, money flows back to the depositors K2*D as they
                                    withdraw their deposits by writing checks. In this model loans
                                    are made by the bank in proportion to its money K3*M. Borrow-
                                    ers pay the bank interest as a product Li*L of the loan interest
                                    rate Li and the loan account L. In the model payback of loans
                                    K4*L is in proportion to the quantity loaned L. The change in
                                    the deposit account at each iteration is a balance of the deposits
                                    Jd and the drawout of deposits K2*D. The change in the loan
                                    account is the difference between the loans K3*M and the pay-
                                    back K4*L.


                                                EXAMPLES OF THE BANK MODEL

                                       Banks accept people’s deposits to make mortgage loans to
                                    finance buying of homes. If you sometimes borrow and also lend
                                    money, you fit into this model. Although you may act as if the
                                    money you borrowed is a bonanza to spend, you also need to
                                    keep track of your debt, since you have to pay it back with the
                                    interest added.

                                    ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                    in Table 17.3
                                    17.3–1 What happens to the bank’s deposits if the interest rate
                                           paid to depositors IN goes up? Increase IN to 0.07 and
                                           see. To see the original graph and the change on the
                                           screen at the same time, first run the program; then
                                           change IN to 0.07 and run the new program on top of
                                           the first by typing RUN 70. This skips the statements
                                           that clear and reset the screen.
                                    17.3–2 Suppose the rate of new deposits goes down by half.
                                           What will happen to the bank’s money and to its debt?
                                           Make JD ⫽ 1.5 E4 and rerun. Can the bank accelerate
                                           its profit with few or no depositors (assuming initial
                                           capital to loan)?
280                         Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics


      TABLE 17.3
      Program for Simple Banking (BANK.bas) (Figure 17.3)




      17.3–3 What happens if the bank is unable to make as many
             loans? Reduce the loan income rate K3 by half. Suppose
             there is a limited number of borrowers available so that
             there is a ceiling. Insert the lines:


                  375 IF L⬎ 8000000! THEN K3 ⫽ 0
                 376 IF L⬍ 8000000! THEN K3 ⫽ .14
Model of Production, Consumption, and Circulating Money (ECONP&C )                             281


                                  17.3–4 What happens if the going interest rate for loans is re-
                                         duced? What can the bank do to stay profitable? (Assume
                                         depositors and borrowing are unchanged).




                                                                 䉬
                                  17.4 MODEL OF PRODUCTION, CONSUMPTION,
                                      AND CIRCULATING MONEY (ECONP&C)

                                      In the model ECONP&C (Figure 17.4a), circulating money
                                  is related to the production and consumption of real wealth. Real
                                  wealth (such as food, fiber, wood, and fish) is first produced in
                                  the rural area using the renewable energy of the environment
                                  interacting with goods and services from the city. Products are




FIGURE 17.4.
Model of the countercurrent
link between money circulation
and energy use (program
ECONP&C.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.
282                           Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics


      sold to the city consumers who generate city assets. Goods and
      services of the city feed back to the rural area (to the left).
         Money that is used to buy and sell products and goods and
      services flows as a circular countercurrent in the opposite direc-
      tion. As shown by the diamond-shaped symbols, the flow of
      products and goods and services are linked to the flow of money
      by the prices. In this model the prices are determined by the larger
      system’s markets outside this system’s boundary. The working
      capital in the bank accounts of the producers and consumers are
      the small tanks indicated with $ signs. Money circulates between
      rural money (tank M1) and city money (tank M2). The spending
      of money is proportional to the money in the bank accounts—the
      more money, the more spending. Because the energy source is a
      renewable inflow, limited at its source, the model is an appro-
      priate simplification for an agrarian economy before the indus-
      trial revolution.
         The simulation (Figure 17.4b) started with small storages of
      products Q and consumer assets C and then shows a growth of
      rural products Q and city assets C as money goes around and
      around (Figure 17.4b). Since the money supply Tm is constant,
      the same money buys more as production increases until the
      growth is limited by the renewable energy source.



                  EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         Change of money in the city with each iteration is a balance
      between expenditures from the rural area K2*M1 and expendi-
      tures by the city K1*M2. Since the total money supply Tm is held
      constant, the rural money is the difference between the total and
      that in the city (Tm ⫺ M2). The expenditure of the city money
      K1*M2 buys products from the rural stock Q( Js ⫽ K1*M2/p1)
      according to their price p1. The expenditure of rural money
      K2*M1 buys goods and services Jg ⫽ K2*M1/p2 from the city C
      with the price p2.
         Available renewable energy R is the unused remainder of the
      input I. The energy in use K0*R*Jg depends on the goods and
      services from the city Jg. The resulting production P is K4*R*Jg.
      The change in stock of rural products DQ is a balance between
      the production P, losses due to depreciation K5*Q and sales
      K1*M2/p1. The change in stock of city assets is a balance between
      the consumers’ work K6*Js using the inflow of rural products Js,
Model of Economic Use of Renewable Resources (ECONUSE )                                        283


                                  depreciation K3*C, and the outflow of goods and services to the
                                  rural area Jg ⫽ K2*M1/p2.



                                                           EXAMPLES

                                     An example is agricultural production of food and fiber, which
                                  consumers in the city use to provide the labor and capital assets
                                  needed for agricultural production. In Paris in 1860, hay for
                                  horses was sold to the city and manure returned to the surround-
                                  ing farms.

                                  ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                  in Table 17.4

                                  17.4–1 In 1815 dust from a volcanic explosion shielded the sun,
                                         and in that summer there were crop failures in New
                                         England with frost all summer. What is the effect of
                                         reducing the source input by half?
                                  17.4–2 What is the effect of increasing the money supply TM
                                         without changing the resource availability or the prices?
                                  17.4–3 Suppose the price of human goods P2 were increased,
                                         other things being the same? What is the effect on stored
                                         products and city assets? Explain.



                                                                 䉬
                                          17.5 MODEL OF ECONOMIC USE OF
                                          RENEWABLE RESOURCES (ECONUSE)

                                     With the model ECONUSE (Figure 17.5a) environmental
                                  products based on renewable energy are used for economic pro-
                                  duction and sale. The product Q (such as forest wood, fish, or
                                  nuts) is produced by an autoctalytic environmental production
                                  process that uses the renewable energies of sun, rain, and wind.
                                  The products accumulate in storage Q where some depreciates
                                  and the rest is used in economic production (interaction symbol)
                                  and sold to the main economy on the right. The yield of product
                                  ready for sale E depends on both the quantity of original product
                                  Q and the amount of processing equipment and labor A. The
                                  money obtained from the sale is in tank M where it is used to
284                        Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics


      TABLE 17.4
      Program for Economic Countercurrent of Money and Energy
      (ECONP&C.bas) (Figure 17.4)
Model of Economic Use of Renewable Resources (ECONUSE )                                         285




FIGURE 17.5.
Model of economic use of
environmental resources
(program ECONUSE.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation.


                                  buy necessary goods and services to sustain assets A for the
                                  economic production process.
                                     The simulation (Figure 17.5b) starts with small quantities of
                                  environmental product Q, equipment assets A, and money M.
                                  First the quantity of environmental product (e.g., wood) Q grows.
                                  Sales increase, and more money M becomes available to buy
                                  more goods and services like saws, tractors, trucks, and roads
                                  to build up economic assets A. This economic growth uses up
                                  some of the stocks of wood. Later a balance of production and
                                  use is reached at a rate of use based on the natural limitation of
                                  tree growth on the renewable energies.


                                              EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    In this model, R is the unused renewable energy after the use
                                  K0*R*Q for autocatalytic environmental production K1*R*Q.
                                  The change of storage in each iteration is the difference between
286                          Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics


      the production, the depreciation K2*Q, and that used for eco-
      nomic processing K3*Q*A. The economic product exported from
      the system for sale E ⫽ K4*Q*A generates income pE*E. The
      change in money available DM is the difference between the
      money brought in from the sale of the product pE*E minus the
      money paid out for goods and services K5*M. The change in
      economic processing assets DA is the difference between the
      purchased goods and services K5*M/pG, the depreciation K6*A,
      and assets used up in the economic production K7*Q*A.


                 EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIC USE

         This model is appropriate for any salable product that grows
      without human assistance or reinforcement—wildflowers, natu-
      ral honey; forest products like rubber, resin, turpentine, wood,
      fruits, nuts; marine products like fish, lobsters, clams, coral,
      shells.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 17.5
      17.5–1 What difference does a one-half increase in the price of
             goods and services make? Find the statement for PG and
             increase it by a half.
      17.5–2 If the environmental resource is scarce, sales are less.
             Can the user stay in business? Change I0 to half and run
             the program again.
      17.5–3 What difference does it make if you start with 10 times
             more money?
      17.5–4 How vulnerable is your business to the price you can
             get for your product? To see, halve PE and then double it.
      17.5–5 As an economic product gets scarce, its price tends to
             increase. Can you add a statement to the program with
             PE inverse to Q? For example, what happens with
             PE ⫽ K8/Q and K8 ⫽ 150?


                                     䉬
         17.6 MODEL OF THE ECONOMIC ROLE OF
         BIODIVERSITY RESERVE AREAS (RESERVE)

        Because most agriculture and intensive plantation forestry
      wears out soils, sustainable production depends on a cycle that
Model of the Economic Role of Biodiversity Reserve Areas (RESERVE )                               287


                                    TABLE 17.5
                                    Program for Economic Use of Environmental Resource
                                    (ECONUSE.bas) (Figure 17.5)




                                    includes a period of time with successional restoration by a natu-
                                    ral ecosystem. This restoration of fallow land is automatic and
                                    rapid if the area is surrounded by a complex, forest with high
                                    diversity of species to transport and seed the restoration process.
                                    The restoration land cycle is modeled as RESERVE in Figure
                                    17.6. If there are few biodiversity reserves, seeding is delayed
                                    and economic output is less in the long run. If the areas reserved
288                                                       Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics




FIGURE 17.6.
Model of the economic role of
reserve areas of high diversity
(program RESERVE.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation of
yield and bare area as a
function of percent of land
in reserve.



                                  for complex forest are large, the area for economic output is
                                  small and the economic output less.
                                     The program has been arranged to simulate the effect on the
                                  yield Y of changing the reserve area R. The resulting graph (Figure
                                  17.6b) plots yield Y and bare area B as a function of R. The
                                  curve has a maximum. On the left where there is little reserve,
                                  the bare land is huge. On the right where the reserve is large,
                                  the land for economic yield is less.
                                     The program runs a family of curves. After each run, the
                                  economic input E is increased and the program plots another
                                  curve. With more economic input the yields are larger, but more
                                  economic production also increases the land deterioration rate,
                                  causing more bare land. The peak of the upper curves shifts
Model of the Economic Role of Biodiversity Reserve Areas (RESERVE )                                289


                                    to the right, since the reserve required to generate maximum
                                    yield increases.
                                       Unlike most of the programs in this book, the coefficient cali-
                                    brations are included in the program (instead of being in a sepa-
                                    rate table or spread sheet). In lines 100–145 you enter fractional
                                    areas of the four categories in the land cycle (total should be
                                    1.0). In lines 160–190 the program calculates the coefficients
                                    that would produce a cycle with that land distribution. As Lotka
                                    showed years ago, a storage in a circular steady state is inverse
                                    to the outflow coefficients. In other words, storages accumulate
                                    ahead of a bottleneck.



                                                EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                       Environmental energy sources in this model are unlimited
                                    (constant 1.0), with land area limiting each environmental pro-
                                    duction process. The change equation for each land use DA, DB,
                                    DS is a balance between a flow from the previous state and the
                                    transfer to the next. At steady state the change rates are zero.
                                    Solving these equations for one variable and algebraically substi-
                                    tuting, a steady-state equation for economic area A is obtained
                                    as a function of the reserve area R. Thus time was eliminated.
                                    In the program, instead of iterating with time, R is changed on
                                    each iteration. After the plot is complete the program continues
                                    to lines 550–570 where R is reset to a low value, economic input
                                    E is increased, and the simulation is sent back to iterate the value
                                    of R again.

                                    ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                    in Table 17.6

                                    17.6–1 Insert STOP in the program after line 190 just after the
                                           observed steady-state areas are converted into coeffi-
                                           cients. Then activate the command line and type ?K1,
                                           K2 (? means to print what follows). Then type ?K3, K4.
                                           Write down these coefficients. Looking at the model
                                           diagram, which coefficient indicates the rate at which
                                           the land in economic use wears out? Increase this coeffi-
                                           cient to 0.3 and run the simulation again. What is the
                                           effect on economic production, the amount of bare land,
                                           and the reserve needed for maximum yield?
290                          Chapter Seventeen Models of Microeconomics


      TABLE 17.6
      Program for Simulating the Effect of Biodiversity Reserves on
      Economic Yield from Agriculture and Forestry (RESERVE.bas)
      (Figure 17.6)




      17.6–2 Suppose an area believed to be in a steady-state rota-
             tion were observed with small fraction of land area bare
             B ⫽ 0.1 and biodiversity reserve R ⫽ 0.1. Recalibrate
             and run the simulation with these values (also A ⫽ 0.4
             and S ⫽ 0.4). For this economic yield to be sustained,
             what can you say about the rate of reseeding of this
             area K2. What parts of an ecosystem might be respon-
             sible?
      Chapter Eighteen
                          䉬

   MODELS OF
 MACROECONOMIC
   OVERVIEW



18.1 Model of Money-Driven
     Growth (MONEYGRO)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Exponential Growth Driven by
          Money Circulation
18.2 Model of Price in Relation to Unsustainable
     Growth (BUYPOWER)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Macroeconomic Models
          Like BUYPOWER
18.3 Model of Textbook
     Macroeconomics (MACROEC)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Macroeconomic Systems
18.4 Model of an Economy in Relation to
     Land Use (ROTATION)
        Explanation of Equations
        Examples of Land Rotation Systems




                          291
T     he minimodels discussed in this chapter are simple over-
views of a whole economy, including the environmental sources
of real wealth and the circulation of money. Models of a whole
economy are called macroeconomic models. MONEYGRO adds
money supply, accelerating economic growth. BUYPOWER re-
lates production and prices to stages in use of nonrenewable re-
sources. After diagramming the textbook equations used in macro-
economics, MACROEC compares growth with limited and
unlimited resources. ROTATION simulates the allocation of land
area between environment and urban economic development.


                                 䉬
          18.1 MODEL OF MONEY-DRIVEN
               GROWTH (MONEYGRO)

   A simple minimodel that represents the standard view of growth
from economics is MONEYGRO (Figure 18.1). Money is circulat-
ing (dashed lines) as a countercurrent to the flow of products and to
the feedback of goods and services into production. As the diagram
shows, the resource availability E is held constant, which means
that resources are never limiting, regardless of the demand on
them. Because new money is added to the money supply M in pro-
portion to the development of real wealth (assets A) without caus-
ing inflation, the result is exponential growth without limit (see
EXPO, Figure 9.4). The rate of growth is sensitive to the deprecia-
tion rate of the assets. This is a version of the Domar–Harrod
model of economic growth introduced 60 years ago. To see what
happens when the sources are limited, see models BUYPOWER
(Figure 18.2) and MACROEC (Figure 18.3) that follow.

            EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

   In the model, new money is added to the money supply M in
proportion to economic assets K1*A, making the growth inflation
free. Economic production K0*E*M is a product of the money
circulating M and the unlimited energy supply (E ⫽ constant).


              292
Model of Money-Driven Growth (MONEYGRO)                                                       293




FIGURE 18.1.
Model of money driven growth
(program MONEYGRO.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation.




                                 Depreciation of real assets is linear K2*A. Taken together the
                                 two equations are autocatalytic.



                                 EXAMPLES OF EXPONENTIAL GROWTH DRIVEN
                                         BY MONEY CIRCULATION

                                    The model in Figure 18.1 applies to the growth of an industry
                                 that is utilizing a large new resource, or to the growth of a
                                 country, where the concentration of resource is constant. Because
                                 many people believe it is always possible to substitute one re-
                                 source for another, they believe that the resource E is unlimited
                                 and that exponential growth as shown here is a general model
                                 for the whole economy and its component businesses. Resource
                                 scientists know that resources are not unlimited and that such
                                 exponential growth is only temporary.
294                   Chapter Eighteen Models of Macroeconomic Overview


      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 18.1
      18.1–1 If availability of resources is less, how will the growth
             of money and assets differ? Change E to 0.9.
      18.1–2 What happens if the depreciation rate of the assets is
             decreased? Change K2 to 0.02.
      18.1–3 What if the economy changes the rate of adding money?
             Increase K1 to 0.02; then decrease it to 0.012.
      18.1–4 If a company starts with more assets, how does its growth
             compare to a start with fewer assets?


                                      䉬
           18.2 MODEL OF PRICE IN RELATION TO
           UNSUSTAINABLE GROWTH (BUYPOWER)

         Where growth is based on a large nonrenewable source (fuels)
      as well as renewable sources (sun, wind, rain), there is a pulse of

      TABLE 18.1
      Program for Money-Driven Exponential
      Growth (MONEYGRO.bas) (Figure 18.1)
Model of Price in Relation to Unsustainable Growth (BUYPOWER )                                 295


                                  growth before the economy returns to a lower state. BUYPOWER
                                  (Figure 18.2a) is like the 2SOURCE model of Figure 13.4 but
                                  includes the circulation of money. The model shows the behavior
                                  of prices of products generated during the growth cycle. The
                                  model has autocatalytic production generating economic assets
                                  Q with three pathways, one using fuels and minerals, and two
                                  based only on renewable resources.
                                     In the simulation shown in Figure 18.2b money supply was
                                  held constant, and an index of prices pr (money per unit produce)
                                  was graphed. Prices reached a minimum when the production
                                  rate was highest before assets reached their maximum. Then, as
                                  nonrenewable sources were used, prices increased again, showing




FIGURE 18.2.
Model of prices resulting from
growth on nonrenewable
reserves (program
BUYPOWER.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.
296                   Chapter Eighteen Models of Macroeconomic Overview


      inflation (fewer assets per dollar). Productivity P was also
      graphed, showing a maximum when assets and nonrenewable
      resources F were both moderately high. In the real economy,
      money is usually added to the money supply each year.



                 EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

         Renewable source inflow is J, and the availability of nonrenew-
      able sources is F. The externally limited inflow of environmental
      renewable sources is represented by the equation for available
      unused inputs remaining R. There are three production processes,
      including linear conversion of environmental energies Pw*R, an
      autocatalytic process K4*R*Q without the nonrenewable re-
      source, and K3*R*F*Q, an autocatalytic process with both
      sources. The change of assets at each iteration is a sum of these
      production inputs minus depreciation and consumption K5*Q.
      Money M is circulating in proportion to the money supply K*
      M. Prices pr is the ratio of the money circulating (gross economic
      product) divided by production K*M/P. In other words, product
      price pr goes down and up again as the buying power increases
      and decreases.



         EXAMPLES OF MACROECONOMIC MODELS
                   LIKE BUYPOWER

         This model is a very simplified view of the world economy,
      but it can represent any country that is dependent on fuels and
      renewable resources and not very dependent on imports and
      exports. Examples are large nations like the United States and
      Russia.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 18.2

      18.2–1 What happens to prices if the system starts with more
             fuel? Make F ⫽ 150 and run both graphs.
      18.2–2 If the system converts fuels more efficiently, how will
             that affect assets and prices? Increase K3 to 0.006.
      18.2–3 How does the system react if it finds a way to use its
             renewable energies more efficiently? Increase K4 to 0.08.
Model of Textbook Macroeconomics (MACROEC )                                                  297


                                 TABLE 18.2
                                 Program for Prices Determined by Energy for Growth
                                 (BUYPOWER.bas) (Figure 18.2)




                                                               䉬
                                               18.3 MODEL OF TEXTBOOK
                                              MACROECONOMICS (MACROEC)

                                     Introductory texts in economics often describe macroeconom-
                                 ics with a set of equations for income Y, consumption C, savings
                                 S, and investment I, as listed and diagrammed in Figure 18.3a.
                                 Note the circulation of money in dashed lines in two loops. One
                                 is the money circulating C through consumers. In the other loop,
                                 money is saved S into the money supply M and flows out as
                                 investment I. The income, Y, is where the two loops are joined.
298                                               Chapter Eighteen Models of Macroeconomic Overview




FIGURE 18.3.
Model relating textbook
macroeconomic equations to
energy resources (program
MACROEC.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations
with unlimited resources (R ⫽
constant); (b) design of source
that is limited by inflow;
(c) simulations with unlimited
resource; (d) simulation with
flow-limited resources.




                                     Flows of real resources, products, and services are drawn as
                                  solid lines flowing in opposite direction from the money. In this
                                  model the income is generated by the real production (although
                                  the income money is flowing in a countercurrent in the opposite
                                  direction). Production is a product of the available resources, the
                                  capital assets, and labor. Savings is a fraction of the income;
                                  saved money is invested. Labor is in proportion to the money
                                  paid to consumers.
                                     In Figure 18.3c and d two simulations are shown, the first
Model of Textbook Macroeconomics (MACROEC )                                                    299


                                 with unlimited energy sources (R ⫽ constant) and the second
                                 with flow limited renewable energy sources. Compare the design
                                 for the limited production process in Figure 18.3b with the unlim-
                                 ited one in Figure 18.3a. With limited resource inflow, the growth
                                 levels reach a steady state, but with unlimited source explosive
                                 exponential growth of the real assets and of the circulating money
                                 occurs. Exponential growth with unlimited energy was used with
                                 the MONEYGRO simulation also (Figure 18.1b). The constant
                                 resource case can only apply for a short time, because no energy
                                 source is large enough to be constantly available indefinitely.
                                    Although the equations of macroeconomics were used in both
                                 runs, the type of resource controlled the nature of growth. This
                                 exercise helps show how economic systems are similar to general
                                 models for autocatalytic systems, but with additional flexible
                                 money mechanisms that facilitate human participation in the
                                 patterns that may maximize performance.


                                              EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    The storage of real wealth is Q (capital assets). The energy
                                 resource R is a factor in the production process PR ⫽ K4*R*L*Q
                                 along with labor L and capital assets Q. Income is generated by
                                 the production Y ⫽ K1*PR, where K1 is the ratio of the flows of
                                 money to production of real wealth PR. A fraction of this goes
                                 into savings S ⫽ K5*Y. The rest goes to consumption C ⫽ Y ⫺
                                 S. Labor depends on the consumption money C according to the
                                 wage rate pL (L ⫽ C/pL). At each iteration money supply M is
                                 increased by the savings flow S and decreased by money flowing
                                 out to investment proportionately, I ⫽ K7*M. Capital assets Q
                                 is a balance between the part of production that goes into new
                                 assets K3*I*PR minus assets used in production process
                                 K6*R*L*Q and the linear losses to depreciation K2*Q. With
                                 unlimited resources (a), R is constant. With flow-limited re-
                                 sources (b), R is the unused remainder of the flow junction in
                                 Figure 18.3b, where R ⫽ J ⫺ K0*R*L*Q, and therefore R ⫽
                                 J/(1 ⫹ K0*L*Q).


                                    EXAMPLES OF MACROECONOMIC SYSTEMS

                                    The macroeconomic models are often applied to nations,
                                 states, and regions. The provisions for source control added to
300                   Chapter Eighteen Models of Macroeconomic Overview


      these minimodels make the macroeconomics equations dynamic
      and realistic.


      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problem for the Program
      in Table 18.3

      18.3–1 What is the effect of an increase in depreciation rate of
             the growing assets? Double K2.
      18.3–2 What is the effect of increasing the percent of the income
             saved and reinvested? Increase K5.
      18.3–3 What is the effect of increasing the availability of energy
             in the exponential case of Figure 18.3a? Increase R.
      18.3–4 What is the effect of increasing the inflow of energy in
             the flow-limited system of Figure 18.3b? Increase J.




                                      䉬
        18.4 MODEL OF AN ECONOMY IN RELATION
               TO LAND USE (ROTATION)

         Agricultural-based human economies have to rotate their land
      back and forth between a resting state and farming. During years
      of farming, the soil usually loses structure, organic matter, and
      nutrients, so that farm productivity declines. In the resting (fal-
      low) state, plant succession is allowed to run for several years,
      rebuilding the vegetation and soil.
         The model ROTATION, shown in Figure 18.4a, relates land
      area to development in an agrarian time without fossil fuels. The
      human economic assets Q depend on the land in economic use
      A2 and the stored products of environmental work S, such as
      wood and soil. The environmental support system has biomass
      structure B, which depends on the environmental sources I and
      the area of fallow land A1. Land rotation is modeled by letting
      land cycle back and forth between fallow and economic use.
         The simulation (Figure 18.4b) starts with a natural landscape,
      such as a forest cover, with large biomass structure B (e.g., trees)
      but low economic assets Q. As the economic system develops,
      land shifts from A1 to A2, and forest biomass is used up as it is
      transferred into trees ready to be processed S and then into
      economic assets Q.
Model of an Economy in Relation to Land Use (ROTATION )                               301


                                  TABLE 18.3
                                  Program for Macroeconomic Equations (MACROEC.bas)
                                  (Figure 18.3)
302                                              Chapter Eighteen Models of Macroeconomic Overview




FIGURE 18.4.
Model of land allocation in
development (program
ROTATION.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.




                                            EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    Production of environmental biomass B is proportional to the
                                 available renewable energy resources R (such as sun, wind, rain)
                                 and the undeveloped area A1 (K2*R*A1). Economic produc-
                                 tion of human assets is a product of the local storages S, the de-
                                 veloped area A2, the renewable energy R, and the assets Q
                                 (L3*R*S*A2*Q). When human assets increase, they cause more
                                 environmental land area A1 to go into developed use (pathway
                                 L2*A1*Q). Land area is returned to ecological succession with the
                                 help of the seeding K4*B from environmental biomass structure B
                                 interacting (L1*A2*B) with developed land area A2. The small
                                 rectangles on seedflow pathway K4 and on land development
                                 flow L2 indicate influences derived from these flows, forces that
                                 go to other interactions.
Model of an Economy in Relation to Land Use (ROTATION )                        303


                                  TABLE 18.4
                                  Program for Land Allocation in Development
                                  (ROTATION.bas) (Figure 18.4)
304                   Chapter Eighteen Models of Macroeconomic Overview


          EXAMPLES OF LAND ROTATION SYSTEMS

         This model illustrates what happens when a new area is colo-
      nized without much outside imports. It is appropriate for early
      slash-and-burn agriculture in the rain forest. There, a very small
      part of the forest was in agriculture, while most was in very
      slow succession.
         The model also represents the whole human civilization in
      relation to environmental resources. In that example, B is the
      product of geologic production such as fuels and minerals. We
      are using these products much faster than the small amount of
      resting land can produce them.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 18.4
      18.4–1 What would happen to the land rotation if so much of
             the original vegetation were destroyed that there were
             no seeds for reseeding?
      18.4–2 What is the effect of starting with larger storage of envi-
             ronmental products? Set S ⫽ 100.
      18.4–3 What is the effect of having less total land area? Set
             TA ⫽ 50.
    Chapter Nineteen
                       䉬

   MODELS OF
 INTERNATIONAL
   RELATIONS
   AND TRADE

19.1 Model of Trade and Empower (ENTRADE)
       Examples of Trade
       Explanations of Equations
19.2 Effects of a Global Economy on a Nation
     (FREEMARK and EMEXCHNG)
       Explanation of Equations
19.3 Model of Defense and War (WAR)
       Examples of War Systems
       Explanation of Equations
19.4 Model of Globally Shared
     Information (INFOBEN)
       Examples of Systems Sharing Information
       Explanation of Equations




                      305
A     lthough this chapter has minimodels of relationships be-
tween nations, the models may apply to other systems where
there are exchanges between units. The model ENTRADE shows
how exchanges convert competition to cooperation. The models
FREEMARK and EMEXCHNG show the effects of a global
economy on a nation. With the model WAR, diversion of energy
for defense and war is compared with other international rela-
tionships. The model INFOBEN shows coexistence by free shar-
ing of world information. Some of the relationships of competi-
tion and cooperation in Chapter 14 are also relevant.
   An open question is this: What relationships maximize the
whole system’s performance? In addition to plots of each of the
competing or cooperating units, the total output power of the
combined system is plotted by adding the outputs of the produc-
tion processes (interaction symbols).


                               䉬
            19.1 MODEL OF TRADE AND
                EMPOWER (ENTRADE)

   In the model ENTRADE, two populations are competing for
the common resource R. The production process K2*R*A for
unit A is slightly more productive K4*R*B than for B; K2 is
greater than K4. Other coefficients of A and B are identical. In
the simulation (Figure 19.1b), A tends to displace B, as in the
EXCLUS model of competitive exclusion in Figure 14.1. After
an initial period, trade is turned on between the two, and the
populations become a symbiotic system of coexistence. With
trade, the total production of both together is greater than with
competition. Their total assets are also greater when they are
trading.

                   EXAMPLES OF TRADE

  Examples of trade between populations are nations like Japan
with the United States, and groups of nations like the European


             306
Model of Trade and Empower (ENTRADE )                                                           307




FIGURE 19.1.
Model of trade and coexistence
(program ENTRADE.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation.


                                 Union with the Asian rim countries. Animal populations trade
                                 too, like large ocean fish with their smaller cleaner fish—the large
                                 fish have their parasites cleaned off and the smaller fish get food.


                                            EXPLANATIONS OF EQUATIONS

                                    In Figure 19.1 the coefficient for each mathematic pathway
                                 expression is labeled on each line. To find the whole expression
                                 for a line, find the coefficient in its equation below the diagram.
308           Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade


      At any time the available resource R is that part of the renewable
      inflow I remaining after that used by four production processes.
      Two of the production processes are the autocatalytic production
      flows without trade (K2*R*A and K4*R*B), and two (K20*R*B
      and K19*R*A) operate using the availability of assets from the
      other unit when trade is turned on (when Z in the program of
      Table 19.1 is changed from 0 to 1).

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      of Table 19.1
      19.1–1 If you increase the productivity K2 of population A,
             what happens to the assets of A and B, and to the total
             power? Explain.
      19.1–2 If you increase K3 (the death rate of animal population
             A or the pollution depreciation of nation A), what hap-
             pens to the assets and to power? Explain.



                                      䉬
        19.2 EFFECTS OF A GLOBAL ECONOMY ON A
            NATION (FREEMARK AND EMEXCHNG)

         The global economy impacts a nation through many kinds of
      pathways including investments, loans, sales, and purchases. The
      minimodel FREEMARK shows some of these exchanges in Figure
      19.2a. Whether the money economy is stimulated or drained
      depends on the prices of exports and imports and on interest
      rates. The model was normalized by calibrating the inflow, the
      environmental storage, and the assets storage with the value 100,
      a much smaller number than the actual values. The flows were
      then determined from an estimate of turnover time. Figure 19.2b
      is a typical result of simulating this program without exchange,
      and Figure 19.2c is a typical result when prices are favorable for
      stimulating growth of assets A.
         Perhaps more important is the exchange of real wealth as
      measured by the balance of emergy. The universal value concept,
      emergy (spelled with an ‘‘m’’), was explained and simulated in
      Chapter 11 as a way to measure real wealth on a common basis.
      The standard of living goes down if economic exchange carries
      out more real wealth than it brings in. Emergy calculations are
      necessary to determine real wealth. A longer version, program
Effects of a Global Economy on a Nation (FREEMARK and EMEXCHNG )                              309


                                TABLE 19.1
                                Program for Simulating the Symbiotic Effects of Trade
                                (ENTRADE.bas) (Figure 19.1)




                                EMEXCHNG.bas, has emergy equations added. These diagrams
                                and equations are shown in Figure 19.2d with a typical simulation
                                of the emergy storages in Figure 19.2e.
                                   For models like this one with normalized calibration, the em-
                                ergy calculation can be made by including the normalization
                                factors (the ratios of the real energy value to 100). These factors
                                (NfJ, NfQ, and NfA) are included in emergy equations in Figure
                                19.2d.
310                                      Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade




FIGURE 19.2.
Model of effect of global
exchange on the economy of a
nation. (a) Energy systems
diagram and equations for
program FREEMARK.bas;
(b) simulation without
exchange; (c) exchange with
favorable prices; (d) emergy
diagram and equations for
program EMEXCHNG.bas;
(e) simulation with favorable
prices but net loss of emergy
(real wealth).




                                           EXPLANATIONS OF EQUATIONS

                                    The stock of environmental resource Q (Figure 19.2a) is a
                                balance between the production (⫹) and three uses (⫺). The
                                consumption within the environmental unit is K2*Q, the use by
                                the human development is K3*Q*A, and the export is Jme/pe.
                                The developed assets storage A is a balance between economic
                                production K4*Q*A plus imported goods–services–fuels K6*
                                M/pg minus local depreciation–consumption K5*A and export
                                of assets Jma/pa. The propensity of outside markets to purchase
                                ( Jme and Jma) are a major influence on the nation’s economy.
                                    The available international money M is a balance between the
                                money from purchases by the outside economy ( Jm and Ja) and
                                the payout for imports K6*M. Prices on international markets
                                are pe for environmental products, pa for assets, and pg for goods–
                                services–fuels. If there is investment from outside Ji, money flows
                                into storage of international dollars M, and accompanying debt
                                D also results. Interest outflow is It*D where It is the interest
Effects of a Global Economy on a Nation (FREEMARK and EMEXCHNG )                              311




FIGURE 19.2.
(Continued)




                                rate. Repayment outflow X*K7*M is turned on when X (in the
                                switch symbol) is changed from 0 to 1.
                                   By aggregating the first diagram (Figure 19.2a), a simple over-
                                view of the emergy contributions is obtained (Figure 19.2d).
                                There are only two inflows of emergy, and these are calculated
                                as the product of outside transformities TrJ and TrG and energy
                                inflows (corrected with the normalization factor). Emergy flows
                                out in sales of environmental products TrQ*(NfQ*Jme /pe) such as
                                wood, minerals, and agricultural products, and in export sale of
                                assets TrA*(NfA*Jma/pa). Emergy at any time is the balance of
                                inflows and exports represented in simulations by the emergy
                                exchange ratio ExR ⫽ emergy imported/emergy exported [plot-
312           Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade


      ted in Figure 19.2e as exchange ratio minus 1 so as to graph
      gain (⫹) upward and loss (⫺) downward].


      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Programs
      in Table 19.2
         19.2–1 First run the program FREEMARK.bas (Table 19.2a)
      without any outside exchanges by setting JME, JMA, and K6 ⫽
      0. The results should be the graph in Figure 19.2b. Then turn
      on investment by setting INV ⫽ 1 and K6 ⫽ 1. Note that the
      program (lines 510–560) allows investments for 50 years before
      starting the payback. Interest is paid as long as there is debt.
      What happens to the debt D plotted in the upper panel? Is the
      early growth of assets A changed? Turn off the investment se-
      quence (set INV ⫽ 0 in line 370) before doing the next problem.
         19.2–2 Next run the program with environmental stock sales
      and purchases of outside goods–services–fuels by setting JME ⫽
      0.5 and K6 ⫽ 1 with favorable prices: PG ⫽ 0.2 and PE ⫽ 10
      ( JMA ⫽ 0). The result should be the graph in Figure 19.2c. With
      only the internal system running, there is no international money
      (M ⫽ 0). Next, what is the effect of lower price (PE ⫽ 1) for
      sale of environmental products Q? Next, what is the effect of a
      large increase in price of purchased goods–services–fuels (set
      PG ⫽ 2)? Why? How is this scenario like some undeveloped
      countries? What is the effect of borrowing with these price condi-
      tions (run with INV ⫽ 1 and JI ⫽ 0.5) compared with the result
      in Problem 20.3–1?
         19.2–3 Use the program EMEXCHNG.bas (Table 19.2b) to
      simulate emergy and the ratio of real wealth received from the
      global economy to that exported. Run the program with favor-
      able prices (PG ⫽ 0.2; PE ⫽ 10; JI ⫽ .5; K6 ⫽ 1). The benefit
      or loss from the foreign exchanges is plotted in the lower panel
      in Figure 19.2e (emergy exchange ratio defined in Figure 19.2d).
      Is there a net benefit or loss in real wealth (exchange ratio ExR
      greater than 1)? Can you explain how developing countries can
      accelerate their growth with trade and loans but experience net
      loss of real wealth?
         Next increase the price of purchases (PG ⫽ 2) or decrease
      prices of sales (PE or PA) and run again. Explain the effect of
      world prices on the emergy measures of real wealth and the ratio
      of inflow to outflow. How much increase in the sale price and/
      or decrease in the price of fuels–goods–services is required to
Effects of a Global Economy on a Nation (FREEMARK and EMEXCHNG )                        313


                                TABLE 19.2a
                                Program FREEMARK.bas Simulating Global Impacts on a Nation
                                (Figure 19.2a)




                                                                                  (continues)
314            Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade


      TABLE 19.2a (Continued)




      obtain a net benefit in real wealth as measured by the emergy
      exchange ratio ExR?
          19.2–4 In both programs, consider the effect of selling assets
      (finished products) after setting the inflow of outside purchasing
      money JMA ⫽ 0.2. Then increase prices for sale of assets PA
      larger than the price of asset purchases PG. What is the effect
      of the price changes on growth of assets and on emergy exchange?



                                       䉬
         19.3 MODEL OF DEFENSE AND WAR (WAR)

         Whereas Chapter 14 presented models with simple patterns
      of competition between two populations, the model WAR has
      defense and war, features of competing countries. In Figure 19.3
      two systems A and B are drawing from the same limited environ-
      mental resources. Each competitor builds a defense storage.
      When at war, the two competitors have three pathways of nega-
      tive interaction. Each system has a pathway controlling destruc-
      tion of the assets of the other. Then there is the pathway where
      each unit interacts to decrease the defense of the other.
         In the simulation in Figure 19.3b, unit A prevails at the end
      of the war period, but the total useful productivity of the whole
      system P for the time is not changed.
Model of Defense and War (WAR)                                                           315


                                 TABLE 19.2b
                                 Program EMEXCHNG.bas Simulating Emergy and Economic
                                 Effects of a Global Economy on a Nation (Figure 19.2)




                                                                                  (continues)
316            Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade


      TABLE 19.2b (Continued)




                EXAMPLES OF SYSTEMS AT WAR

         Examples are two pre-industrial nations at war, since they are
      not importing anything from outside. In modern times a country’s
      assets could include fuels from within the country. This model
Model of Defense and War (WAR)                                                                   317




FIGURE 19.3.
Model of defense and war in
international relations (program
WAR.bas). (a) Energy systems
diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.



                                   could also represent two groups of animals fighting over territory,
                                   like elephants, or fish in your fish tank. Animals have some of
                                   their resources put into defense mechanisms held in readiness.



                                               EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                      At any time, the resource R is the unused remainder of the
                                   renewable inflow I after part is used by the competing production
                                   processes K0*R*A and K1*R*B. The assets of both systems are
                                   a balance of positive autocatalytic production flows K2*R*A and
                                   K4*R*B minus depreciation flows K3*A and K5*B, minus assets
                                   used to support defense K6*A and K9*B and minus destruction
                                   from war K13*A*Mb and K12*B*Ma. The storages for defense are
318            Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade


      a balance between the allocations from assets K7*A and K10*B
      minus the depreciations K8*Ma and K11*Mb, and minus the de-
      structive drains by war K16*Ma*B, K15*Ma*Mb, K14*Mb*A and
      K17*Ma*Mb. The coefficients K are the same for both units except
      that the allocation for defense in unit A (K6 and K7) is slightly
      greater than for unit B (K9 and K10).

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 19.3
      19.3–1 Adjust the coefficients so that neither nation is destroyed.
             Explain what you did and why it did or did not work.
      19.3–2 When you increase the environmental resources, how
             does this affect each nation and the timing of the destruc-
             tion of B? Explain.
      19.3–3 Change one coefficient so that B wins the war. Explain
             in terms of two warring countries.




                                       䉬
              19.4 MODEL OF GLOBALLY SHARED
                   INFORMATION (INFOBEN)

         As the earth has developed new information and new means
      of information processing, the possibility of a new pattern of
      peace among nations is suggested by a model of global informa-
      tion sharing. As diagrammed in Figure 19.4, two nations are
      linked by shared information, which is mutually beneficial to
      production of both countries. Simulation of the program in Table
      19.4 shows how countries share information, maximize power,
      and develop coexistence (Figure 19.4b). Shared information S
      contributes to production of both populations, making them
      mutually beneficial.
         It may be an assumption, but information moves easily
      throughout the world with television and the Internet, not much
      constrained by the many efforts to restrict information access
      with economic profit making. Information has high transformi-
      ties. High-transformity products are rapidly transmitted and
      flexible in use. It will be a new era if the self-organization of
      information finally displaces the old global system of power poli-
      tics and territoriality.
Model of Globally Shared Information (INFOBEN )                                       319


                                   TABLE 19.3
                                   Program for Simulating Competition with Negative
                                   Interactions (WAR.bas) (Figure 19.3)
320                                       Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade




FIGURE 19.4.
Model of benefits of globally
shared information (program
INFOBEN.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) simulation.




                                                  EXAMPLES OF SYSTEMS
                                                 SHARING INFORMATION

                                    Medical information shared around the world has decreased
                                 deaths and increased productivity. As information about birth
                                 control spreads, productivity could increase even more. Political
                                 information about what is happening in one country, via TV,
                                 can affect activities in another country, encouraging protests or
                                 elections toward political systems that are internationally cooper-
                                 ative. Animal populations share information that allows popula-
                                 tions to operate in herds, schools, and rookeries. Interspecies
Model of Globally Shared Information (INFOBEN )                                   321


                                   TABLE 19.4
                                   Program for Shared Information (INFOBEN.bas)
                                   (Figure 19.4)
322           Chapter Nineteen Models of International Relations and Trade


      information is shared for mutual benefit, such as when squirrels
      make warning chatter at the sight of a snake.


                EXPLANATIONS OF EQUATIONS

         Shared information S is increased by linear pathways from A
      and B minus losses K8*S and that used in feedback loops K9*R*S
      and K10*R*S. The maintenance of shared information requires
      continuous duplication and distribution like that which occurs
      in child rearing, education, and television.
         With each iteration, the change of assets in each nation (A
      and B) is the sum of the autocatalytic production K2*R*A and
      K4*R*B plus the production increased by the information
      K11*R*S and K12*R*S minus outflows K3*A and K5*B. In this
      model these linear outflow pathways generate shared information
      and also include the depreciation losses from A and B.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 19.4

      19.4–1 If the energy source I is decreased, what happens to the
             total productivity? Explain with an example.
      19.4–2 What happens if the shared information, S, is zero? Ex-
             plain. Add a line 465 S ⫽ 0.
      19.4–3 Suppose one nation does not contribute to shared infor-
             mation. Set K6 ⫽ 0. What happens?
       Chapter Twenty
                          䉬

    MODELS OF THE
       GLOBAL
    GEOBIOSPHERE


20.1 Model of World Carbon Dioxide (WORLDCO2)
       Explanation of Equations
       Other Examples
20.2 Model of World Population (PEOPLE)
       Explanation of the Diagram and Equations
20.3 Overview Model of Geological Processes in
     Earth Evolution (EARTHGEO)
       Explanation of Equations
20.4 Model of a State Driven by a World
     Minimodel (STATECON)
       Examples That Fit the State-World Models
       Description of Equations




                         323
M       odels assembled in this chapter present overview perspec-
tives for the whole earth. The model WORLDCO2 simulates
carbon dioxide resulting from global metabolism fuel uses and
oceanic buffering. The model PEOPLE, for world population,
includes energy resources for public health and epidemic disease.
The model EARTHGEO overviews the geological processes in the
development of the earth. The STATECON minimodel presents a
state economy driven by a world minimodel of availability of
inputs. The macroeconomic models in Chapter 18 and the growth
minimodels in Chapter 13 can also be used for global perspec-
tives.




                               䉬
         20.1 MODEL OF WORLD CARBON
              DIOXIDE (WORLDCO2)

    As the consumption of nonrenewable fuels has increased in
this century, the global carbon dioxide concentration of the atmo-
sphere has increased, affecting climate. As shown by the pathways
in and out of the CO2 storage in Figure 20.1, the carbon dioxide
is increased by consumers on land and in the sea and by burning
of fossil fuels. Carbon dioxide is decreased by land and marine
photosynthesis and the buffering reaction with the carbonates in
the sea, deserts, and elsewhere. For the long time periods of
this model (years) the separate, rapid, chemical reactions of the
buffering chemical reactions can be aggregated to those appro-
priate.
    As illustrated by the simulation in Figure 20.1b, the model
binds the excess carbon dioxide into the carbonate buffer system
until the global system comes into better balance in later years
as fuel use decreases. Ppmv means parts per million by volume.
In this model balance between global production and use of
carbon dioxide can be achieved by reforestation. Reforestation
is represented by the coefficient of terrestrial production K1.


             324
Model of World Carbon Dioxide (WORLDCO2)                                                      325




FIGURE 20.1.
Model of world carbon dioxide
(program WORLDCO2.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation.




                                            EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    The available sunlight is the unused remainder Il and Iw after
                                 solar energy use by the production processes on land KL*IL*C
                                 and in the sea Kw*Iw*B. The photosynthetic production (land
                                 and seas production symbols) goes into the storage of organic
                                 carbon Q, where its change in a unit time DQ also depends on
                                 two outflows: respiration K2*Q and the cutting and burning of
                                 forest Ct.
                                    Change in atmospheric carbon dioxide DC is a balance be-
                                 tween positive inputs from respiration K3*Q, fuel consumption
                                 Fc, and cutting and fires Ct and two negative outflows, to land
326                               Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere




FIGURE 20.1.
(Continued).




               photosynthesis K4*IL*C and oceanic photosynthesis K5*L*C. As
               listed in Table 20.1, the rate of carbon dioxide contributed by fuel
               combustion Fc was calculated as the starting value Fcs decreased
               by one percent each year (0.00035*YR). Decline in global fuel
               consumption is anticipated as fuels become less abundant and
               more expensive.
                   Bicarbonate in oceans is a balance between that produced
               when carbon dioxide is buffered with limestone K6*C*L and
               that consumed directly and indirectly by marine photosynthe-
               sis K7*Iw*B.
                   The reacting limestone L is that in chemical exchange with
               these processes in the biogeosphere. The change in limestone
               (CaCO3) DL was increased by photosynthetic-driven elevation
               of pH increasing skeletal deposition, for example, coral reefs and
               coccoliths K9*Iw*B. Limestone is decreased by the acidification
               of carbon dioxide diffusing into the sea K10*L*C.
                   The model was given stability by providing a conservation of
               carbon. Total organic and inorganic carbon Tc was given an
               initial value that was added to by the fossil fuel combustion Fc
               on each iteration Tc ⫽ Tc ⫹ Fc*dt. The organic matter was
TABLE 20.1
Program for World Carbon-Dioxide Changes (WORLDCO2.bas)
(Figure 20.1)
328                      Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere


      calculated in the simulation as the difference between the total
      carbon and that in other storages Q ⫽ Tc ⫺ C ⫺ B ⫺ L.



                          OTHER EXAMPLES

        The EARTHSYS model given earlier in Figures 4.3 and 5.4
      overviews the carbon dioxide in the whole planet with ocean
      and land aggregated.
        Biosphere 2, the 3-acre glass-enclosed mesocosm in the Ari-
      zona desert mountains, had a buildup of CO2 in its first 2-year
      experiment, from excess soil respiration. As on earth, the excess
      CO2 was absorbed by carbonates in its ocean, its desert soils,
      and its concrete. This is simulated with the EXTEND model
      SIMBIO2 described in Section 4.4.


      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 20.1
      20.1–1 If you double the rate of forest production of the world
             (double K1) by reforestation, what happens? Explain.
      20.1–2 Increase the rate of cutting and burning of tropical forest
             by changing line 320 CT ⫽ 0.1. What happens? Ex-
             plain.
      20.1–3 If fossil fuel consumption (FCS) were doubled, what
             happens to the graph of carbon dioxide? Explain.




                                      䉬
      20.2 MODEL OF WORLD POPULATION (PEOPLE)

         The number of people in the world is the balance between
      reproduction and mortality. The number of births first depends
      on the number of reproducing people. Reproduction per person
      can be affected by the product of economic assets per person
      where economic assets are evaluated in emergy units to include
      environmental as well as urban assets. Mortality is increased by
      diseases and decreased by economic assets used for health care.
      The model PEOPLE combines these factors. As countries develop
      economically, the emergy per person gradually declines, as do
Model of World Population (PEOPLE)                                                               329


                                 birthrates. In other words, this model has built into it the hypothe-
                                 sis that population reproduction in one way or another is dimin-
                                 ished as people become crowded relative to their resources. See
                                 Figure 20.2.


                                           EXPLANATION OF THE DIAGRAM
                                                 AND EQUATIONS

                                    On the left side of Figure 20.2, production of economic assets
                                 is generated by interaction between the available renewable re-
                                 sources R, the available nonrenewable resources F, the economic
                                 assets A, and the population N. The renewable resources avail-




FIGURE 20.2.
Model of world population, and
health assets and disease
(program PEOPLE.bas). (a)
Energy systems diagram and
equations; (b) simulation.
330                      Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere


      able R is the remainder of the inflow J not yet in use. (See
      the RENEW model, Figure 13.1, for more explanation of the
      limitations of constant, renewable sources.) One production flow,
      K3*R*F*N*A, is based on available nonrenewable fuels F inter-
      acting with population, assets, and renewable resources. Fuels
      are used up by this production flow ⫺K0*R*F*N*A. Another
      production term, K4*R*A, becomes important only when fuel
      reserves F are small. The quantity of economic assets A is a
      balance between the two productive flows (positive terms in the
      equation) and the outflows (negative terms). The outflows include
      depreciation, K5*A, the economic assets used to develop popula-
      tions, K6*(A/N)*N, the economic assets used for regular health
      and medicine, L0*(1 ⫺ K9*A), and those used for epidemic dis-
      ease, L0*N*N*(1 ⫺ K9*A). The calibration was made with epi-
      demic mortality at 10% of ordinary mortality.
         The population N is the balance between births and deaths.
      The birthrate, L1*(A/N)*N, is directly proportional to assets per
      individual (A/N) and the population N. Two pathways of mortal-
      ity are included, regular deaths and deaths from epidemic disease.
      Regular mortality, K7*N*(1 ⫺ K9*A), is in proportion to the
      population N, but diminished in proportion to the economic
      assets used in health care 1 ⫺ K9*A. Epidemic mortality is in-
      creased in proportion to the square of the population K8*N*N,
      but diminished in proportion to those assets used in health care
      and medicine 1 ⫺ K9*A. A square of population, N*N, is appro-
      priate because epidemics spread when people are crowded, in
      proportion to population interactions, which is mathematically
      the square of the number.
         The program (Table 20.2) was calibrated with values for 1980.
      When the program is run, it generates the graph shown in Figure
      20.2b. As the nonrenewable fuels are used, economic assets pass
      through a maximum and start to decrease. Not many years later
      the population crests and decreases rapidly, a result of declining
      birthrates and higher mortalities.
         The curves in the population simulation (Figure 20.2b) show
      that the assets per person during growth are higher than those
      during the decline period. However, later with lower populations,
      the assets per person improve again. In one sense this model is
      an optimistic one, implying that a reasonable standard of living
      is possible in lower energy times, providing population levels
      decline in proportion with resources available for use.
Model of World Population (PEOPLE)                                                              331


                                 TABLE 20.2
                                 Program for World Population (PEOPLE.bas) (Figure 20.2)




                                 ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                 in Table 20.2
                                 20.2–1 If the fossil fuel tank F is set to zero, the model depicts a
                                        human population growing on renewable energies alone.
                                        How will the graph differ from the original? Why?
                                 20.2–2 Increase K9 to demonstrate the results of increased medi-
                                        cal care. How does this change the long-range popu-
                                        lation?
332                      Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere


      20.2–3 How would the graph change if, after about 250 years,
             the birthrate were cut 90%—what would be the changes
             in the immediate and long-range futures? (Add line
             515 IF T ⫽ 250 THEN L1⫽ 0.0001.) Also explain the
             difference in the graph of the fuels.
      20.2–4 If an epidemic of a disease like AIDS gets worse, how
             would this change the population prediction? Increase
             K8 10 times and run the simulation. Then, to make
             things worse, also cut the medical care K9 to zero.



                                      䉬
        20.3 OVERVIEW MODEL OF GEOLOGICAL
      PROCESSES IN EARTH EVOLUTION (EARTHGEO)

         Figure 20.3a represents a model of the main inputs and pro-
      cesses that developed the pattern of oceans and continents of the
      earth requiring a billion years or more. There are two energy
      sources, solar energy and the concentrated heat deep in the earth.
      The earth processes, as they have become organized in cycles
      over many years, have rapid atmospheric processes helping drive
      the ocean. These contribute to the hydrologic cycle, which contrib-
      utes to land formation and earth cycles, coupled to deep heat-
      driven emissions of materials to the surface. Water emerges from
      the deep earth in volcanic flows and leaves the earth when decom-
      posed in the high atmosphere, and the light hydrogen molecules
      escape into space. The pathways of circulating water are shaded
      darkly on the left, while the flow of land in the sedimentary
      and igneous–metamorphic cycles is shown on the right with
      speckled shading.
         Figure 20.3b uses the values of flow and storage to calibrate
      the model. Whereas the processes of atmosphere, ocean, and
      hydrologic cycle have turnover times of a few thousand years,
      the turnover time involved in building and sustaining the conti-
      nents is around a billion years. Running a model with such a
      wide range of turnover times would be difficult if A and L were
      both represented as storages. By representing the fast turnover
      items as a ‘‘flow use junction,’’ a running average of available
      sunlight R and atmosphere-ocean energy A are calculated in each
      computer iteration (see Section 6.4). The average contributions
      are provided to the slower large-scale land production process
FIGURE 20.3.
Model of earth development (program EARTHGEO.bas).
(a) Energy systems diagram and equations; circulating materials are shaded; (b) calibration values;
(c) simulation.
334                              Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere




FIGURE 20.3
(Continued).



               on the diagram to the right. The values used in the calibration
               are written in storages and on pathways in Figure 20.3b. Values
               of earth and water are in grams per square meter above a plane
               4000 meters below sea level. The unit of time is 1000 years.
                  The simulation shown in Figure 20.3c starts with a smaller
               amount of seawater and continental land than now. A sine wave
               represents the solar energy with a 20% oscillation of energy on
               a cycle of about 130,000 years. The zone of the oscillation shows
               up in the upper graph as a stippled bar. As the seawater grows,
               the atmospheric–oceanic processes increase, contributing to land
               development and development of a freshwater hydrologic cycle.
Model of a State Driven by a World Minimodel (STATECON)                                        335


                                 The plot of freshwater glaciers in the middle panel oscillates in
                                 response to variations in solar energy, suggesting ice ages. The
                                 increase of the freshwater hydrologic cycle occurs by diverting
                                 some of the atmospheric–oceanic cycle. The energy of the fast
                                 flows on the left are accumulated in the slow development of
                                 the continents.


                                             EXPLANATION OF EQUATIONS

                                    In Figure 20.3a, solar energy I is shown heating and vaporizing
                                 water from the sea S to generate the water and energy in atmo-
                                 spheric circulation, storms, and ocean currents A. In the program
                                 (Table 20.3) Ii is the average solar insolation around which it is
                                 varied plus and minus 20%. On the right are shown upflows
                                 from the deep earth bringing water Jw, energy E, and earth matter
                                 in volcanic flows and intrusions Je and K8*R*A*E*L. In the
                                 middle there is a large productive interaction that represents
                                 the coupling between the atmosphere–ocean energy A, available
                                 energy from the deep earth E, existing land L, and the available
                                 solar energy R. A hydrologic cycle of freshwater Fw is generated
                                 with lakes, rivers, and glaciers on land driving the erosion of the
                                 land K6*R*A*E*L, which is cycled to form new land
                                 K5*R*A*E*L using the sedimentary cycle plus new materials
                                 from the deep earth K8*R*A*E*L. Some land sinks back into
                                 the deep earth K7*L.

                                 ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
                                 in Table 20.3
                                 20.3–1 Double the solar energy flow I. What happens? Why?
                                 20.3–2 Set the water flow from deep earth JW to zero. What
                                        happens? Why?
                                 20.3–3 Reduce the energy E from the deep earth to 0.1 and then
                                        0.01. What happens? Why?



                                                                 䉬
                                  20.4 MODEL OF A STATE DRIVEN BY A WORLD
                                           MINIMODEL (STATECON)

                                    The state-miniworld model (STATECON) in Figure 20.4 sim-
                                 ulates the response of a state to changes in the resources of the
336                    Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere


      TABLE 20.3
      Program for Simulating Development of Ocean and Land with
      (EARTHGEO.bas) (Figure 20.3)
Model of a State Driven by a World Minimodel (STATECON)                                        337




FIGURE 20.4.
Minimodel of global
development affecting local
development (Program
STATECON.bas). (a, b) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(c) simulation.




                                 outside world. The world economy represented by MINIWORLD
                                 in Figure 20.4a grows slowly before discovery and use of fossil
                                 fuels; then with abundant fuels turned on it has a pulse of growth
                                 of assets and products, which are available to stimulate local
                                 economies. Finally global assets decrease again as fuel re-
                                 sources decline.
                                    The state represented by the lower model in Figure 20.4b uses
                                 some of the world’s economic assets Q to produce its own assets
                                 U. The production of the state’s assets U is in proportion to the
338                      Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere


      world assets. The more world assets there are, the more the state
      can grow. Water W is used as an index of the state’s natural
      resources, which interact with the world assets for the state
      growth.
         In the simulation, growth of the state’s assets follows that of
      the world. The upper graph of Figure 20.4c shows curves for
      world economic assets Q and the introduction of fossil fuels F.
      In the lower graph are curves for the state’s environmental re-
      sources W and its economic assets U. The simulation goes halfway
      across the screen, representing a colonial period without fossil
      fuels. Then after 300 years fossil fuels F are turned on by technol-
      ogy, which starts the Industrial Revolution. As these nonrenew-
      able resources are used, economic assets go through a maximum
      in the world, followed almost as rapidly in the state. The state’s
      assets decline because local natural resources W and world assets
      decline. As growth decreases, the storages of natural resources
      start to recover.


                      EXAMPLES THAT FIT THE
                       STATE-WORLD MODELS

         STATECON can be used for any nation or state that depends
      on imports and exports from the world economy. For example,
      Florida imports fuels and goods, like machines and cars, and
      exports oranges, vegetables, and tourist services. Japan is an
      example of a country that must import and export to keep its
      economy going. It imports fuels and raw products and exports
      finished electronic goods. Its economy is quite dependent on the
      rest of the world.


                  DESCRIPTION OF EQUATIONS

         The five equations in Figures 20.4a and 20.4b are stated as
      the following changes for each unit of time that passes:

                              DF ⫽ ⫺K4*F*Q.

      Change of nonrenewable resource reserves F (fuels, etc.) is equal
      to the use in the economic production resulting from product
      interaction of fuel reserves F and global assets Q.
Model of a State Driven by a World Minimodel (STATECON)                                    339


                                 TABLE 20.4
                                 Program (STATECON.bas) for a Regional Economy Driven by
                                 A Minimodel of the World Economy (Figure 20.4)




                                                  DQ ⫽ Js ⫹ K1*F*Q ⫺ K3*Q.

                                 Change of global assets equals steady inflow of products from
                                 environmental work Js, plus the economic production resulting
                                 from fuel use interacting with global assets Q (K1*F*Q), minus
                                 assets-dependent losses K3*Q.
340                     Chapter Twenty Models of the Global Geobiosphere


                DW ⫽ J ⫺ L3*W ⫺ L5*W ⫺ L1*W*U*Q.

      Change of water storages DW equals inflow of rain J, minus
      outflow L3*W, minus linear use in developing state assets L5*W,
      minus water use by state economic production L1*W*U*Q.

               DU ⫽ L2*U*Q*W ⫹ L4*W ⫺ L6*U ⫺ L*U.

      Change of state assets DU is increased by the autocatalytic pro-
      duction based on imported global assets Q interacting with local
      resources W (L2*U*Q*W), plus local production L4*W, minus
      depreciation L6*U, minus state products traded L*U.

      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 20.4

      20.4–1 What would happen to this state if it developed with
             10% less use of resources obtained by trade with the
             world? To make a 10% lower rate of use of world
             resources, decrease L2 by 10%.
      20.4–2 If the world’s sunlight is greater, how does this affect
             the state’s growth? After running the program with its
             current settings, increase JS.
      20.4–3 If a new rich fuel source were discovered in about the
             year 2000, how would the world and state economies
             react? Add a statement as line 375 to make F ⫽ 1000
             when T ⫽ 400.
               PART FOUR
                               䉬


 APPLICATION

Part IV applies simulation to real systems. After considering
fundamental models and their simulation with several easy meth-
ods in Parts I through III, you are ready for a modeling project.
Chapter 21 presents the steps for simulating an ecosystem exam-
ple and discusses the controversial question of what complexity
is appropriate. Chapter 22 briefly introduces other kinds of simu-
lation modeling including spatial models, statistical models,
mathematical methods for complex networks, and other simula-
tion software.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
  Chapter Twenty-One
                           䉬

MODELING PROJECTS
 AND COMPLEXITY




 21.1 Overview
         Course Projects
         Modeling a Real System
         Debugging
         Applications of Minimodels
 21.2 LAGOON: An Example of an Initial
      Project Model
         Explanation of Model and Equations
 21.3 Complexity of Models
         More Complex LAGOON Model
         Simulating Small Scale with Main Features of a
           Larger Scale
         Limits on Complexity
         Complexity and Uniqueness
         Representing Complex Models with Diagrams
         Use of Complex Models in New Situations
 21.4 Judging the Success of Simulation
         Verifying Model Performance
         Comparing Observations with Simulations



                           343
A      modeling project is the next step after learning principles
and means for simulation. Chapter 21 introduces the process of
modeling and simulation of a real system. Examples in previous
chapters were minimodels with relatively few units and relation-
ships (2 to 15 coefficients). Each minimodel shows a few impor-
tant principles, but the patterns over time in the real world are
more complex, with all the principles and scales operating to-
gether. Investigators want all the main features of a system to
show in the model. The matching of observed data usually re-
quires models with more units and interconnections. But the
controversial question is this: How much complexity is desirable?




                                 䉬
                      21.1 OVERVIEW

                     COURSE PROJECTS

   In our systems courses, after working with principles and
minimodels, students do special projects on systems of special
interest to them. To limit difficulty, complexity, and the time
required for a first application and to develop ability to aggregate,
the assignment requires that the whole system of the declared
interest and its main sources be included. However, for the first
application the simulation model is limited to four storages and
four interactions. LAGOON (see Section 21.2) is an example of
an aggregated model of an ecosystem, only slightly more complex
than the minimodels in Part III. Students are discouraged from
isolating a small part of the system of interest, since to do so
puts the model at the wrong scale for understanding the defined
system and its problems. An oral presentation is made to the
group as soon as there are graphs to show from the initial simula-
tion runs. After benefiting by the discussion, the model is revised
and runs completed.
Overview                                                                 345


              A written report is required to include and explain the follow-
           ing items:

            1. The system under study and its questions of special interest
            2. A complex diagram of the real system
            3. Diagram of the aggregated simulation model and coefficients
            4. The derived equations (on a page facing the model diagram)
            5. Diagram of the model with calibration numbers
            6. Table or spreadsheet used for calculating coefficients
            7. Listing of the simulation program
            8. Simulation graphs for the calibration run
            9. Simulation graphs for ‘‘What If ’’ experiments that explore
               the questions of special interest
           10. Summary of insights gained from the exercise

           After the course project is completed, students are ready to de-
           velop models for their other courses, theses, dissertations, and
           jobs.


                        MODELING A REAL SYSTEM

               To model a real system, first define a boundary and the time
           scale of interest (hours, days, years, etc.). Then use words to
           make three lists: (1) the main external factors (sources), (2) the
           main parts inside, and (3) the main processes (interactions) be-
           lieved to be important at that place and time scale. Then draw
           the systems diagram and write the equations. Find data on flows
           and storages for the diagram and calibration table. Numbers
           used for calibration need to be in the right order of magnitude
           and adjusted to be internally consistent with other flows in the
           diagram (example: Figure 21.1b). At this stage precise data are
           not needed. In one simple method, estimate average storage quan-
           tities, and then use estimated turnover times to estimate the flows
           on the pathways in and out, determine the coefficients from the
           flows and storages, write the program, and start runs.


                                   DEBUGGING

             Mistakes (bugs) are almost always present in the programming
           and have to be removed. Bugs include errors in thinking and
346                  Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity


      careless typing. The first runs may jump off scale, show nothing,
      give negative values, or induce error messages from the computer.
      Debugging is a trial-and-error process. Reduce the iteration inter-
      val DT to eliminate any artificial chaos. Cut the input sources
      to a small value to get the output range to stay within the screen.
      Decrease off-scale amplitudes with scaling factors. Keep the en-
      ergy systems diagrams in view. After each run use the command
      line to print values to see if they are in the right order of magni-
      tude. If not, use the diagram to identify the equations and coeffi-
      cients affecting that variable. Start on the left, checking each
      input and storage quantity. Where interactions are drawn from
      storages, they can be pulled below zero, which causes the whole
      program to generate nonsense. Insert statements to prevent these
      values from going below zero (e.g., IF Q ⬍ 0.00001 THEN
      Q ⫽ .00001).
          If steady-state numbers are used for calibration, if the program
      is not oscillating, and if the first runs are made with the calibration
      numbers as the starting values, the graphical output is horizontal
      straight lines, which may mean that bugs are eliminated. Reset the
      starting conditions to 10% of steady state and rerun to observe
      growth and leveling. If the model is oscillating, check to see if
      amplitudes and frequencies are realistic.
          Controversy exists as to how much complexity and detail are
      desirable in simulation models and in their validation. Many
      modelers go immediately to the level of complexity planned for
      simulation. However, a better way is to program a model with
      important features and get it running to gain insight on its perfor-
      mance in comparison to the observed system. Then add addi-
      tional parts and mechanisms. By making the preliminary model,
      debugging is easier, the investigator keeps structure and function
      better related, and he or she enjoys the process more.


                 APPLICATIONS OF MINIMODELS

         Minimodels aid development of more complex models accord-
      ing to scale:

      1. At its own scale a minimodel and its simulation show a few
         principal relationships and their consequences over time. The
         simulation of a minimodel that has the main essence in over-
         view should be a smoothed version of the simulation of the
LAGOON: An Example of an Initial Project Model                                                   347


                                     more complex model. For example, a minimodel of a micro-
                                     bial population might show a smoothed curve produced by
                                     the aggregated of mechanisms of growth and limitations.
                                  2. Relative to the smaller scale, a minimodel aggregates more
                                     complex details. It provides a top-down overview, which may
                                     be enough if the details of the smaller scale are not the primary
                                     concern. At the scale of the minimodel the smaller scale often
                                     contributes rounded averages. For example, most of the details
                                     of the rapid processes of biochemistry within the bacteria are
                                     not needed on the time scale of studies of microbial popula-
                                     tion growth.
                                  3. The minimodels are building blocks for developing more com-
                                     plex models. Knowledge of the behavior of the simpler con-
                                     figurations helps understand the more complex model in
                                     which these are embedded. For example, the models of the
                                     bacterial population can be inserted into a model of a gar-
                                     bage dump.



                                                                  䉬
                                     21.2 LAGOON: AN EXAMPLE OF AN INITIAL
                                                PROJECT MODEL

                                     The model LAGOON (Figure 21.1) illustrates the process of
                                  developing a preliminary simulation of a real system in a project.
                                  Figure 21.1a has the main features of an ecosystem in a tropical
                                  marine lagoon in Puerto Rico. The broad shallow lagoon 1 m
                                  deep was surrounded by mangroves and connected with the sea
                                  by a narrow tidal channel. Shrimp and larger fish were harvested
                                  by nets in the channel. The detritus from the mangroves and
                                  algae was consumed by larger organisms such as young shrimp
                                  and fishes. The lagoon water exchanged with the sea through
                                  the channel had a greater outflow than inflow because of the
                                  freshwater received from land runoff.
                                     The modeling procedure started with a written list of sources,
                                  components, and processes. Then these were diagrammed and
                                  equations written (Figure 21.1a). Next, values of flows and
                                  storages were collected and written on the diagram (Figure
                                  21.1b). Constant coefficients were calculated with a calibration
                                  table (using a spreadsheet). The simulation program was writ-
                                  ten, run, and debugged. To save time, an old BASIC program
348                               Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity




FIGURE 21.1.
Model of a tropical marine
lagoon connected by a channel
with the sea (program
LAGOON.bas). (a) Energy
systems diagram and equations;
(b) calibration values for
storages (per square meter) and
flows (grams per square meter
per year) written on the
diagram; sun, wind and tide
were normalized as unity;
(c) typical simulation of the
LAGOON model.
LAGOON: An Example of an Initial Project Model                                                     349


                                  of similar complexity was loaded and statements changed.
                                  Then simulations were rerun with various changes in inputs
                                  or coefficients, relating the responses to what was known about
                                  the lagoon.
                                      This aggregated ecosystem model (Figure 21.1a) illustrates
                                  food chain patterns in ecosystems and the recycle of mineral
                                  nutrients. The external sources, sun, nutrient inflow, and tidal
                                  patterns are source-limited inputs that determine the carrying
                                  capacity of the system to support higher organisms.
                                      It was known that populations pulsed in this lagoon. In typical
                                  simulations (Figure 21.1c) of LAGOON.bas, consumers pulse
                                  almost with an annual time scale even when no seasonal inputs
                                  are applied. The buildup of detritus storage permits the consumer
                                  food chain to develop an oscillation. The simple prey–predator
                                  interaction of the shrimp and small consumers causes the pulsing,
                                  which also causes the primary production, detritus, and nutrient
                                  levels to oscillate. Pulsing is facilitated by having linear and auto-
                                  catalytic pathways to the small consumers. This lagoon model
                                  illustrates the ways larger species can control the periodicities
                                  of ecosystems.


                                     EXPLANATION OF MODEL AND EQUATIONS

                                     To represent the main features of the lagoon, the model
                                  LAGOON (Figure 21.1a) was defined with the boundary at the
                                  edge of the wetland border of the lagoon. The model includes a
                                  producer unit for mangroves with stored biomass M occupying
                                  area A. Marked with a producer symbol, the net photosynthetic
                                  production P in the open water and on the shallow bottom
                                  was modeled as a product of available light R2 and the nutrient
                                  concentration N. Because the scale of time chosen was years, the
                                  very fast turnover components algae and nutrients at position
                                  N0 and N were modeled without storages. The ‘‘flow use’’ design
                                  (Section 6.4) provides a running average of the nutrient concen-
                                  trations, simplifying the simulation. In Figure 21.1a and the pro-
                                  gram (Table 21.1) both K and L are used for constant coefficients;
                                  L alone is the storage of larvae and juveniles.
                                     Nutrients available to the mangroves N0 are the sum of inflows
                                  Nr and Ng minus that used by mangroves L1*R1*A*N0. Nutrients
                                  N available to the freewater aquatic production P are those pass-
                                  ing through the mangrove border N0 plus that recycled L6*C
350                Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity


      TABLE 21.1
      Program for Marine Lagoon (LAGOON.bas)
      (Figure 21.1)




                                                    (continues)
LAGOON: An Example of an Initial Project Model                                                  351


                                  TABLE 21.1 (Continued)




                                  minus that used in production L5*R2*N. A pool of organic accu-
                                  mulation characteristic of most ecosystems is included as the
                                  detritus storage D. The animals are included as a pair of autocata-
                                  lytic consumer units connected with prey–predator type inter-
                                  action.
                                     In Figure 21.1a the storage of detritus organic matter D re-
                                  ceives the net photosynthetic production flow of the algae
                                  K2*R2*N and some of the litter from the mangroves K4*M. Some
                                  detritus washes out K3*D, and some is used by the small consum-
                                  ers on two pathways, one linear L8*D and one an autocatalytic
                                  use K5*D*C. The small consumers (zooplankton and bottom
                                  microzoa) are increased by the food conversion pathways L9*D
                                  and K6*D*C and decreased by linear losses K7*D and the autocat-
                                  alytic consumption K*C*S by larger consumers (labeled as
                                  shrimp). The larger consumers S are increased by conversion of
                                  their food L4*C*S and influx of juveniles and larvae L with the
                                  tide. Storage S is decreased by linear losses L7*S and fishing
                                  yield K9*S.
352                 Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity


      ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems for the Program
      in Table 21.1

      21.1–1 What happens to the storages and the oscillations if
             nutrients running off the land through the mangrove
             border are increased? Change NR from 1 to 3.
      21.1–2 What is the effect of cutting the mangroves on detritus
             and consumers? Reduce the mangrove area A from 0.1
             to 0 and change the initial value of M to 0.
      21.1–3 What happens if larvae and juveniles of larger consumers
             from offshore reproduction are not available to exchange
             back into the lagoon with the tide? Set L ⫽ 0 and S ⫽ 0.




                                      䉬
                  21.3 COMPLEXITY OF MODELS

         On every scale the real world is vastly more complex than
      humans can visualize, and no model can represent all of its detail.
      But humans can visualize main features in simplified models.
      Traditional science studies pieces. For understanding, systems
      and simulation combine the pieces into models. Associated with
      O’Neill is the principle that the complexity of ups and downs of
      patterns over time is proportional to the complexity of the parts
      and pathways. In other words, minimodels generate smoothed
      graphs of phenomena, whereas more complex models of the
      same system have more of the detailed ups and downs. Reality
      modeling is intermediate in complexity and accuracy between
      the minimodels and the real world.
         The complexity of models that is desirable is controversial,
      and depends on scales. Complexity results as modelers attempt
      to include more of what they observe in the real world. Many
      scientific disciplines are dedicated to one scale and sometimes
      these investigators want to include everything they know. Many
      people believe that combining more and more parts will generate
      a correct simulation of the system, even though the main features
      of design that control are from mechanisms of a larger scale
      outside of the model. Yet a model at one scale may not have the
      controlling influences of the larger scale necessary for simulation
      of that scale. The human mind acting like a zoom microscope
      observes each scale in a system of interest with the same detail
Complexity of Models                                                                   353


                       and often wants to include them equally. Yet fine detail of smaller
                       scales may not affect the scale of main interest.



                                MORE COMPLEX LAGOON MODEL

                          To illustrate the process of increasing complexity, model
                       LAGOONII (Figure 21.2a) was made by adding details to
                       LAGOON. The program contains 120 coefficients and required
                       several months to develop and debug (Odum and Munroe, 1993).
                       It has many of the uncertainties and arbitrary choices of moder-
                       ately complex models. Like the simpler LAGOON, it has produc-
                       ers, a food web of consumers, nutrient recycle, and tidal seeding.
                       Like the real lagoon, the simulation has many complex pulsing
                       sequences which are sensitive to population levels, nutrients,
                       and other factors (example: Figure 21.2b). In one simulation
                       overfishing caused blooms of fast turnover carnivores (jellyfish).
                          The complex version still could not duplicate the fine detail
                       sequences of each species population because they were not in
                       the model separately. Nor were the mechanisms of population
                       detail included such as age classes, special species physiology,
                       and special relationships to other species. However, additional
                       understanding was obtained of important aspects of the ecosys-
                       tem. For example, increased organic matter from the land facili-
                       tated pulsing. Neither model can be expected to generate all of
                       the observed fluctuations of the smaller scales that had been ag-
                       gregated.



                            SIMULATING SMALL SCALE WITH MAIN
                               FEATURES OF A LARGER SCALE

                          Where small-scale detail is of interest, it can be included within
                       a model that for the most part has larger scale structure and
                       processes. For example, details on a species, to the satisfaction
                       of the species scientist, can be imbedded in an otherwise simpler
                       ecosystem model like LAGOON in order to have its inputs appro-
                       priately driven by interactions with the ecosystem around it.
                       For example, one of the consumer units in Figure 21.2c can be
                       expanded to include both mass and population numbers, eggs,
                       larvae, age classes, and physiological effects of temperature.
354                 Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity




              FIGURE 21.2a


                      LIMITS ON COMPLEXITY

         It is nonsense to try to model all the detail of the real world.
      To do so would be to lose understanding in the confusion. It
      takes more information to model something than to be that
      something. To find out what the real world does, measure the
      real world. To understand and predict the main features of the
      real world, develop models on a scale appropriate to human
      understanding, with frequent checks with observed data so that
      the model shows the main features, but not all the details of
      scales outside of main interest.
         When large models are generated by combining many relation-
      ships piece by piece, even the modeler-programmer who did it
      may not comprehend the product, often forgetting what is in the
      code. Opportunity for programming errors increases with the
      complexity. It is very difficult to know if all the errors have been
Complexity of Models                                                                           355


FIGURE 21.2.
(a) More complex model LAGOONII of a tropical marine lagoon used to explore oscillations in a food
web in relation to productivity and nutrients (Odum and Munroe, 1993). Equations:

Limiting Flows:
R1 ⫽ JS ⫺ K0*R1*N0/AM              Therefore R1 ⫽ JS/(1 ⫹ K0*N0/AM)
R2 ⫽ JS ⫺ K1*N*R2                  Therefore R2 ⫽ JS/(1 ⫹ K1*N)
R3 ⫽ R2 ⫺ M7*N*R3                  Therefore R3 ⫽ R2/(1 ⫹ M7*N)
R4 ⫽ PH ⫺ V1*A*R4                  Therefore R4 ⫽ PH(1 ⫹ V1*A)
R5 ⫽ PB ⫺ V2*C*R5 ⫺ U3*G*R5        Therefore R5 ⫽ PB/(1 ⫹ V2*C ⫹ U3*G)

Water:
WR ⫽ RA*AL; WL (W/AL) ⫺ Z; FL ⫽ W2*(TD ⫺ WL); EV ⫽ W8*WD*AL
If TD ⬎ WL then Y ⫽ 1: X ⫽ 0; If TD ⬍ WL then Y ⫽ 0: X ⫽ 1
DW ⫽ WR ⫹ WG ⫹ FL ⫺ W8*WD*AL ⫺ M6*M*AM

Phosphorus:
N0 ⫽ WR*NR ⫹ WG*NG ⫺ L1 *R1*AM*NO.
Therefore N0 ⫽ (WR*NR ⫹ WG*NG)/(l ⫹ L1*R1*AM)
N ⫽ N0/AL ⫹ Y*M1*NT*(FL/AL) ⫹ RC ⫺ X*L7*N*FL/AL ⫺ L5*R2*N ⫺ M8*R3*N
Therefore N ⫽ (N0/AL ⫹ Y*M1*NT*FL/AL ⫹ RC)/(1 ⫹ L5*R2 ⫹ M8*R3 ⫹ L7*FL/AL)

Production:
PH ⫽ K2*R2*N;       PB ⫽ M9*R3*N;       GP ⫽ PH ⫹ PB; RS ⫽ 200*RC
Detritus: DD ⫽ R4 ⫹ R5 ⫹ X*K3*(D/Z)*FL/AL ⫺ K5*C*D ⫹ K4*M*AM/AL ⫺ N4*D*A ⫺ L9*D ⫹
          W4*WG*RG/AL
Benthos: DC ⫽ K6*D*C ⫺ K7*C ⫺ K8C*S ⫺ V3*R5*C ⫺ V4*C*B
Shrimp: DS ⫽ L4*C*S ⫺ X*M5*S ⫺ C9*S ⫺ W1*F*S ⫹ Y*M4*ST*FL/AL
         YS ⫽ X*M2*S*FM
Mangroves: DM ⫽ L2*R1*N0/AM ⫺ L3*M ⫺ K4*M
Zooplankton: DA ⫽ N1*D*A ⫺ N2*A ⫺ N3*A*P ⫺ M3*A*J ⫹ U2*R4*A
Grazing fish: DG ⫽ U4*R5*G ⫺ N7*G ⫺ N8*G ⫺ Z5*G*F ⫹ Y*N9*GT*FL/AL ⫺ U7*FH*G
Plankton fish: DP ⫽ Z1*A*P ⫺ Z2*P ⫺ W3*P ⫺ Z3*P*F ⫹ W9*PT*FL/AL ⫺ N5*FH*P
Bottom fish: DB ⫽ V5*C*B ⫺ V6*B ⫺ V7*B*F ⫺ U6*B ⫹ Y*U5*BT*FL/AL ⫺ N6*FH*B
Jellyplankton: DJ ⫽ W6*A*J ⫺ W7*J ⫹ Y*L8*JT*FL/AL ⫹ X*U1*( J/Z)*(FL/AL)

Higher consumers:
DF ⫽ Z4*S*F ⫹ Z7*P*F ⫹ Z8*G*F ⫹ V8*B*F ⫺ Z6*F ⫺ Z9*F ⫺ K9*FH*F ⫹ Y*L6*FT*FL/AL
Fishing: YF ⫽ K9*FH*F ⫹ N5*FH*P ⫹ N6*FH*B ⫹ U7*FH*G



                                 debugged. With large numbers of coefficients, the calibration is
                                 difficult. It is difficult to understand large models, although it
                                 helps to provide an energy systems diagram on a poster board.
                                    Many examples are available of the failure of modeling and sim-
                                 ulation which started with a false ideal of having the computer
                                 combine everything that could be learned about the parts of a sys-
                                 tem. The IBP (International Biological Program) of the late 1960s
356                                  Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity




FIGURE 21.2
(Continued). (b) One of the
simulations of the LAGOONII
model with large detritus input;
(c) sections of the systems
model isolated to show
calibrations. Letters used for
constant coefficients are C, K, L,
M, N, and V.
Complexity of Models                                                                  357


                       sought to ‘‘understand ecosystems for the benefit of human soci-
                       ety.’’ The traditional science ideal was adopted of studying all the
                       parts, going from the scale of ecosystems down into the scales of
                       physiology of organisms and below, leaving synthesis to a few peo-
                       ple with mathematical background. Much was learned and pub-
                       lished about the parts of ecosystems, but the models were so com-
                       plex that they were never finished, not realistic, and mostly never
                       published. What understanding was obtained about the ecosystem
                       scale came from a few simplified models.


                                  COMPLEXITY AND UNIQUENESS

                          In real systems uniqueness and creativity emerge with com-
                       plexity. There are more possible arrangements and connections
                       between parts than there is energy to arrange them. Thus, differ-
                       ent combinations result for the same number of parts and path-
                       ways. Complex ecosystems like coral reefs and rain forests tend
                       to be unique—never exactly the same. The same is true for the
                       complex models. When more detail is added, the choices tend
                       to be arbitrary, representing the special knowledge and interests
                       of the modelers.
                          The more complex a model is, the more possible variations
                       there are. Even at moderate levels of complexity, two modelers
                       are likely to design models that have different units and connec-
                       tions. This doesn’t mean they are wrong. The models reflect
                       the different choices on the parts of the real world included,
                       aggregated, or omitted. Creativity and originality emerge with
                       complexity both in nature’s creation and in the understanding
                       of unique models.


                                REPRESENTING COMPLEX MODELS
                                       WITH DIAGRAMS

                          As illustrated in this book, simulation models should always
                       be diagrammed, preferably with the participation and approval
                       of the authors. Each diagram should be accompanied by the
                       change rate and logic equations extracted from computer codes
                       and represented by the symbol network. The diagramming
                       catches inconsistencies and dangling pathways. Making models
                       visible and more easily understood encourages use by more peo-
358                  Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity


      ple, more discussion of the structure and functions in previous
      models, and more building of one effort on another. People can
      trust a model better if they understand what is in it. Then they
      can suggest the changes they require for additional use in
      other situations.
          In wide usage since 1966, and explained in Part I of this
      book, the symbols and diagramming rules of the energy systems
      language (Chapter 2 and Appendix D) contain mathematical
      equivalents, energy constraints, and means of representing infor-
      mation. When symbols are placed on the page from left to right
      in order of their energy transformity, a model drawn by one
      person is congruent with those of another. Whereas the language
      is also used qualitatively in a soft way as a first step in converting
      verbal, mental models to network form, this language can be
      used precisely to represent equations and program code.
          Figure 21.2a is an example of representing the essentials of
      a moderately complex simulation model with energy systems
      diagramming and equations. To represent the calibration data,
      confusion can be reduced by separating parts on which the cali-
      bration values and the equations are shown (sample in Figure
      21.2c).
          Very complex models can require several pages. With the
      symbols in memory as ‘‘macros,’’ complex diagrams can be
      drawn in a few hours with computer drawing programs such as
      Canvas and Corel Draw.



                   USE OF COMPLEX MODELS IN
                        NEW SITUATIONS

         Some complex models with large investments of time, devel-
      oped for one area, are being systematically applied in other areas
      and ecosystems by integrative organizations such as the network
      of Long Term Ecological Research sites (LTERs) of the National
      Science Foundation. Without systems diagrams of the details,
      participants in these group projects have no easy way to know
      their content. Even the authors of models using them later do
      not remember all the details. Even when printouts of computer
      code are available, it is not easy to see what is being represented,
      what should be modified, or how an investigator dealing with a
      particular part can relate.
         So-called ‘‘canned’’ models are adapted to new conditions by
Judging the Success of Simulation                                                                 359


                                    resetting coefficients with data, but the overall structure and
                                    features may not be appropriate. No model or its output should
                                    be used until its equations and systems diagram are available
                                    and understood.



                                                                    䉬
                                     21.4 JUDGING THE SUCCESS OF SIMULATION

                                       At the least, simulation shows the quantitative consequences
                                    of ideas about relationships, often to the surprise of the person
                                    making causal inferences with verbal thinking. At best, simula-
                                    tion fits observed data and predicts future patterns.



                                             VERIFYING MODEL PERFORMANCE

                                        Verification is the process of showing that the model has ap-
                                    propriate mechanisms and output to represent the concepts be-
                                    lieved to be important in the real system. For example, a model
                                    of productivity should respond to variations in the availability
                                    of necessary inputs to production. Study the pathways and con-
                                    figurations of the systems diagram to see if the simulation results
                                    are consistent with the mechanisms that were introduced. Are
                                    these consistent with beliefs about the real system? If not, make
                                    changes. The minimodels in Part III provide insight on responses
                                    that follow from model structures. They should be rerun until
                                    the patterns are plausible. Recalibration may be part of this
                                    process, an easy effort if a spreadsheet program has been used
                                    for calculating coefficients.
                                        The equations for a component unit can be examined to write
                                    the mathematical function for its storage or production. Then
                                    observed data can be plotted on the same graph, which has
                                    the mathematically generated line. Where possible, coordinates
                                    should be chosen so that the theoretical line from the equation
                                    is straight. For example, Figure 16.4c has a straight line relating
                                    species number to the square root of the resource area. Then a
                                    statistical correlation or regression equation can be calculated to
                                    evaluate the probability of the fit between line and data. For
                                    another example, a semi-log graph can be used to test for expo-
                                    nential growth (Figure 9.4) or decay (Figure 6.7) because these
360                 Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity


      functions are straight on coordinates log Q as a function of
      time T.
         A whole model might generate realistic looking time series
      curves with incorrect mechanisms. In addition to comparison of
      data with runs of the whole model, comparisons can be made
      between the performance of component units and observed data.
      For example, the data on production rate of plants (model output
      and observed data) can be graphed as a function of light intensity.
      A good model not only generates the time series, but has the
      components of the model performing realistically. A part of the
      model can be isolated to test its response. In BASIC this is easily
      done by using GOTO to bypass program lines or to disable lines
      by typing REM just after the line number.



                  COMPARING OBSERVATIONS
                     WITH SIMULATIONS

          Comparing the simulation graphs with data from the real
      system is sometimes called validation. The simulation results can
      be compared with the data that were used to calibrate the model.
      Then the model can be compared with data from other times
      and situations. However, it would not be appropriate to compare
      the model with data for a different system known to have major
      factors not included in the model.
          For those using models to represent real systems, success is
      often tested by comparing observed data with the simulation of
      the whole model. Actual records of sources like sunlight and
      water inflow are used as inputs to the simulation. Then observed
      data for the storages are plotted on a graph of properties with
      time generated by the model. In a typical example, Campbell
      and Newell (1998) simulated a system of mussel culture with
      the model shown in Figure 21.3a. Note the way the mussel
      production and respiratory functions include the exponential
      effect of temperature (eT ). Validation was done by comparing
      observed data with simulated graphs. Figure 21.3b is one of
      these comparisons.
          If changes have resulted from experiments on the real system
      (or natural experiments), the model should show the same
      changes when the model is experimentally modified. This does
      not mean recalibrating. If the model is a good one, it will change
      its output to that observed without recalibration.
Judging the Success of Simulation                                                                  361




FIGURE 21.3.
Example of validation, culture of bottom mussels (Campbell and Newell, 1998). (a) Energy systems
model; (b) simulation graph of organic detritus–phytoplankton biomass with observed data points
plotted as small triangles; redrawn from Campbell and Newell (1998).
362                  Chapter Twenty-One Modeling Projects and Complexity


         Statistical methods can be used to measure the fit between
      simulation and data. Observed curves can be statistically com-
      pared with a simulated curve using the chi-squared test, which
      indicates probability of fit. The values of a variable generated by
      the simulation may be plotted on a graph as a function of the
      observed values of that variable. For a perfect fit, points would
      be in a straight line. The degree of fit can be evaluated with a
      correlation or regression program. If the comparison shows a
      poor match, the model and its calibration can be changed until
      there is a better match.
         Perfect fit is not to be expected in any simulation, since no
      model has all the factors and scales operable in the real world.
      Nor are observed data abundant enough and accurate enough
      to prove a fit. The model is successful if it reproduces the main
      features of the system of interest. It is useful if it helps understand
      the problems at issue in the real system.
Chapter Twenty-Two
                         䉬

      SIMULATION
      APPROACHES




22.1 Spatial Models
        Simple Example: Linear Water Flows
        Spatial Self-Organization by Pulsing Units
        Spatial Simulation Software
        Rain Forest Succession
        Fractals
22.2 Variation and Statistical Models
        Inherent Randomness
        Variation as Smaller Scale Oscillations
        Validation with Statistical Measures
        Statistical Methods of Finding an Appropriate
           Dynamic Model
22.3 Approaching Models through Mathematics
        Mathematics Software
        Simulating Fluid Dynamics
22.4 Methods for Larger Simulation Programs
        Compiling
        Sensitivity Analysis
        Using Matrix Equations for Simulation
        Input–Output Simulation


                        363
22.5 Discrete Processes and Models
        Logic Networks
        Cumulative Error in Digital Simulation
        Neural Networks
        Queues of Discrete Units
22.6 Parallel Processing
22.7 Frontiers and Perspectives
        Other Approaches to System Simulation




          C     hapter 22 surveys other approaches to simulation including
          spatial models, mathematical approaches, statistical models,
          techniques for larger models and software packages. We can only
          explain the key ideas and where to go to learn more. Published
          translations of models from the symbols of mathematics and
          other fields into energy diagrams are available (Odum, 1983,
          1994).




                                        䉬
                           22.1 SPATIAL MODELS

             Typical spatial simulation divides the geometric area of a
          system into component blocks, each of which has its own
          simulation model running, but connected by pathways between
          the blocks. For example, in Figure 22.1a the landscape is
          divided into nine blocks. Each block has its own minimodel,
          receiving inputs from outside sources. The model in each block
          has inputs and output pathways joining adjacent blocks (small
          squares in Figure 22.1a). After equations are written for each
          block, all of the block models are simulated as one program.
          The output can be nine sets of graphs, one for each block.
          More often, the values of each block are given a shading or
          color so that an attractive map is displayed with shadings
          changing with time. Sometimes three-dimensional graphics are
          used to show the values of each block as a vertical column.
          For applications to real landscapes, the blocks are usually not
          square but follow natural features of the landscape.


                         364
Spatial Models                                                                                  365




FIGURE 22.1.
Example of spatial simulation,
water distribution on a flat
landscape with the area divided
into nine blocks. (a) Pattern of
blocks showing rain inflow
from an outside source and
small squares indicating flows
between adjacent blocks; (b)
details of block 5 showing the
unit model with energy systems
symbols, including coefficients
and change equation.


                                       SIMPLE EXAMPLE: LINEAR WATER FLOWS

                                      A very simple example is the model in Figure 22.1b for the
                                   flow of water in a flat, sandy landscape. In this case each block
                                   has the same minimodel. The repeating unit model in this case
                                   is a simple water storage, which exchanges water with the next
                                   block according to the difference in water quantity (Figure
                                   22.1b). Rain enters each block and flows toward those blocks
                                   with less water, dispersing some energy from the frictional pro-
                                   cesses. The model is appropriate where flow is through a porous
                                   medium (such as sand) and thus appropriate for D’Arcy’s law
                                   where flow is proportional to difference in pressure (a linear
                                   pathway), and pressure is proportional to the water stored Q.
366                           Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


      The equation for each block is the same, although the coefficients
      (K) may be different (different friction). For the model in Figure
      21.1 the program for simulation has nine equations, one for each
      of the nine storages.
         A unit model with more pathways is required for simulating
      water flow on most landscapes, one including rain, percolation
      into deeper levels of the earth, evaporation, transpiration by the
      vegetation, runoff and other interblock flows, and quadratic flow
      where there is turbulent flow in channels. In the field of hydrol-
      ogy, commercial software packages help simulate water distribu-
      tion and flow.


               SPATIAL SELF-ORGANIZATION BY
                       PULSING UNITS

         With a more complex unit model (PULSE from Figure 15.4),
      Richardson (1987) studied the spatial patterns of energy produc-
      tion and consumption generated by spatial simulation. The unit
      model (Figure 22.2b) was simulated in 100 blocks (Figure 22.2a)
      with different kinds of interblock pathways, starting with the
      simple linear flow used in Figure 22.1. A digital-analog hybrid
      computer was used for the computations. Shading was used to
      show the magnitude of simulated quantities, with darker shading
      for larger quantities. Shown as a time sequence from left to right
      in Figures 22.2c and 22.2d are two sequences of shaded maps,
      one for the accumulated storage of producer products and the
      other for the storage of consumer assets during their surge of
      consumption and growth. This power-maximizing design auto-
      matically develops an organized center in spatial simulation. The
      consumer frenzy develops a hierarchical center because more
      flows converge to the blocks in the center than to those on the
      perimeter. Figure 22.2e has the graphs for one of the middle
      blocks. The peaks of the curves correspond to the dark shadings
      in Figures 22.2c and 22.2d. In the field of embryological develop-
      ment, Meinhardt (1982) simulated the early development of
      structures and patterns of organisms with spatial models of chem-
      ical concentrations.


               SPATIAL SIMULATION SOFTWARE

        In application to real systems, there may be many blocks and
      more complex unit models, so that the amount of computer
Spatial Models                                                                                   367




FIGURE 22.2.
Example of spatial simulation
with the unit model PULSE
(Figure 15.4) by Richardson
(1987). (a) 100 blocks; (b) unit
model; (c) 15 successive
patterns of accumulated
product arranged in sequence
from left to right (quantity
indicated by the intensity of
shading); (d) time sequence of
consumer storage; (e) time
sequence of accumulated
products and consumer storage
in one of the blocks.


                                   computation is large. Commercially available software packages
                                   for spatial simulation are used such as MAP and MFWORKS.
                                   These are part of the tools available to study geographic informa-
                                   tion (GIS ⫽ geographic information systems). ARCINFO is one
                                   of the computer graphics programs widely used to represent
                                   landscape data. The landscape is divided into polygons (irregular
                                   blocks) to which data for each area are assigned. Color-coded
                                   maps of various properties and combinations of data are derived.
                                   GRID is a version of that program that can be used for simulating
                                   changes in the blocks over time.


                                                 RAIN FOREST SUCCESSION

                                     Using GRID (ARCINFO), Weber (1994) developed a unit
                                   model of rain forest succession in the Tabonuco forest of Puerto
368                                                           Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


                                      Rico (Figure 22.3a) and simulated its spatial patterns for a square
                                      forest area with 1000 blocks. Values of storages were represented
                                      with intensity of shading (Figure 22.3b). The Cecropia-Tabonuco
                                      unit model (Figure 22.3a) has Cecropia representing successional
                                      vegetation drawing on sunlight and nutrients competing in paral-
                                      lel with mature tree species represented by Tabonuco (Dacryodes
                                      excelsa). Organic matter passes from the tree biomass to a litter
                                      storage, from which animal consumption and microbial decom-
                                      position release nutrients that recycle. Each block receives sun-
                                      light, nutrients (from rain, rocks, and other blocks), and seeds
                                      from other blocks. Biomass is removed from the blocks by herbi-
                                      vore animals that occupy larger territory. The switch symbols
                                      on seed pathways and light indicate threshold actions.




FIGURE 22.3.
Example of spatial simulation of
rain forest succession in Puerto
Rico by Weber (1994) relating
successional tree species
(Cecropia), mature Tabonuco
forest tree species and litter. (a)
Unit model; (b–d) time
sequence of regrowth following
forest clearing in the center of
the area; (b) mature forest trees
(Tabonuco); (c) successional
Cecropia; (d) litter.
Spatial Models                                                                  369


                     The successional species, Cecropia, is a weed tree with high
                 net production, but short life (fast turnover time), developing
                 rapidly where seeds have been dispersed. In the program seeds
                 were distributed from a few trees scattered in the forest to sur-
                 rounding blocks with probability decreasing with distance. Also
                 depending on fruit dispersal, mature species develop as soon as
                 shade levels reach a threshold. The mature species develop more
                 slowly, with higher quality represented in the model as a longer
                 turnover time. The fruits of these trees are fewer and larger,
                 dispersing slowly.
                     In the simulation scenario shown in Figure 22.3b–d, central
                 area of forest area was cleared and maps plotted of regrowth
                 patterns. First, the open area filled in with Cecropia (Figure
                 22.3c). Then the mature vegetation developed closing the canopy
                 in 20 years (Figure 22.3b). In the cleared area there was less
                 litter production, and ground litter decreased (Figure 22.3d). As
                 the vegetation redeveloped, organic litter returned to normal.
                 These patterns are similar to those observed where patches of
                 forest were experimentally cleared (Smith, 1970).
                     To represent the varying factors of light, nutrients, and topog-
                 raphy on the steep mountain rain forest of the Luquillo forest,
                 Hall et al. (1992) simulated a unit model of production, consump-
                 tion, organic matter, and recycle in response to the destructive
                 action of Hurricane Hugo. Irregular blocks were defined by ridge-
                 ravine topography, which also affected solar energy because of
                 the variation in slopes of land facing the sun.
                     As the examples here show (Figures 22.1–22.3), spatial simu-
                 lations depend on the unit model, the interblock connections,
                 and the impact of large-scale influences affecting all the blocks.
                 Sometimes spatial simulations are presented without reporting
                 the unit model or demonstrating its validity. Without an under-
                 standing of what the simulation is doing, the result cannot be
                 used for policy or trusted for prediction.



                                           FRACTALS

                    Fractal forms have the same shapes on each scale, large pat-
                 terns on larger scale, and the same pattern but in a miniaturized
                 version on the smaller scale (Mandelbrot, 1983; Schroeder,
                 1991). Simulation can generate the small shapes within the larger
                 ones, cascading through many levels as space is divided into
370                             Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


      fractions, each with the shape of the original and so on. For
      example, a branching network of a tree results if half of a limb
      is diverted into a branch and each branch again split into half
      and that one split again and so on. Fantastic shapes result when
      various geometric operations are propagated in this way. Such
      patterns are common in nature (examples: snowflakes, flowers,
      deltas, highways, tidal channels, galaxies), apparently because of
      the hierarchy of energy transformations. Similar energy processes
      occur on each scale, but with different magnitude. The small are
      coupled to the large. For example, in turbulence large eddies
      interact with smaller eddies and these with even smaller eddies,
      etc. Finding similar designs on different scales is a property ex-
      pected where each scale has the same model. Fractal algorithms
      can be included in simulations with digital compression programs
      and graphic plotting to represent observed patterns in space and
      time (Barnsley and Hurd, 1993).



                                        䉬
       22.2 VARIATION AND STATISTICAL MODELS

         Statistics is the study of variation. Concepts and equations are
      developed for representing the distribution of values in space and
      time. Observations in nature show variation involved in nearly
      everything. There are very different views about the causes of
      variation and how this should be modeled and simulated.



                      INHERENT RANDOMNESS

         One approach regards variation as inherently indeterminate,
      referred to as randomness. Mathematical equations are devel-
      oped that start with estimations of chance which are represented
      as probability. Probability of a result is the fraction of its expected
      occurrence among possible occurrences. In flipping a coin, the
      chance of getting heads is one out of two, a probability of 0.5.
         Bennett (1998) summarizes the history of mathematical
      thought and many controversies about randomness. The distribu-
      tion of errors (X) in measurements is often represented with the
      Gaussian distribution, the well-known bell-shaped curve, where
      the number of values (Y) with deviations (X) from a mean are
      distributed according to a negative exponential squared: Y ⫽
Variation and Statistical Models                                                                371


                                   K*e⵩ ⫺ k*x2 (Figure 22.4a). Distributions that represent this
                                   concept of inherent variation are generated by mechanical devices
                                   for repeating chance actions or by similar manipulation of num-
                                   bers by computer algorithms. For example, tables of random
                                   numbers exist (generated by these chance selections of numbers).
                                   With this approach to variation, randomness can be added to
                                   simulation models with random number tables or some computer
                                   algorithm that generates variation with a symmetrical distribu-
                                   tion of variation about the curves generated by dynamic equa-
                                   tions.


                                   VARIATION AS SMALLER SCALE OSCILLATIONS

                                      An opposing concept regards variation as the dynamic oscilla-
                                   tions on a smaller scale that are seen as variations in curves of




FIGURE 22.4.
Frequency distribution (Y) of
deviations (X) from the values
expected for phenomena of a
larger scale. (a) Symmetrical
distribution of variation
described by the Gaussian
equation; (b) skewed
distribution of variation
expected from fluctuations
dependent on the scale of
oscillations.
372                            Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


      models on a larger scale. To simulate this variation, models of
      small scale can be added to larger scale models, making a more
      realistic model (Chapter 21). This point of view does not accept
      inherent randomness as a valid concept. Errors in measurements
      are regarded as dynamic fluctuations in the phenomena being
      measured and/or in the devices and persons making the measure-
      ments. This dynamic variation concept recognizes the hierarchy
      of the real world and its values (ultimately caused by the hierar-
      chical distribution of energy transformations). Most variation in
      the real world is not distributed symmetrically (Figure 22.4a),
      but increases with scale (Figure 22.4b). Such curves are said to
      be skewed. The same percentage variation is found at each level
      of size, because each level has the similar effects of the variations
      from the next smaller scale. Measures of variations (such as
      variance) increase with the means. Weibull, gamma, and log-
      normal equations are used when a skewed distribution of varia-
      tion exists.
         Whether you believe that there is inherent randomness or that
      variation is the result of a hierarchy of dynamic oscillations or
      both, dynamic curves may be given somewhat more realistic
      variation with statistical devices for generating variation. Values
      generated by the equations (dynamic model) are varied according
      to a statistical distribution (Figure 22.4). A model with a source
      of variation included is a stochastic model (Nelson, 1995). For
      example, stochasic models fit marketing, inventory, and optimi-
      zation (Ross, 1992). Simulations are used to estimate risk (Vose,
      1996; Evans, Olson, 1998).



        VALIDATION WITH STATISTICAL MEASURES

         If variation fits a statistical distribution somewhat, the tests
      for probability derived from that mathematics are convenient for
      determining how well a simulation curve fits observed data. The
      probability of curves being different is estimated. In Chapter 21
      we suggested use of chi-squared tests to compare simulated and
      observed time series. Another way of validating a model plots a
      graph of simulated data as a function of observed data. Then
      the fit can be evaluated with correlation measures. Or vertical
      bars can be placed on points representing some measure of the
      variation. Bars on observed data plots can be compared with the
      bars on curves generated by a stochastic model. Where plus and
Variation and Statistical Models                                                                    373


                                   minus the standard error of the mean is used for the bars and
                                   the two sets of bars don’t overlap, the curves have a high probabil-
                                   ity of being different (a property based on Student’s t distribution
                                   for small samples). Refer to texts on biometry and statistics.
                                   However, all of these statistical measures and procedures are
                                   based on assumed distributions of variation (normal distribu-
                                   tions, Student’s t distribution, chi-squared distribution, Poisson
                                   distribution) and are not accurate where the variation does not
                                   follow the mathematical equations used for that distribution.
                                   Sometimes the data are transformed to achieve a distribution of
                                   variation that matches the equations on which the statistical
                                   measure is based.



                                        STATISTICAL METHODS OF FINDING AN
                                           APPROPRIATE DYNAMIC MODEL

                                      With statistical modeling, the equations for dynamic simula-
                                   tion are derived by statistical procedures for fitting lines or curves
                                   to data. For example, a regression equation can be obtained
                                   to represent observed data for growth. Grant (1986) provides
                                   explanations and wildlife examples.
                                      To derive equations from observed data sounds realistic. How-
                                   ever, descriptive equations derived without understanding of the
                                   mechanisms provide no basis for using them for a different range
                                   of values, different time, or different situation. For example, an
                                   observed growth curve might be part of a system that will develop
                                   a steady state, or it might be part of a pulse that will turn down.
                                   Extrapolating the observed curve has no basis.
                                      Determining coefficients by empirical fitting to past data can-
                                   not predict the future if the coefficients are actually variables
                                   affected by changes. For example, in a complex model of eco-
                                   nomic growth, Meadows et al. (1972) determined many coeffi-
                                   cients relating one variable to another from existing data. These
                                   coefficients were determined in a time of cheap available energy
                                   but were applied to a future time when less fossil fuel energy is
                                   expected. Because energy augments nearly all production pro-
                                   cesses in our economy, output coefficients decline when energy
                                   is more expensive. When the same procedures were used to simu-
                                   late the economy 25 years later (Meadows et al., 1992), limits
                                   to growth were found 80 years sooner than in the previous
                                   simulations made before the improved coefficients had changed.
374                            Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches



                                       䉬
                   22.3 APPROACHING MODELS
                     THROUGH MATHEMATICS

          Procedures in this book translate verbal thinking into network
      diagrams after which equations are written for simulation pro-
      grams. Emphasis is on visualizing and calibrating the whole
      model in a network view before writing equations for the com-
      puter to do the various calculations. Little mathematical training
      is required. Students may simulate systems without realizing that
      they are doing calculus operations.
          However, many people approach simulation through mathe-
      matics, writing equations for each part of the system using mathe-
      matical expressions for various mechanisms and processes from
      analytic geometry and other fields (Beltrami, 1997). For example,
      mathematical models are used for growth of microbes (Hurst,
      1996) and for animal behavior (Lendrem, 1986; Mangel and
      Clark, 1988). Many published papers and books on simulation
      give the models in mathematical form and use its associated
      vocabulary. For example, the word graph refers to pathway dia-
      grams. A branched network without a loop is a tree. Simulation
      is solving equations by numerical integration. Students may want
      to take additional math courses to use this literature.
          For simpler systems, families of curves are often derived from
      mathematical computation rather than from simulation. Equa-
      tions derived from mathematical integration do not have cumula-
      tive errors of numerical simulation. (Examples Figures
          In the widely used state-change way of thinking, the set of
      conditions at one time are the states (values of storages). There
      is a set of coefficients changing states at time t to that at the next
      time step. Each state change coefficient is multiplied by one or
      more state variables to obtain part of the change in itself or other
      state variables during the time interval. The set of coefficients is
      a transition matrix. The coefficients in many cases turn out to
      be the same pathway coefficients we derive from the systems
      diagrams. Even where equations for the parts are written first,
      overview can be aided and consistency checked by diagramming
      the set of equations (Chapter 6).
          STELLA and the library of blocks supplied with EXTEND
      require the writing of equations first. This contrasts with our use
      of EXTEND in Chapters 4 and 5 where simulation is arranged
Approaching Models through Mathematics                                                          375


                                  with the symbols, which automatically apply the appropriate
                                  equations.


                                                MATHEMATICS SOFTWARE

                                     Routine teaching of mathematics now uses commercial mathe-
                                  matical software such as MATHEMATICA, MAPLE, MATLAB,
                                  etc., in which the student can enter equations, values, math sym-
                                  bols, and plot the results of the calculations including attractive
                                  finished graphs of one variable as a function of others. These
                                  software packages for calculations can be used for simulation.
                                  For example, Roughgarden (1998) uses MATLAB as the basis
                                  for a course to introduce concepts of mathematical ecology and
                                  related fields, emphasizing, as in this book, that understanding
                                  requires models and simulation. In his approach, after explaining
                                  the rationale for an equation, it is typed into the program in text
                                  form, after which the computer plots the graph with time or
                                  some other variable. The emphasis is on population equations
                                  elaborating on mathematical relationships of some of the same
                                  minimodels given in Part III of this book. The Roughgarden book,
                                  like this one, started as a workbook of models and exercises, but
                                  requires more mathematics background.


                                             SIMULATING FLUID DYNAMICS

                                     Air, water in lakes and oceans, and fluid earth move according
                                  to the balance of forces on each parcel. The usual forces affecting
                                  lateral motion include pressure gradient force, Coriolis force of
                                  earth rotation, centrifugal force where fluids are spinning, eddy
                                  transfer of momentum, and friction. For up and down motions,
                                  there is also gravity. For spatial simulation these appropriate
                                  forces are included in each unit model. After the area is divided
                                  into blocks, a point in the center of each block is designated as
                                  the center of mass of the fluid parcel contained in that block.
                                  The equation for each block is the sum of the forces, called the
                                  equation of motion. It is an acceleration equation. Fluids are
                                  accelerated along the pathway from one block’s center to those
                                  adjacent according to the difference in forces, the density, and
                                  the distance between the centers. Where mass of fluid accumulates
                                  in a block, it has to expand vertically, increasing the pressure
376                           Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


      below. A ‘‘continuity’’ equation calculates these changes. The
      unit models become more complex when equations for heat,
      moisture changes, and density are added. In applications to the
      real atmosphere in three dimensions over the earth there are so
      many blocks and equations that super computers are required.
      Jacobsen (1998) provides an introduction.




                                     䉬
                   22.4 METHODS FOR LARGER
                     SIMULATION PROGRAMS

        Special techniques are useful for larger simulation programs.



                              COMPILING

         With the fast computers now available to everyone, minimodel
      simulations run almost too fast for the eye to see as points plot
      in sequence across the screen. Larger models may take longer,
      either because they are more complex or because they have so
      many duplicate units. With appropriate converter software, a
      simulation model may be compiled to run faster. The compiler
      converts the many separate steps into one process in binary ma-
      chine language (the 1’s and 0’s of computer memory). Many
      simulation software packages automatically compile for each
      run.



                      SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS

         In the chapters in Part III, ‘‘What If ’’ experiments were sug-
      gested to explore the responses of the systems. In a sensitivity
      analysis, a systematic procedure is used to test the response of
      the system to changes in all of the variables, one by one. For
      example, the test can record the responses to a doubling of each
      source and state variable. Learning where a system is sensitive
      can help us anticipate impacts. Large responses in simulation
      can be compared with a range of variations in observed data.
      Simulation software packages such as STELLA and EXTEND
Methods for Larger Simulation Program                                                            377


                                   have subprograms for doing a general sensitivity test in one oper-
                                   ation.


                                    USING MATRIX EQUATIONS FOR SIMULATION

                                      Where there are many units, all with similar equations, and
                                   where the equations are simple, the simulation programs can
                                   compute the iterations efficiently using matrix operations. To get
                                   the idea, consider the spatial simulation with many blocks in
                                   Figure 21.1. For one block on each iteration a new storage value
                                   Qt⫹1 is calculated as the old Qt plus the inflow J plus the change
                                   due to flows between the blocks DQ. The change due to inter-
                                   block flows is the product of the K coefficients and the appro-
                                   priate Q storages (⫽ states) in the adjacent blocks. For block 5
                                   in Figure 21.1a:

                                               Q5t⫹1 ⫽ Q5t ⫹ Jr5 ⫹ DQ5, where
                                           DQ5 ⫽ K25*Q2 ⫺ K25*Q5 ⫹ K45*Q4 ⫺ K45*Q5
                                            ⫹ K65*Q6 ⫺ K65*Q5 ⫺ K85*Q8 ⫺ K85*Q5

                                   The equations for all of the blocks together can be represented
                                   with matrix mathematics so that all the blocks are calculated
                                   simultaneously on each iteration. The matrix expression for the
                                   system simulation is analogous in form to the equation for a
                                   single block and is shown In Figure 22.5 with block 5 highlighted
                                   and its coefficients shown.




FIGURE 22.5.
Matrix expressions for an
iteration with the water model
in Figure 22.1.
378                            Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


         Multiplying the state vector Qt by the coefficient matrix K
      generates a vector of changes DQ due to the flows between
      blocks. (In this operation the column vector is changed to a row
      vector and multiplied by each row of the matrix, starting at the
      top. Then the products in the row are added across to get the
      new Q values.) On each iteration, the program calculates new
      state values Qt⫹1 by adding the vector of source inputs J and the
      changes due to exchanges with surrounding blocks K*Q to the
      state vector Qt for time t. The state values Qt for each iteration
      can be graphed or assigned by spatial graphics to show the distri-
      bution on a map.
         Here the use of matrix equations in simulation was explained
      using a spatial example. However, matrix operations are used for
      other kinds of simulation wherever there are duplicate, repetitive
      iterations. For example, the Leslie matrix is a table of population
      numbers with age classes on one axis and the processes affecting
      each age class on the other axis. It is readily simulated by multiply-
      ing on each iteration the vector of age class numbers by the
      matrix of age-specific processes to obtain a new vector of age
      class numbers for each new time step. Grant (1986) explains
      with wildlife examples.
         Programming languages (including BASIC) contain funda-
      mental mathematics operations such as matrix addition, subtrac-
      tion, multiplication, and inversion (analogous to division). Ma-
      trix operations are useful in spatial hydrology and fluid dynamics
      simulations where the same set of equations is used for large
      numbers of blocks.
         On the right side of Figure 22.5, a state vector (list of Q
      storage values) was multiplied by a transition matrix (table of K
      coefficients) to obtain a new state vector. In many cases matrix
      algebra can calculate a substitute matrix that has the same result
      when multiplied by the vector, but has numbers only on the
      diagonals. These are called eigenvalues. Called an eigenvector, a
      set of Q values can be defined that will generate a multiple of
      itself when multiplied by the substitute matrix with its eigenval-
      ues. This set of values in the eigenvector is the steady state.
      For example, the eigenvalues and eigenvector for the population
      numbers in a Leslie matrix are the stable age distribution (the
      distribution of numbers by age classes that generates itself in
      steady state).
         For systems where the state change coefficients are linear
      (multiplied by only one state variable), matrix operations are
Methods for Larger Simulation Program                                                           379


                                   used to find steady states and criteria for stability. However,
                                   except when available energy is very small, real systems develop
                                   autocatalytic designs (maximum power principle) and are not
                                   linear. When equations are solved for the steady state (changes
                                   equal zero), many nonlinear terms become linear, but then the
                                   simplified equations only apply to small changes near equilib-
                                   rium. Since all storages have depreciation (second law), there are
                                   negative terms on the diagonal of system matrices, a mathemati-
                                   cal criterion of stability. Logofet (1993) provides matrix views
                                   of many ecological examples.
                                      The rules for use of pathways and numbers on some other
                                   kinds of network diagrams are quite different from the energy
                                   systems language. For example, in one usage the arrowhead is
                                   directed from consumer to food, opposite to the energy flow. In
                                   energy systems language the arrowhead is always in the direction
                                   of the flows of energy, matter, and information—from food to
                                   consumer. The action of the consumer to get the food is shown
                                   as an autocatalytic feedback interaction (Figures 2.7 and 2.13a).

                                               INPUT–OUTPUT SIMULATION

                                      Simulations of systems can be done by matrix operations that
                                   extrapolate input–output relationships. The flows of materials
                                   or money between the units of a network can be represented with
                                   an input–output table (sometimes called a transaction matrix)
                                   (Figure 22.6a). Flows of materials are from the items listed at




FIGURE 22.6.
Example of an input–output
table and its representation as
an energy systems diagram. (a)
Table of flows between three
units; (b) network diagram with
energy pathways added; (c)
network diagram with reversed
directions of flow, which are
appropriate if flows are money;
(d) calculation of a Leontief
coefficient describing the flow
relationship of two units.
380                           Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


      the top to the items listed along the side. These flows can also
      be represented with an energy systems diagram that can show
      the energy and hierarchical relationships (Figure 22.6b). The
      diagonals of the matrix are flows circulating within the unit. The
      total of numbers added across is the total of inflow, whereas the
      total of columns adding down is the productive output. At steady
      state the sums of rows and columns are the same.
         Energy circulation has been used in input–output tables by
      connecting the pathways of degraded energy (heat sinks) back
      as inputs of available energy (Figure 22.6b, which is an arrange-
      ment for mathematical purpose contrary to the second thermody-
      namic law).
         Money paid for commodities flows in the opposite direction
      from the materials (Figure 22.6c). If the flows of money were
      numerically the same, the table in Figure 22.6a would suffice by
      swapping the words ‘‘from’’ and ‘‘to.’’ In an economic system
      units in the network are called sectors (industrial, agricultural,
      etc.). The human consumers are the final demand sector and
      are appropriately placed on the right, representing a superior
      hierarchical position (C in Figure 22.6c).
         A Leontief coefficient (input per unit output) can be calculated
      for each input–output box as the ratio of the input flow to the
      total output (the production). For example, in Figure 22.6d the
      input flow from A to B is Jab and the productive output of B is
      Pb. This Leontief coefficient is Lab ⫽ Jab/Pb ⫽ 10/14 ⫽ 0.71. These
      coefficients measure the structural linking of one unit to another
      by the flow. If it is believed that the system as a whole is going
      to grow 10%, without much change in the relationships of the
      various units, then matrix inversion methods can be used with
      the coefficient matrix to backcalculate what each intersector flow
      will become consistent with the increased total growth. Such
      calculations have been made for national economies with more
      than 600 boxes (sectors).



                                      䉬
          22.5 DISCRETE PROCESSES AND MODELS

         Many processes and models have numerical steps. For exam-
      ple, stairs in a house have steps. The height of the levels where
      you place your foot are in a discrete series. With continuous
Discrete Processes and Models                                                                  381


                                functions the values for a state can have any value. With discrete
                                functions the values are in steps. Most of the models simulated in
                                this book involved continuous functions, although some involved
                                on–off switching actions (example: the FIRE program of Table
                                15.3).


                                                    LOGIC NETWORKS

                                    Logic networks are arrangements of on–off units. For example
                                an AND gate unit is on (has an output of 1) when its inputs are
                                both on (have values of 1). An OR gate is on if either of its
                                inputs is on. A NOT unit is on when the input is off, but off
                                when the input is on. A threshold switch is on when the input of
                                a continuous function is greater than a threshold value (example:
                                water overflowing a river bank). Flip-flops are set by an input
                                pulse of 1 and stay on until turned off by a reset pulse. Some
                                systems have networks of these logic units. They are discrete
                                systems since the values have only two alternative steps, on and
                                off. Models of discrete processes can be simulated by writing a
                                program with a sequence of logic actions. Simulation programs,
                                including BASIC, have the common logic actions AND, OR,
                                NOT, IF-THEN, etc., as part of the language.
                                    Systems of continuous functions can be simulated with discrete
                                networks with results that exaggerate responses. For example, a
                                flip-flop unit can simulate the competition between two species
                                that exclude each other in competition. Depending on input
                                thresholds, there is one species or the other, but not both. Robert-
                                son and Muetzelfeldt (1991) use logic programming in ecologi-
                                cal systems.
                                    Hardware simulators are available in which you can connect
                                various logic units with jumper wires so that the complex conse-
                                quence of many units is simulated. The digital computer is such
                                a discrete system built of enormous numbers of electrical logic
                                circuits with values either on (logic 1) or off (logic 0). By having
                                a huge number of such units in the extremely miniaturized net-
                                work on the computer chip, the digital computer simulates con-
                                tinuous functions, carrying numbers to 40 significant figures.


                                CUMULATIVE ERROR IN DIGITAL SIMULATION

                                   There is a tiny error that can accumulate in digital simulation
                                of continuous functions, especially in growth processes. Where
382                            Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


      it is important to have a conservation of something (example:
      keeping total materials constant), we avoid the error by having
      the value for material in one unit set equal to the constant total
      minus that calculated for the other units (INTLIMT, Table 12.3).



                         NEURAL NETWORKS

         The neurons of brains are something like logic circuits in that
      their outputs are dependent on the combined action of inputs.
      Network diagrams and mathematics originally made to describe
      nerve interactions have evolved into a systems language for deal-
      ing with other systems, particularly those that have discrete
      thresholds and actions. Systems are simulated with neural net-
      work programs and software. Complex networks are studied to
      understand how organisms think.



                   QUEUES OF DISCRETE UNITS

         Some systems have separate units passing from one process
      to another. Examples are cars moving down a manufacturing
      assembly line and people waiting in line at the bank. These
      are queuing systems. In industry, where many parts are being
      processed and combined, the network of flows and junctions
      may be complex. Programs such as EXTEND have ready-made
      components and procedures to simulate systems that process
      discrete units. Simulating the flow of discrete units is important
      to manufacturing.



                                      䉬
                   22.6 PARALLEL PROCESSING

         The first electrical simulations used networks of wires and
      electrical storage units (capacitors) in which the flows and storage
      of electric charge were analogous to the flows and storage of
      water (not unlike the network in Figure 22.1). All parts of the
      network were operating simultaneously with electrical recorders
      tapped in to record water levels and flows at points of interest.
      Later ‘‘operational analog computers’’ had electrical units (opera-
Frontiers and Perspectives                                                                 383


                             tional amplifiers) for each unit in which the voltages were manip-
                             ulated according to the equations for that unit. The parts of these
                             earlier electrical simulators operated simultaneously in parallel.
                             Except in some industrial uses, electrical analog computers were
                             replaced by the digital computer because of its speed and accu-
                             racy. As used in this book, numerical simulation uses the equation
                             for each unit to calculate the values for each unit successively,
                             one by one. It plots points, and then does it again for the next
                             time step. There is one sequence of calculations. New initiatives
                             are now cropping up to develop parallel processing again, but
                             this time using simultaneous digital computations in parallel.




                                                             䉬
                                    22.7 FRONTIERS AND PERSPECTIVES

                                Simulation is becoming a mainstream of scientific investigation
                             in old and new fields (Casti, 1998). New areas of application
                             are the study of artificial intelligence (systems that learn and
                             control themselves) and fuzzy logic (systems with equations that
                             allow a range of values; Klir and Folger, 1988). Although simula-
                             tions are rarely trusted as reliable predictors in public affairs,
                             public and business policies are increasingly seeking the insights
                             of models—for example, energy policy (Bunn and Larsen, 1997),
                             risk analysis (Evans and Olson, 1998), and global futures.
                                Simulation modeling is a varied and creative field, as observed
                             in the issues of the journals Simulation, Ecological Modeling and
                             Systems Ecology, and Environmental Modeling and Software.
                             Application is best done by each person modeling and program-
                             ming his or her own models to learn the behavior and attributes
                             of a particular system of interest. Languages often used include
                             BASIC, DYNAMO, FORTRAN, PASCAL, and C⫹⫹. For more
                             complex models and simulations involving many repetitive oper-
                             ations, commercial software packages are available such as
                             EXTEND, STELLA, VISUALBASIC, CSMP, GASP, GPSS, and
                             many others, although considerable time is required to learn
                             each. Because principles of materials, energy, and information
                             apply to all scales, apparently similar models and configurations
                             are found in most fields. Understanding, applying, and simulating
                             general systems models is emerging as a unifying branch of
                             knowledge.
384                           Chapter Twenty-Two Simulation Approaches


      OTHER APPROACHES TO SYSTEM SIMULATION

         The reference list includes the books and papers cited and some
      other recent introductions to simulation. These introductions use
      different approaches, different choices of models believed to be
      fundamental, and different subject areas of application. Simula-
      tion of systems is in a creative stage.
                 Appendix A
                              䉬

      PROGRAMMING
     ENERGY SYSTEMS
       BLOCKS FOR
       SIMULATING
       WITH EXTEND
W        hereas the instruction manual that comes with the pro-
gram EXTEND fully explains how to make and program your
own blocks for use with their standard procedures and libraries
(example: Figure 6.9), there are special features in the unique
blocks which we developed to simulate energy systems diagrams
without the user having to write equations. The equations are
preprogrammed into the blocks. The following procedure makes
a block for EXTEND that is compatible with our energy systems
libraries of programmed blocks (Chapters 4 and 5). You may
need the main instruction manual to cover items not given in
these instructions. Also see Odum and Peterson (1996).



                              䉬
           A.1 PROGRAMMING SCREENS

   To see the program of an ICON-BLOCK and/or make
changes, double click on the block’s icon while holding down
the option key (Macintosh) or the Alt key (Windows PC). Two
screens appear, one for the dialog box of that block and one for
the block program. For example, Figures A.1a and A.1b show
the screens for the block TANK. Each of the items in the dialog
box (Figure A.1b) can be changed. The larger screen (Figure


                              385
386                      Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND




FIGURE A.1.
Screen views of the program for
the block named TANK.



                 A.1a) has a panel for making a picture icon in the upper left, a
                 panel for help statements in the upper right, and a panel for
                 writing the main program script on the lower right. Following
                 instructions in the EXTEND manual, you can enter words and
                 icon graphics as needed to write a program or change an existing
                 program. EXTEND program script is written in a language simi-
                 lar to C⫹⫹.




                                               䉬
                       A.2 ARRAYS SHARING INFORMATION
                               AMONG BLOCKS

                   The energy systems language symbol blocks for EXTEND are
                 based on four position arrays for sending information back and
Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND                387


                 forth between blocks. Figure A.2 shows how the information is
                 passed between blocks in four channels. When one block on
                 screen is connected by means of a line to another block with the
                 mouse, each block program is arranged to share information that
                 is on a four-position array. Position 1 is a code that each block’s
                 program can use to take special actions. Position 2 is a force.
                 Position 3 is a flow. Position 4 is a transformity. As the program
                 iterates, the values in the array are changed, some by the upstream
                 block and some by the downstream block.
                    For example, a store block (see Figure A.2) uses the flow sent
                 by the upstream unit and received in the input connector. It also
                 receives the transformity of that flow so it can calculate the
                 emergy being stored. The storage block determines the force for
                 the output connector, which the next unit uses to determine
                 its use of the outflow. Using information shared through the
                 connectors, the downstream block sends back to the storage
                 block the downstream part of the information on what was used.
                 In the upstream block this information is combined with the
                 information on the stored quantity to determine the amount to
                 be added or subtracted from the storage tally. The outflow array
                 from the storage contains the transformity of the stored quantity
                 that is sent to the downstream unit.
                    Each block takes array information that was written in
                 connecting blocks, and this information is first placed in re-
                 ceiving arrays, such as ‘‘Received1inarray’’ from upstream and
                 ‘‘Received1outarray’’ from downstream. Then, within the pro-
                 gram, these received values of code, force, flow, and transformity
                 are transferred to corresponding positions in arrays that operate
                 within the block. For example, the program statement ‘‘Con1in-




FIGURE A.2.
Interblock information transfers
with arrays for a storage block.
388            Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND


      array[flow]’’ ⫽ ‘‘Received1inarray[flow]’’ says that the values
      of the ‘‘Con1inarray’’ array become equal to the values in the
      receiving array. Those array positions that don’t receive informa-
      tion from other blocks are left at zero. After the block program
      has made its computations, its values are passed to an output
      array and then shared upstream and downstream through the
      connector arrays.

                    Con1in ⫽ Passarray(Con1inarray);
                   Con1out ⫽ Passarray(Con1outarray);



                                      䉬
        A.3 STEPS FOR PROGRAMMING THE SCRIPT

         1. Draw what you want on paper first. Write the equation
      or equations that you want the block to perform. Decide what
      input connections are required, what information the inputs are
      supposed to receive from other blocks, and what the output
      connections are to transmit to the next block.
         2. Make an icon. Use any drawing program to make a small
      picture appropriate to the block you are making. Or use a scanner
      to put a small picture on disk. Scale the icon to be about 1 cm
      by 1 cm or smaller. Save the icon to disk to be safe and then to
      a clipboard. Or use the small drawing program that is part of
      EXTEND to make the icon after you load EXTEND (see step 3).
         3. Load EXTEND. After turning on the computer, double
      click on the hard disk icon to see the various folder and program
      icons; double click on the EXTEND folder to open it and then
      double click on EXTEND (triangular icon).
         4. Modify an existing block as a shortcut to making a new
      one. Use the FILE menu of EXTEND and open the Gensymb
      folder. Double click on the worksheet GENSYMB. The screen
      will be filled with the icons of the present general systems blocks.
      You can select and reprogram one of these that is somewhat like
      the one you want to make. This saves many steps and errors.
      Hold down the option key (Macintosh) or Alt key (Windows
      PC) as you double click on the icon. The two program screens
      appear (example: Figure A.1), one behind the other. One is the
      screen for arranging dialog boxes and instructions; the other has
      the icon, the help statement, and the program script. You can
Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND               389


                make the needed changes and then save the revised program
                under another name. Using Save As from FILE menu, save the
                block to a new library. You can decide what changes to make
                by reading through the procedure for making a new block from
                the beginning (steps 5–9, next subsection).


                                MAKING A NEW BLOCK

                   5. From the DEFINE menu, select Build a New Block. A
                screen appears for you to type in the name of the block and
                select a library to put it in. After that a pair of screens appears
                ready for programming. Click on the second screen (behind) to
                bring it to the front. Either draw an icon in the upper left space
                or paste an icon that you drew earlier (step 2) from the clipboard
                (by clicking on the space and then releasing on Paste in the
                EDIT menu).
                   6. Add input connectors. Using the upper drawing bar, click
                on the connector box and then click within the space where
                you want a connector to appear. For each connector a name
                automatically appears in the connector list on the left side of the
                screen below the icon. The connector that appears is an input
                connector (square white connector) and its name ends with ‘‘in.’’
                Use a mouse to move input connectors to the left of the icon.
                   7. Add output connectors. To make output connectors from
                an input connector, retype the name of the connector so that it
                ends with ‘‘out.’’ The connector turns black. Move one or more
                of the output connectors to the right of the icon.
                   8. Label the icon. First click on the ‘‘A’’ box in the upper
                bar; then click on the place you want a label to go. Type the
                name of the block and move it underneath the icon.
                   9. Even before you finish it may be a good idea to save what
                you have done by clicking in the put-away box in the upper left
                corner of the screen. A screen appears and you can check ‘‘Save
                without compiling.’’ Save with the block name you plan to use
                and the destination in a new library. To avoid confusion, people
                working in a class need to designate their libraries with their
                names.


                           DESIGNING THE DIALOG PAGE

                  10. Make dialog boxes. In these boxes, users can type in
                numbers for calibration or for setting initial conditions. Pull the
390            Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND


      dialog screen to the front by clicking on it. Using the DEFINE
      menu, select New Dialog Item. A screen appears with 12 choices.
      Select Parameter. A screen appears in which you type the word
      that is to be the program label for the number that is to be
      entered. For example, you could type WATERSTORE (one word)
      if the box is supposed to receive a number representing storage
      of water. Move each parameter box that you put on the screen
      into the correct position with the mouse. Each parameter label
      that you enter appears in a list of variables on the icon screen
      (lower left).
          11. Put text labels next to these dialog boxes. This is done
      by selecting New Dialog Item as in step 10, but then selecting
      the choice Static Text (Label). A box appears on the screen for
      you to type in the label. Then when this is completed, the label
      box appears on the dialog screen. Move it into position. You
      will probably have to expand the box to fit the words by using
      the mouse pointer to pull at the lower right corner.



                        WRITING THE SCRIPT

         Table A.1 is the script for the tank block of the general systems
      library GNSYSLIB.lix. Use this script and the screens in Figure
      A.1 as an example as you go through programming steps 12–15
      that follow:

         12. Designate program labels. Pull the script icon screen into
      view again (by clicking on the edge of it that is visible). At the
      top of the script space, you first designate the names of the
      array positions:

                         Constant code is 0;
                         Constant force is 1;
                         Constant flow is 2;
                         Constant transformity is 3;

      Next type all the address names that are used in the program on
      a line starting with a word to indicate the type of variables.
      Names already in the two lists on the lower left side do not have
      to be listed. For example, the following would be listed for one
      input connector and one output connector:
Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND             391


                TABLE A.1
                Script of Icon-Block TANK in Library GNSYSLIB.lix




                                                                      (continues)
392            Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND


      TABLE A.1 (Continued)




                                                            (continues)
Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND   393


                TABLE A.1 (Continued)
394            Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND


              Real Con1inarray[ ], Con1outarray[ ];
              Real Received1inarray[ ], Received1outarray[ ];

      On another line type any variable or parameter names used
      within the block such as:

           Real, Q, Water, K1, K2, DQ, DE, Inflow1, outflow1;

         13. Type program lines between the brackets. Brackets are
      already provided for the several categories of message handling.
      Program statements must end with a semicolon. Capitals or low-
      ercase letters are interchangeable. If you want to leave a remark
      in the program that tells you later what you were doing or why,
      type a ** or // followed by the remark. The program ignores
      anything on the same line that follows ** or //. You will need
      to program three message handling groups which can be in the
      script in any order:

           On Createblock, which gives values to dialog boxes
           when they open.
           On Initsim, which calculates the initial conditions
           before the run.
           On Simulate, which has the program steps
           during the run.

         14. Scroll the script program space until On CreateBlock ap-
      pears. (Use the mouse pointer on the arrow along the right mar-
      gin.) Type here whatever numbers you want the dialog boxes to
      have when they are first called to the screen. Type a parameter
      name (that will be used by the program) showing it equal to the
      number you want to appear. For example, type

                         兵
                         WATERSTORE ⫽ 1000;
                         其

      Whenever someone pulls the block from the library onto a work-
      sheet screen, it will have the value 1000. Thereafter the user can
      change it if needed. If you put in nothing, the dialog box will be
      empty when it is clicked on.
Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND                395


                   15. Next scroll the script space until On Initsim appears. Here
                you should set initial conditions and create the input and output
                arrays that will be used:

                           兵
                           Makearray(con1inarray,4)
                           Con1inarray[code] ⫽ ⫺1;
                           Con1inarray[Force] ⫽ 0.0;
                           Con1inarray[Flow] ⫽ 0.0;
                           Con1inarray[Transformity] ⫽ 0.0;
                           Makearray(con1outarray,4)
                           Con1outarray[code] ⫽ ⫺1;
                           Con1outarray[Force] ⫽ 0.0;
                           Con1outarray[Flow] ⫽ 0.0;
                           Con1outarray[transformity] ⫽ 0,0;
                           Eq ⫽ 1000; **initial solar emergy storage
                           其

                   16. Scroll the script space to find ‘‘On Simulate.’’ Type the
                simulation program between the brackets. Start with an IF state-
                ment as to what values the arrays should receive from connecting
                blocks and which should be set from the block being pro-
                grammed. For example:

                 If (not getpassedarray(con1in, Received1inarray))
                 兵
                 Con1inarray[code] ⫽ ⫺1;
                 Con1inarray[force] ⫽ 0.0;
                 con1inarray[flow] ⫽ 0.0;
                 Con1inarray[transformity] ⫽ 0.0;
                 其
                 Else
                 兵
                 (Con1inarray[flow] ⫽ Received1inarray[flow];
                 (con1inarray[transformity] ⫽ Recieved1inarray[transformity];
                 其

                This statement sets input array positions to zero if nothing is
                received, but if received, the flow is given the value received from
                the upstream input.
396           Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND


         A similar statement is used to receive downstream values
      shared by the output array:

           If (not getpassedarray(con1out, Received1outarray))
           兵
           Con1outarray[code] ⫽ ⫺1;
           Con1outarray[force] ⫽ 0.0;
           con1outarray[flow] ⫽ 0.0;
           Con1outarray[transformity] ⫽ 0.0;
           其
           Else
           Con1inarray[flow] ⫽ Received1inarray[flow];

         17. To write short equations for action, transfer information
      received to shorter internal names or letters. For example:

                    Jin ⫽ Con1inarray[flow];
                    Stin ⫽ Con1inarray[transformity];
                    Jout ⫽ Con1outarray[flow];

          18. Write the equations using the short labels. For example,
      if the change in storage is the sum of inflows minus outflows:

                         DQ ⫽ Jin -Jout- K1*Q;

      and the new value of storage is:

                         Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*deltatime;

      Deltatime is the iteration interval DT.
         For emergy storage (Eq), storage Q, and solar transformity
      received in (Stin), the transformity of storage St is:

                                St ⫽ Eq/Q;

      and the change in emergy storage sums the products of flows
      and transformities:

                        DEq ⫽ Stin*Jin ⫺ St*Jout;

      and the new value of stored emergy is:

                       Eq ⫽ Eq ⫹ DEq*deltatime;
Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND               397


                   19. Next, assign the new values to input and output arrays:

                                    Con1inarray[force] ⫽ Q;

                Force is put in an upstream array in case a block is connected
                that is affected by backforce:

                               Con1outarray[force] ⫽ Q;
                               Con1outarray[transformity] ⫽ ST;

                  20. By identifying the set of values in arrays with those in
                connectors, you pass values to connecting blocks:

                             Con1in ⫽ Passarray(con1inarray);
                             Con1out ⫽ Passarray(con1outarray);

                Don’t forget the closing bracket of On Simulate: 其.
                    21. Click on the small square to close the program. A screen
                appears. Check ‘‘To compile if necessary.’’ It may give you error
                messages for things you have omitted such as semicolons and
                variables declared in the first lines of the program. Make correc-
                tions and repeat.
                    22. After it compiles, try to use your block by putting it on
                a model (worksheet screen). Use a source and a plotter and see
                if it generates the output that you planned. During the program-
                ming, it may help to print out what you have. If not, return to
                the program and revise, etc.



                       PROGRAMMING BLOCKS THAT PUMP
                              FROM UPSTREAM

                   Interaction blocks control the inflows from upstream. Their
                function is a product of a coefficient and the ‘‘forces’’ received.
                For example, the equation for production P ⫽ K1*N*Q is based
                on the values of forces N and Q received from upstream connec-
                tors. For the systems to work, the interaction block is pro-
                grammed to send back upstream to be subtracted the amounts
                of N and Q that were used. These flows are included in the array
                shared with the upstream connector, except the force is omitted
                and by convention the upstream block adds that force as it re-
398           Appendix A Programming Energy Systems Blocks for Simulating with EXTEND


      ceives the incomplete term. Thus, the connector that supplied
      the force N is sent the following with N omitted:

                    Con1inarray[Flow] ⫽ K2*Q;
                    Con1in ⫽ Passarray(Con1inarray);

      and the connector that supplied the force Q is sent the following
      with Q omitted:

                    Con2inarray[Flow] ⫽ K3*N;
                    Con2in ⫽ Passarray(Con2inarray);

      To be compatible, downstream blocks that control uses must be
      programmed to send incomplete terms upstream and the up-
      stream blocks must be programmed to add the missing force.



                                     䉬
       A.4 CONVERTING MACINTOSH BLOCKS FOR
                   WINDOWS PCS

          If you develop the block on a Macintosh, it can be converted
      for use with EXTEND on Windows PCs, by clicking to bring
      up the conversion program MACWIN (from EXTEND files).
      The transformation gives the library an extension .lix. Following
      its instructions, save the transformed block to a ‘‘new library’’
      on a disk formatted for the PC. Transfer the library file to a PC
      and using EXTEND for PC move the new block to the desired
      library of blocks. After blocks or libraries are put into a new
      computer, the library has to be recompiled. Open EXTEND,
      load the library, open the library window, and select Compile
      from the DEFINE menu. MACWIN is not included with all
      versions of EXTEND.
                 Appendix B
                               䉬

          NOTES ON
        COMPUTER USE
          AND BASIC
        PROGRAMMING

T     o simulate the BASIC models in this book, some form of the
program BASIC must be loaded on your computer and operated
according to its manual. Computer operating systems are chang-
ing so fast that some of these remarks may be irrelevant by the
time this book is printed. Software companies encourage the
purchase of fancy forms of BASIC like VISUALBASIC and
FUTUREBASIC, but much of such programs is distracting for
simple simulation, forcing users to learn unnecessary procedures.
Sections follow with notes on the use of QUICKBASIC the older
BASICA in PC and Chipmunk BASIC for Macintosh. The authors
can supply equivalent notes for APPLE II computers.



                               䉬
B.1 QUICKBASIC FOR PCs AND WINDOWS PCs

   QUICKBASIC in brief form is included as part of the Microsoft
PC DOS and WINDOWS files (In WINDOWS 98: Tools\oldms-
dos\). When you load the program by clicking on QBASIC.exe,
a screen appears with menus. QUICKBASIC only uses and saves
programs in ASCII letter format. Putting numbers at the start of
each program line is optional. We use the line numbers so that
the lines can be easily referred to and so that the program can


                              399
400                             Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming


      be run by older BASICA or transferred to Chipmunk BASIC
      for Macintosh.
         F6 toggles the cursor to or from the program window to one
      below where you can type in instructions. In the lower window
      you can determine values such as Q at the end of a simulation
      run by typing:

                             PRINT Q or ? Q.

         A Screen statement, 10 SCREEN 1,0, is needed in each pro-
      gram. The 1 is for medium resolution graphics with color, and
      0 turns color on. The Color statement is 20 COLOR 0,0. After
      the word COLOR the first number gives the background color
      from a selection of 15 (0 is black). Numbers 7 and 15 are white
      backgrounds, which are useful when black on white is desired
      when printing the screen. The second number designates one of
      two set of color choices (palettes).
         Colors in PCs depend on the version of graphics in the operat-
      ing system. In simplest form the second digit in the color state-
      ment selects one of two palettes each with three colors. 0 selects
      a palette where 1 in a printing line is green, 2 is red, and 3 is
      brown. 1 selects a palette were 1 is cyan, 2 is magenta, and 3
      is white.
         A graph can be printed (screen dumped) from BASIC or
      QUICKBASIC if the computer operating system and its connected
      printer have been arranged to print graphics (loading an appro-
      priate printer driver). Some IBM models require the file GRAPH-
      ICS to be loaded. Other PCs and printers have printer files that
      can be designated when setting up DOS supplied on utility disks
      or can be obtained from the computer companies involved. After
      the run, print the graph by pressing Shift and Print Screen or
      just Print Screen. This will copy the graph on the clipboard. Use
      Alt-Tab to go back to the desktop. Activate WORD or a drawing
      program and paste the graph from the clipboard. Then label and
      edit it to get it ready to print.



                                     䉬
                            B.2 PC BASICA

         The old standard program BASICA may be needed to access
      older BASIC programs that were saved in binary form not accessi-
Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming                                  401


                ble by QUICKBASIC. It can be operated from PC DOS. After
                loading and/or running a program on BASICA, it can be saved
                in ASCII by typing: SAVE ‘‘Name’’, A. Then that program is
                available to QUICKBASIC.
                    BASICA.exe was supplied with old versions of DOS. After
                BASICA is loaded, a simulation program can be loaded by typing
                LOAD ‘‘Name’’ and then run by typing RUN. To interrupt a
                program that is running press Ctrl and Num Lock for a temporary
                interruption. For other computer models press the Pause key.
                Press Ctrl and Scroll Lock for a permanent interruption. BASICA
                requires lines to be numbered (i.e., 10, 20, 30, etc.). When a new
                line is added, it is put in its numerical order automatically. To
                list the program type LIST. To print a program listing, type
                LLIST. Delete a program on screen by typing NEW. Names
                of programs are limited to eight characters and must have the
                extension.bas (example: NAME.bas).
                    To list the files while in BASICA, type FILES. To return from
                BASICA to the PC DOS operating system, type SYSTEM. To
                read the file list while in DOS, type DIR. DIR/W arranges the
                file list in a compact horizontal listing. DIR/P lists a full screen
                of files and stops the scroll until a key is pressed to continue with
                another screen full of files, etc.
                    CLS clears the screen and may be the first line in a program
                (example: 10 CLS). To display graphs from two successive runs
                on the screen at the same time, run the first. Then make a change
                in the program and run it again, but start the run after the initial
                CLS statement (example: RUN 20).




                                PC-MAC FILE TRANSFERS

                   The BASIC programs for Macintosh can be transferred to a
                PC and vice versa with an appropriate file transfer program.
                Transfers to a PC require file names to have a maximum of eight
                characters and they must end in .bas. Many newer computers can
                read ASCII programs on PC-formatted disks and Mac-formatted
                disks interchangeably. To run a Mac-transferred program on a
                PC, you have to add two lines: 10 SCREEN 1,0 and 20
                COLOR 0,1, which are necessary for PC graphics as described
                earlier. In transferring a PC program to a Macintosh, these two
                lines have to be changed and the plotting statements (PSET)
402                             Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming


      replaced as explained in sections B.3 and B.4 that follow. In this
      book the programs are in form for PC QBASIC (QUICKBASIC).




                                     䉬
                 B.3 MACINTOSH QUICKBASIC

          QUICKBASIC (not on the CD) will work on many Macintosh
      operating systems. It is black and white, with fine grain texture.
      To use QUICKBASIC in some computers and operating system
      7.1, the cache must be turned off using the cache icon in the
      System folder, and 32-bit addressing turned off using the memory
      icon in the Control folder. If it is available, load QUICKBASIC.
      Then use its menu to open a simulation program from the
      book CD.
          To run the program, open the RUN menu and activate RUN.
      After the program is running, you can stop it with Apple key
      and a period. You can also use the menu to stop a run. To list
      the program, open the WINDOWS menu and activate LIST. If
      the list window covers the graph, put the arrow on the title bar
      (lines at the top of the window) and hold the mouse down to
      move the window around. To enlarge the list window, double
      click the title bar of the list window or the small square box at
      the upper right corner.
          To change numbers or letters in a program listing, highlight
      the character to change. Then type in the new character. After
      the first run, you can change a value and rerun with the second
      graph on the same screen for comparison. Open the WINDOWS
      menu and activate COMMAND, which opens another window
      at the bottom of the screen. In the COMMAND window type
      RUN 40 (if 40 is the number of the first statement below the
      SCREEN and CLS (clear) statements).
          To save a program, open the FILE menu and activate Save
      As, after which you type in its name and where it is to be saved.
      The name of a program can have a maximum of 30 characters.
      It is optional to include the .bas required for PC names. If the
      name is restricted to eight characters it can be transferred to a
      PC later without changing the title. Using the SAVE command
      keeps the same name and destination. To write a new program,
      open the FILE menu and activate NEW. This clears any previous
      program and gives you an active list window on which to type.
Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming                               403


                   To print a listing of the program, open the FILE menu and
                activate PRINT. To print the whole screen (screen dump) on
                older operating systems, put on the caps lock, and press the Shift
                key, the Command (Apple) key, and the 4 key. In later operating
                systems hold down the Shift key, the Command key, and the 3
                key. This will copy the screen on the hard disk window in a file
                named PICTURE1 (PICTURE2, PICTURE3, etc.). Double click
                the picture. This brings it to the screen with the Macintosh pro-
                gram SIMPLE TEXT. Outline the desired part with the mouse
                and copy it to the clipboard. From there paste it into WORD or
                a drawing program for editing and printing.



                                               䉬
                        B.4 MACINTOSH CHIPMUNK BASIC

                   Because QUICKBASIC for Macintosh is no longer on the
                market, CHIPMUNK BASIC has become the appropriate pro-
                gram for no-nonsense introduction of programming and minimo-
                del simulation to beginners using Macintosh. The freeware pro-
                gram CHIPMUNK BASIC was developed by Ronald H.
                Nicholson, Jr., Santa Clara, California and is on the web as
                CHIPMUNK BASIC Home Page (具http://www.nicholson.com/
                rhn/basic/典) CHIPMUNK BASIC has the essence of the original
                BASIC programs and has been kept current with powermacs and
                Macintosh operating systems while also being compatible with
                older Macintosh computers. Some tutorials and manuals are
                included with the downloaded folder. Although not used in this
                book, the program has capabilities of displaying moving anima-
                tions (sprites), sound, and matrix operations. CHIPMUNK
                BASIC 6.3 is included on this book’s disk.



                 CONVERTING PC QUICKBASIC PROGRAMS TO
                    CHIPMUNK BASIC FOR MACINTOSH

                   The following are the changes which need to be made to the
                PC programs listed in this book to run them on CHIPMUNK
                BASIC. Program lines have to be numbered. To delete a line,
                simply type the line number without anything else. As with
                QUICKBASIC the programs are text files and can be read by
404                              Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming


      word processors. The program accepts upper or lower case char-
      acters, but converts them to lower case.
         Delete the SCREEN statement and replace it with the follow-
      ing that sets up the graphics:

                                20 graphics 0

         Delete the COLOR statement and replace it with graphics
      color followed by three numbers that indicate foreground line
      color. 100,0,0 is red, 0,100,0 is green, and 0,0,100 is blue. When
      all three are zeros the line color is black.

                                30 color 0,0,0

         Instead of the LINE statement at the start of the program,
      indicate the square frame of the graph as follows:

      40 moveto 0,0: lineto 0,180: lineto 320,180: lineto 320,0: lineto
                                     0,0

         To plot the graph in color, place the statement on the same
      line with the plot statement. For example, the following statement
      plots the line blue in the TANK model simulation in Table B.1:

      TABLE B.1
      BASIC Program TANK.bas from Tables 1.1 and 9.2 Modified for
      CHIPMUNK BASIC

      5 rem CHIPMUNK BASIC for Macintosh
      10 rem CHIPTANK.bas (Storage tank with source of steady inflow)
      15 cls
      20 graphics 0
      40 moveto 0,0 : lineto 0,180 : lineto 320,180 : lineto 320,0 : 0,0
      50 j ⫽ 2
      60 q ⫽ 1
      70 k ⫽ 0.02
      80 dt ⫽ 1
      90 t0 ⫽ 1
      95 q0 ⫽ 1
      100 rem start of iteration loop
      110 graphics color 0,0,100: moveto t,180-q : pset t,180-q
      120 dq ⫽ j-k*q
      130 q ⫽ q⫹dq*dt
      140 t ⫽ t⫹dt
      150 if t/t0 ⬍ 320 then goto 100
Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming                                 405


                   110 graphics color 0,0,100: moveto t,180-q: pset t,180-q

                   For plotting of points for Q as a function of time t during
                the simulation, substitute the following, where t0 and q0 are
                scaling factors.

                        110 moveto t/t0, 180-Q/Q0: pset t/t0,180-q/q0

                   For other details open the file Quick Reference in the Macin-
                tosh section of the book CD.
                   For example consider the tank model in Figures 9.1. The
                CHIPMUNK BASIC version is given in Table B.1. Load CHIP-
                MUNK BASIC, the program file, CHIPTANK.bas, and RUN the
                simulation as explained in Chapter 9.


                  USE OF CHIPMUNK BASIC FOR MINIMODELS

                   Double click on its icon to Open CHIPMUNK BASIC. Then
                use its FILE menu to open a BASIC program. To open the file
                needs the extension .bas. Use the MENU to LIST the program. If
                the program already has the graphics statements for CHIPMUNK
                BASIC, type RUN or select RUN from the menu. Otherwise,
                make the line changes outlined in the previous section.
                   To edit a line, use the mouse to position the cursor within the
                line where changes can be made. Then move the cursor to the
                end of the line and type return. The revised line appears at the
                bottom of the program, which also means the program has been
                changed similarly. Type LIST to see the revised program with
                numbered lines in order.
                   In the FILE menu use SAVE AS to save the program in the
                usual way. To print out the program, highlight and copy to the
                clipboard. Then use SIMPLETEXT or a word processor to bring
                up the text and print it.
                   To print out the simulation graphs, find print in the file menu.
                Also see Section B.3 for directions for screen dumping everything
                on the screen in a file Picture 1, Picture 2, etc. on the hard disk.
                Then the image can be trimmed and labeled with a drawing
                program.
                   With the exception of the different graphics statements, the
                old classic book by J. C. Kemeny, the inventor of BASIC and
                T. E. Kurz (1971) is still a good introduction: It is found in many
406                             Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming


      libraries. TRUEBASIC is a later form of BASIC developed by
      Kemeny.




                                     䉬
                     B.5 HELPFUL HINTS FOR
                      BASIC PROGRAMMING

          The zero (0, often printed with a slash) is different from the
      letter O. It is important to use the right one. Do not put commas
      in your numbers. 10000 is right; 10,000 is wrong. The scientific
      notation is like that for many calculators. The number 1234 may
      be input as 1.234 E3. The number 0.01234 may be input as
      1.234 E-2. The E indicates exponent and can be loosely translated
      as ‘‘times ten to the.’’
          In computer equations you indicate multiplication by an aster-
      isk (*) and division by a slash (/). Exponents are indicated with
      (⵩). For example, Q2 is either Q*Q or Q⵩2.
          To remember what special lines are supposed to do, add a
      remark. Any remarks typed after REM are ignored by the com-
      puter. The remark can be put on the same line as an active
      statement by putting in a colon first. For example, 50 Q ⫽
      10:REM Q is the initial biomass of plants.
          To plot a rectangular border around the simulation graph,
      add the line: 30 LINE (0,0)-(300,180),,B for Macintosh or 30
      LINE (0,0)-(300,180),3,B for PC. B indicates a box with the
      opposite corners designated by the coordinates 0,0 and 300,180.
      In a PC the number after the coordinates selects a color from
      the palette that was selected by the COLOR statement.
          To plot points, use PSET followed by coordinates in parenthe-
      ses; for example, PSET (T,180-Q) for the Macintosh. The first
      letter T is for time on the x axis. Because the origin is in the
      upper left corner, the variable Q is subtracted from the length
      of the box 180 so it will plot on the y axis with zero at the
      bottom. For the PC, add a number for the color; for example,
      PSET (T,180-Q),2. See section B.4 for Chipmunk BASIC
      graphics.
          To send the program around again and again (iteration), type
      a program line as follows: IF T*T0⬍320 GOTO 210, where 210
      is the first line with equations that change during iteration.
Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming                               407


                  HOW TO SCALE THE GRAPHS FOR QUANTITY
                                AND TIME

                    When you are plotting various quantities, you want them to
                fit within the box drawn on the screen. To do this, multiply each
                quantity, like Q, by a scaling factor, like Q0. For example, to
                calculate Q0, you first figure out what the maximum quantity
                Q will be. Then divide the height of the screen by the maximum
                Q. The answer will be Q0. For example, if the screen height is
                180 and Q increases up to 200: Q0 ⫽ 180/200 ⫽ 0.9. Sometimes
                scaling factors are put in the denominator, like Q/Q0 in Table
                13.1.
                    To make a line across the screen to subdivide the graphics 40
                lines from the top, add a line to the program. If the width of the
                screen is 360, type in:

                                     LINE (0,40)-(360,40)

                   T0 is the scaling factor for time (T) and is used to make the
                desired simulation time fit within the graphics box on the screen.
                   When you are writing a program for a certain time span (such
                as number of days) and want the graph to cover that time, put
                in two statements: TX ⫽ number of days and T0 ⫽ number of
                plotting points across the screen divided by TX. For example, if
                you want the graph to be in days for a year and the screen width
                is 320, put in the statements:

                                         TX ⫽ 365
                                         T0 ⫽ 320/TX

                  DT is the length of time in each calculation (iteration). For
                example, if data are in days:

                     DT ⫽ 4 means a 4-day calculation in each iteration.
                     DT ⫽ 0.5 means a calculation is done every half day.
                     DT and T0 are put into programs as follows:
                        PSET (T*T0, 180-Q)
                        Q ⫽ Q ⫹ DQ*DT
                        T ⫽ T ⫹ DT
                        IF T*T0 ⬍360 GOTO

                For examples of use of these scaling factors, refer to the WET-
                LAND model of Table 16.1.
408                                       Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming



                                               䉬
                 B.6 USE OF SINE WAVES FOR VARYING INPUTS

                   Some inflows to a system that vary regularly can be pro-
                grammed using sine waves. This is especially useful for the daily
                and seasonal variations in sunlight that follow sine waves on
                clear days (Figure B.1). Seasonal rainfall, evaporation, tempera-
                ture, etc., can also be programmed this way. Giving a regular
                up and down input is a way of studying a system’s response and
                comparing with others.
                   As a wheel with a radius of one rotates, a nail generates a
                sine wave. The height of a nail on the rim goes from zero to ⫹1
                to zero to ⫺1 and back to zero, where measurements are made
                from the level of the axle (see Figure B.1a). A right triangle is
                formed between the nail, the axle, and the horizontal line of
                the axle.
                   The sine of an angle is the opposite side over the hypotenuse
                of a right triangle. As the wheel makes one full revolution, the
                sine of the angle A (the angle between the nail spoke and the
                horizontal) goes from 0 to ⫹1 to 0 to ⫺1 to 0 again. When the




FIGURE B.1.
Sine waves for supplying
diurnal and seasonal solar
inputs.
(a) Sine wave viewed as a line
generated by a nail on a
rotating wheel, with amplitude
plus and minus 1, as generated
by BASIC; (b) graph for
representing annual inputs
using an equation: Y ⫽ 3200 ⫹
800*Sin(T*0.017); (c) graph
representing diurnal inputs
using the equation: Y ⫽
4000*Sin(T*0.26).
Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming                                 409


                value of the sine A is graphed with time (or the path of the nail
                up and down graphed with time), a sine wave results.
                   The angle between the nail spoke and the horizontal as the
                wheel turns a whole revolution goes from 0 to 90 to 180 to 270
                to 360 degrees (0 degrees again). One can also represent the
                angle in radians. A radian is the arc of the circle the length of
                the radius. When the wheel makes a full revolution, it passes
                over a circumference of 2 pi radii. A full revolution of 360 degrees
                is an angle of 2 pi radians. Since pi is 3.14, 2 pi is 6.28. A full
                circle that is a full sine wave cycle is 6.28 radians.
                   Sine waves may be used as a source-driving functions. The
                ups and downs of solar insolation during the year can be repre-
                sented with a sine wave. The sunlight during the day can be
                represented with half a sine wave. The BASIC language has the
                sine function Y ⫽ SIN(X), where X is the angle in radians. As
                X goes from 0 to 6.28, Y goes through a full cycle (0 to ⫹1 to
                0 to ⫺1 to 0 again). To fit a sine wave to a program, substitute
                time (T) for X. Then multiply or divide T by whatever number
                is necessary to scale the sine wave to the time needed. For exam-
                ple, if a simulation is being run in days, using the sine function
                without scaling would generate one cycle every 6.28 days.


                     EQUATION FOR AN ANNUAL SINE WAVE

                   To make the sine wave cycle in 1 year (365 days), multiply
                the time by (6.28/365 ⫽ .017). The equation becomes Y ⫽
                SIN(T*.017). This sine wave will go from ⫹1 to ⫺1 and back
                in 1 year. To scale this up or down, multiply by the range of
                sunlight (or whatever is being represented by the sine wave). If
                this range is R, where R is the amount that the quantity (of
                sunlight) varies from its average V, then the equation becomes
                Y ⫽ R*SIN(T*.017).
                   To move the graph completely into the positive range, add an
                amplitude equal to the average value of sunlight or whatever is
                being represented. If this average value is V (like the average per
                day for a year), then the equation for a seasonal source results:
                Y ⫽ V ⫹ R*SIN(T*.017). See the example shown in Figure B.1b.


                  EQUATION FOR A DAILY SINE WAVE SOURCE

                   If the time unit is in hours and there are 24 hours a day, then
                scale the sine function so that one cycle takes 24 time units.
410                             Appendix B Notes on Computer Use and Basic Programming


      TABLE B.2
      Example of an Array

      BASIC program             Explanation

      DIM A(12)                 Spaces for 12 items of data are set for
                                  array A.
      DATA 2300, 2000,          Sets 12 values of sunlight for 12 months.
        2800, etc.
      FOR M ⫽ 0 TO 11           M is the number of the month.
      READ A(M)                 Tells computer to read the values in the
                                  DATA line.
      NEXT                      Takes next number next time around.
      I ⫽ A(M)                  Input of sunlight from array A for the
                                  month (M).
      Y ⫽ INT(T/365)            Calculates the number of years since the
                                  start. (INT is the command to round
                                  to a whole number.)
      W ⫽ 12*Y                  Calculates total number of months in
                                  previous years.
      M ⫽ INT(T/30.4) ⫺ W       The number of the month in the current
                                  year is the total months since the start
                                  minus number of months in the
                                  previous years.



      Therefore, multiply the time by (6.28/24 ⫽ .26). The equation
      becomes Y ⫽ R*SIN(T*.26).
         To represent sunlight during daytime, put in an IF statement
      that cuts out Y (the sunlight) when the sine goes negative (night
      period): IF Y ⬍ 0 THEN Y ⫽ 0. See the example shown in
      Figure B.1c.



                                     䉬
         B.7 USE OF AN ARRAY TO ENTER A SERIES
                       OF INPUTS

         An array is a way to input a set of numerical data, like a
      different value for each period of time. For example, in the WET-
      LANDS model of Figure 16.1, a different value of sunlight is
      entered for each month. Statements needed to input sunlight
      figures for 12 months are given in Table B.2, with explanations
      at the right. T is time in days.
                  Appendix C
                                䉬

ANSWERS TO ‘‘WHAT
 IF’’ EXPERIMENTAL
      PROBLEMS



               CHAPTER 4 SIMULATION
                WITHOUT EQUATIONS

4.2 Pond Water Model (Program PONDWATR
in EXTEND)

4.2–1 The dialog box of the source icon has a value of 100. If
      the source is made 10, then the stored quantity levels off
      at a low value, less than 200.
4.2–2 If the outflow is set to zero, growth is on a straight line
      and does not level. This is called a ramp.
4.2–3 If the starting value in the dialog box of pond storage is
      changed to 2000, the graph of storage descends and levels
      off at the same lower value reached when the starting
      quantity was small.


4.2 Model of Exponential Growth (Program PICEXPO
in EXTEND)

4.2–3 The city block that starts with a greater value grows faster.
4.2–4 If the fossil fuel source is reduced, the city grows more
      slowly.



                               411
412                               Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


      4.2 Model of the Earth System (Program EARTHPIC
      in EXTEND)

      4.2–5 If the ocean carbonate sink is disconnected, with fossil
            fuel in use the CO2 in the atmosphere increases to much
            higher values, since it is no longer absorbed by the ocean.
      4.2–6 With twice the fossil fuel the CO2 and consumer assets
            grow much faster and reach higher levels.
      4.2–7 Without fossil fuel and with half the sunlight, plants are
            reduced, causing a reduction of organic matter and assets.
            CO2 increases for several years and then decreases to a
            balance again.


         CHAPTER 5 SIMULATION WITH GENERAL
             SYSTEMS BLOCKS FOR EXTEND

      5.2 Model of Storage (Program TANK in EXTEND)

      5.2–1 With a high starting value of 100, storage declines reach-
            ing the same steady state as simulation started with low
            value.
      5.2–2 With no inflow, the storage declines toward zero but at
            a decreasing rate.
      5.2–3 Increasing the outflow from storage causes the steady state
            to be less.
      5.2–4 In the model EXPO, storage drains if the input force is
            very low, or the starting quantity very small.

      5.5 Ecological Model (Program PC&CYCLE in EXTEND)

      5.5–1 With half the nutrient input, steady state takes 300 years,
            twice as long. Level of organic storage reached is less.


            CHAPTER 9 PROGRAMMING IN BASIC

      9.5 Model of Growth of Storage with Inflow and Outflow
      (Program TANK2.bas, Figure 9.1)

      9.5–1 The graph starts high and then levels at the same place
            because that is where the inflow of water equals the out-
            flow through the drain.
      9.5–2 The graph of Q will grow up as before, but when T ⫽
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                                413


                       96, Q will start to decrease, quickly at first, and then
                       more slowly.
                 9.5–3 With a faster outflow, the quantity of leaves never gets
                       as high as with the original outflow.

                 9.7 Model of Exponential Growth (Program EXPO.bas,
                 Figure 9.4)

                 9.7–1 If you make the food more concentrated, the growth of
                       the population Q will be faster and the graph of Q will
                       go up more steeply. If you reduce the concentration, the
                       graph of Q will increase more gradually—at the end of
                       the screen (279 weeks) Q will be less than when E was 1.
                 9.7–2 When K ⫽ 0.08, the graph of Q will be steeper, reaching
                       the top of the screen sooner. When K is reduced ⬍0.07,
                       the graph will grow more gradually.
                 9.7–3 To increase the death rate, increase K4. You can type
                       80 K4 ⫽ .06. The graph of Q will grow more slowly.
                       If you decrease the death rate (80 K4 ⫽ .04), then Q
                       will grow faster.
                 9.7–4 When the growth rate is equal to the death rate, the
                       population will neither decrease nor increase; it is at equi-
                       librium.

                 9.8 Model of Dispersal of Storage (Program DRAIN.bas,
                 Figure 9.5)
                 9.8–1 The leaves would last longer.
                 9.8–2 Your bank account would only last half as long.

                 9.9 Model of Production, Consumption, and Recycle
                 (Program PC&CYCLE.bas, Figure 9.6)

                 9.9–1 The increase in consumers makes a big change in the
                       graph of organics and nutrients. There are fewer nutrients
                       in the soil because there are fewer plants since they are
                       being consumed, and there is less growth of plants because
                       there are fewer nutrients.
                 9.9–2 Half the sunlight produces half the plant growth. More
                       nutrients are left in the soil at first, but they level off at
                       the same place as in the original.
                 9.9–3 Growth of organics and nutrients in the soil increase.
                       However, they come to the same steady state as in the
414                               Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


            original graph. They level at the same place because the
            inflows and outflows have not changed.
      9.9–4 Changing the inflow and outflow of nutrients does not
            visibly affect the graph. Therefore, the limiting factor in
            this model is the energy source (sun and rain).




          CHAPTER 10 SIMULATING WITH STELLA

      10.1 TANK (Figure 10.3)

      10.l–1 The tank value starts at 100, but levels off to the same
             value as it had before the change.
      10.1–2 The level of the tank is lower than before


      10.2 Sensitivity Analysis (EXPO, Figure 10.9)

      10.2–1 Q Quantity reaches a higher value when E ⫽ 2 than
             when E ⫽ 1.


      10.3 Production–Consumption–Recycle Model (PC&
      CYCLE, Figure 10.10)

      10.3–1 Nutrients N and organics Q reach much higher steady-
             state levels when K4 ⫽ 0.05.
      10.3–2 The level of organics goes up and the level of nutrients
             goes down.




             CHAPTER 11 SIMULATING EMERGY
                  AND TRANSFORMITY

      11.3 Emergy and Transformity in Storage (Program
      EMFISH.bas, Figure 11.1)

      11.3–1 With a higher percent of fish removed from stock because
             of the larger K2, the stock is at a lower level with less
             accumulation of input. The emergy level is less.
      11.3–2 Transformity measures the quality of the stock. With
             fewer inputs the stock represents less accumulated work.
             Transformity is less.
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                              415


                 11.4 Emergy in Simple Storage (Program EMGTANK.bas,
                 Figure 11.2)
                 11.4–1 With faster depreciation, stock accumulates less value.
                        The emergy and transformity of the stock are lower.
                 11.4–2 Increasing the transformity of the initial condition and
                        inputs moves the model to a higher position in the energy
                        hierarchy. Emdollars are obtained by dividing the em-
                        ergy by the emergy per unit money of the economy.
                        Higher position yields more emdollars.

                 11.5 Emergy in Autocatalytic Process (Program
                 RENEMGY.bas, Figure 11.3)
                 11.5–1 The output transformity is higher because of the energy
                        transformation work within the model. Emergy is trans-
                        mitted, whereas the energy transmitted is much less.
                 11.5–2 Without an input, the stock drains away. Its quantity
                        decreases but not its transformity.


                       CHAPTER 12 MODELS OF PRODUCTION
                                  AND RECYCLE

                 12.1 Net Production (Program NETPROD.bas,
                 Figure 12.1)
                 12.1–1 Increasing the consumption decreases the net pro-
                        duction.
                 12.1–2 The efficiency of gross production (fraction of sunlight
                        transformed) is the ratio of production K1*S to input
                        energy S if both are given in energy units. In other words
                        the efficiency is K1. Sometimes the fraction transformed
                        is multiplied by 100 to express the efficiency in percent.
                        Increasing K1 increases gross production and net pro-
                        duction.
                 12.1–3 With large initial storage, consumption exceeds gross
                        production so that the net production at first is negative.
                        When net production is negative it is below the zero line
                        in the middle graph.

                 12.2 Limiting Factors (Program FACTORS.bas, Figure 12.2)
                 12.2–1 The result is a set of curves that goes a little higher
                        because the limiting inflow J is larger. Thus increased
416                               Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


             production is possible with an increase in the limiting
             factor. Limits of production due to J occur at a higher
             level when the nonlimiting factor E is increased.
      12.2–2 With higher K1, more of the input energy goes into
             higher output production P without affecting the rest of
             the factors or flows involved.
      12.2–3 Efficiency P/E is the slope of the curves in Figure 12.2b.
             The slope is steepest (and efficiency greatest) when M is
             least limiting because value of material inflow J is high
             and value of E is small.

      12.3 Internal Limiting Factors (Program INTLIMIT.bas,
      Figure 12.3)
      12.3–1 Production is increased by adding materials when the
             internal cycle is limiting.
      12.3–2 When recycle coefficient K2 is increased, the storage is
             less and the recycle and turnover rates are increased.
      12.3–3 The organic storage is less but the flows are greater.
             Since the turnover time is less, the organisms are smaller.

      12.4 Production and Consumption (Program DAYP&C.bas,
      Figure 12.4)
      12.4–1 With a smaller pool of available nutrient materials M is
             less and the storage is less. Although the energy source
             can be more limiting in this model compared to INT-
             LIMIT, the response to lowered materials for cycling
             was similar.
      12.4–2 During the energy pulses, the surge of growth of Q in-
             creases and materials are reduced more. When the energy
             inflow is off, there is a larger surge of consumption and
             material regeneration.
      12.4–3 With reduced consumption, organic storage stays high,
             the material pool stays small and the production rate
             is less.
      12.4–4 Stored quantity is high and steady while the nutrient
             materials available are held to a low level. Production
             rate is less, but there is more production because of the
             longer lighted period.

      12.5 Diurnal Oxygen in Aquatic Ecosystems (Program
      OPENAQ.bas, Figure 12.5)
      12.5–1 Respiration rate exceeds photosynthetic production and
             oxygen goes down.
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                              417


                 12.5–2 With continuous light, oxygen stops fluctuating and rises
                        to a higher level after which a new balance develops
                        between continuous production and continuous respira-
                        tion without net production.
                 12.5–3 With fewer nutrients for photosynthesis, production de-
                        creases, temporarily less than respiration. Later a new
                        balance begins to develop. When metabolic processes
                        are regulated by ecosystem feedbacks so as to restore a
                        balance of processes, the process is called homeostasis.
                 12.5–4 With the diffusion coefficient increased the range of dis-
                        solved oxygen is reduced. The bubbling devices in an
                        aquarium are analogous to wind and waves in a pond.
                        With a smaller diffusion coefficient and organic matter
                        added, very low oxygen values result that can kill fish.

                 12.6 Logistic Autocatalytic Production and Recycle
                 (Program AUTOCYCL.bas, Figure 12.6).

                 12.6–1 Adding TN increases the growth of assets.
                 12.6–2 Increasing energy has some positive effect. With more
                        nutrients added first so that their limitation is less, the
                        energy has a greater effect.
                 12.6–3 The autocatalytic logistic production function (Figure
                        12.6b) generates S-shaped curves because it accelerates
                        growth at first before leveling, whereas the simpler inter-
                        action of energy and nutrients has a decreasing rate of
                        growth from the start, causing the curve to be convex
                        (Figure 12.3b).



                          CHAPTER 13 MODELS OF GROWTH

                 13.1 Growth on a Renewable Source (Program
                 RENEW.bas, Figure 13.1)

                 13.1–1 A system that has a source that stays available no matter
                        how much is used can grow faster and faster; this pro-
                        duces exponential growth. In contrast, a system that has
                        a source with a steady flow that cannot be changed by
                        the system will grow up only to the level where it uses
                        most of the available source. The kind of source deter-
                        mines the kind of system. The limited source energy
                        R ⫽ J/(1 ⫹ K0*Q), which is a limiting expression;
418                               Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


             whereas, with exponential growth the energy E ⫽ 1 is
             a constant not affected by growth, however large.
      13.1–2 When J is increased, the graph of Q increases faster and
             levels off higher. When J is decreased, the graph increases
             more slowly and levels off lower.
      13.1–3 The graph will start partway up the vertical axis and
             grow up to the same level as the original graph. You
             have changed the starting point but the leveling point is
             dependent on J, the energy source.
      13.1–4 Increase K4 in line 80. The graph of the changed forest
             model grows slower and levels off at a lower level than
             the original graph. With the same production rate and
             a higher decomposition rate, it cannot develop as large
             a storage.

      13.2 Slowly Renewable Growth (Program SLOWREN.bas,
      Figure 13.2)

      13.2–1 Until the reserve E can build up, the unit Q cannot grow.
             After the reserve builds up, the assets unit Q grows,
             pulling the reserve down again. In this scenario the assets
             never get as large as the growth that started with large
             E, but the later steady state is the same.
      13.2–2 Because higher inputs maintain higher levels of the re-
             serve, the dependent Q unit can grow to a higher sustain-
             able level also.
      13.2–3 Without an inflow the reserve would be drained away
             and the dependent unit would have only a brief period
             of growth based on the initial storages, as will be consid-
             ered in model NONRENEW (Figure 13.3a).

      13.3 Growth on a Nonrenewable Source (Program
      NONRENEW.bas, Figure 13.3)

      13.3–1 Q (beetles) grow faster and develop larger stock, but
             they don’t last as long since the resource (log) E is used
             up faster. If this model applies to the civilization’s use
             of fossil fuels, finding new deposits may accelerate the
             time of running out.
      13.3–2 Starting with more beetles causes the log to be used up
             faster and more beetles to be produced more quickly. If
             this model were the mining town, it would mean that
             the town and some people were already there when the
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                              419


                        mine was opened. The ore would be mined faster and
                        the town developed more since it already had some peo-
                        ple and structure.
                 13.3–3 When beetles are able to get more growth from the wood
                        of the log, the beetles grow faster to a larger population,
                        which uses up the log faster. All of the log is consumed.
                        If the growth rate is less efficient, the beetles grow more
                        slowly to a smaller population; the log is not com-
                        pletely consumed.
                 13.3–4 Change K4 to .05. With a higher death rate, Q is less
                        and uses up E more slowly.

                 13.4 Growth on Two Sources (Program 2SOURCE.bas,
                 Figure 13.4)

                 13.4–1 By increasing the nonrenewable reserve E, the growth
                        peak occurs sooner, is higher, and uses up the source
                        faster. This property of autocatalytic designs helps max-
                        imize power.
                 13.4–2 Assets Q develop more slowly and use up the fuels (E)
                        more slowly. There is a lower steady state after nonre-
                        newables are gone.
                 13.4–3 With an increased depreciation rate assets decrease more
                        rapidly, use fewer resources, and level off with fewer
                        assets. There are fewer, older assets for use.
                 13.4–4 With more assets at the start, Q grows faster and higher
                        and uses up nonrenewable energy E quickly. For exam-
                        ple, societies that had initial developments on renewable
                        energies had the technology to implement the industrial
                        revolution first.

                 13.5 Logistic Growth (Program LOGISTIC.bas, Figure 13.5)

                 13.5–1 The population grows faster and reaches a higher level
                        steady state, in proportion to the energy.
                 13.5–2 The population quickly decreases to the steady-state level
                        based on its energy E. The deaths from crowding
                        (K4*Q*Q) are high because the number of mice Q is
                        high.
                 13.5–3 K4 is the coefficient that represents the crowding effect.
                        Decrease K4 and more mice are sustained.
                 13.5–4 With the term for linear losses added, the growth is a
                        little less but the simulation graphs are similar.
420                               Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


          CHAPTER 14 MODELS OF COMPETITION
                  AND COOPERATION

      14.1 Competition for Limited Source (Program
      EXCLUS.bas, Figure 14.1)
      14.1–1 Both decrease some, but one prevails at the same level
             as the original graph.
      14.1–2 The cooperative population prevails, driving the other
             population quickly.
      14.1–3 Set K6 equal to K5.

      14.2 Two Populations in Exponential Growth (Program
      TWOPOP.bas, Figure 14.2)
      14.2–1 The run in Figure 14.2b results when everything is similar
             except efficiency of production. Changing the death rates
             can cause the same graph, with one population outdis-
             tancing the other.
      14.2–2 With K1 and K2 equal, the only difference is in the
             starting condition. The one with the larger start rapidly
             outdistances the other.
      14.2–3 The population with quadratic feedback overgrows the
             other quickly.

      14.3 Two Populations with Competitive Interactions
      (Program INTERACT.bas, Figure 14.3)
      14.3–1 Each population reaches a level population because of
             its own quadratic drain without influence on the other.
             The source is not depleted by the growth. The popula-
             tions coexist, unlike Figure 14.3b.
      14.3–2 With a lower energy availability, both populations have
             lower levels but without influencing each other. They
             coexist. Population Q2 is most numerous.
      14.3–3 With a lower interaction coefficient, population Q1 is
             somewhat reduced but both populations coexist.
      14.3–4 With K6 at 0.002 the species population are about the
             same. With K6 at 0.003, Q2 is displaced.

      14.4 Model of Two Populations That Cooperate (Program
      CO-OP.bas, Figure 14.4)
      14.4–1 Populations die out. The growth equations contain both
             Q1 and Q2. Each is dependent on the other.
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                             421


                 14.4–2 Although starting with different quantities, the popula-
                        tions reach the same steady state as before, since they
                        are using the same energy source and growth rates.
                 14.4–3 Set K1 ⫽ K2, and K5 ⫽ K6. With all the coefficients
                        the same the populations grow identically.




                            CHAPTER 15 MODELS OF SERIES
                                 AND OSCILLATION

                 15.1 Model of Prey–Predator Oscillation (Program
                 PREYPRED.bas, Figure 15.1)

                 15.1–1 If you double the growth rate of the carnivores, they eat
                        more herbivores, reducing the quantity of herbivores to
                        about half of the original. The pulse is more frequent
                        because the herbivores are eaten faster.
                 15.1–2 When you reduce the death rate of the carnivores from
                        0.3 to 0.1 the pulses are much longer, with fewer quanti-
                        ties of both carnivores and hervbivores. Because they
                        live longer, they eat more herbivores.
                 15.1–3 Cutting the energy source in half halves the quantities
                        of carnivores and herbivores.


                 15.2 Model of Oscillation at Three Levels (Program
                 OSCILLAT.bas, Figure 15.2).

                 15.2–1 Oscillations become more frequent. With more energy,
                        more of everything can grow and eat faster. To see the
                        plants P on the screen, change P0 to 50. With less energy
                        the oscillations dampen out. There is not enough energy
                        to keep them going. The small amount of life remains
                        almost constant year after year.
                 15.2–2 Like the model PREYPRED in the previous section, ani-
                        mal oscillations continue with constant energy avail-
                        ability.
                 15.2–3 With no carnivores, the herbivores increase and level
                        off, and their steady grazing keeps plants at a low level.
                        With faster turnover time, oscillations are more frequent.
                        The consumers C are small in quantity, and the plants
                        are steadier.
422                                Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


      15.3 Model of Switching Oscillation (Program FIRE.bas,
      Figure 15.3)

      15.3–1 With more energy, growth is faster and fires more fre-
             quent. In this model, an increase in nutrients has little
             effect on the growth of grass because nutrients are not
             limiting.
      15.3–2 With reduced nutrients, growth is less and the threshold
             for fire is not reached.
      15.3–3 The grass will grow until all the nutrients are bound up
             in the grass. Then the graph levels off, as does the growth
             of grass.
      15.3–4 The system never grows enough biomass to reach the
             threshold to support fire.


      15.4 Model of Pulse and Recycle (Program PULSE.bas,
      Figure 15.4)

      15.4–1 With inadequate materials, the production decreases and
             oscillation stops. With excess materials, the oscilla-
             tions continue.
      15.4–2 With reduced energy, production is less and oscillation
             stops. With doubled energy, oscillations are smaller and
             more frequent. With larger energy, the production is
             large and storage of products is large without oscillation.
             The energy loading that sustains pulsing is intermediate
             and may use energy better. By controlling their chloro-
             phyll, green leaves adapt to intermediate energy, allow-
             ing excess energy to pass through for other leaves to use.


      15.5 Model of Destruction and Restoration (Program
      DESTRUCT.bas, Figure 15.5)

      15.5–1 D represents the strong winds, A represents forest tree
             structures or buildings, and M the soil nutrients or build-
             ing materials that can be used.
      15.5–2 More source energy increases the assets A while decreas-
             ing unbound materials M. In the forest example, if more
             nutrients are part of the trees, there are fewer in the soil.
      15.5–3 A large impulse D destroys the storage A quickly; it takes
             longer to regrow.
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                             423


                 15.6 Model of One Pulsing Pair Coupled to Another
                 (Program CHAOS.bas, Figure 15.6)
                 15.6–1 With much less energy available, the oscillation at the
                        lower level becomes small. The upper pair of units oscil-
                        late so the chaos is eliminated. Chaos generally increases
                        with energy flow.
                 15.6–2 Without the connection between the two pulsing pairs,
                        steady states develop without chaos; the phase plane
                        curves become simple loops, not varying.
                 15.6–3 With the larger DT, points appear jumping all over the
                        screen because of artificial chaos. Because of very high
                        values off scale, the program may stop with an ‘‘over-
                        flow’’ message.


                    CHAPTER 16 MINIMODELS OF SUCCESSION
                               AND EVOLUTION

                 16.1 Model of Wet Grassland (Program WETLAND.bas,
                 Figure 16.1)
                 16.1–1 When J is increased, the vegetation thickens, and more
                        peat is produced. Nutrient levels in the soil increase and
                        remain high.
                 16.1–2 Double K6 to 3.2 E-3. There is less peat buildup. Nutri-
                        ents pass through more rapidly with lower concentra-
                        tions and less vegetation.
                 16.1–3 Under the simulated arctic conditions, production is less
                        but consumption is much less, recycling fewer nutrients.
                        Peat accumulates rapidly.

                 16.2 Model of Succession (Program CLIMAX.bas,
                 Figure 16.2)
                 16.2–1 Biomass increases, but diversity remains small.
                 16.2–2 Diverting the biomass energy causes standing biomass,
                        diversity production, and diversity to be less.
                 16.2–3 Production and diversity are less and growth slower.

                 16.3 Model of Nutrients and Diversity (Program
                 NUTRSPEC.bas, Figure 16.3)
                 16.3–1 With intermediate nutrient inflow, an initial surge of
                        weeds occurs, but some diversity develops later.
424                               Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


      16.3–2 With nutrients low, the more seeding (increased S) the
             more species develop in the mature complex.
      16.3–3 With high nutrients, a very large seeding effort (S ⫽ 10)
             is required to develop any diversity. This condition may
             be like a plant nursery where seeding and nutrient addi-
             tions are intense.

      16.4 Model of Species and Area of Resources (Program
      SPECAREA.bas, Figure 16.4)

      16.4–1 Greater resources support higher diversities for the
             same areas.
      16.4–2 Higher rates of depreciation or species loss cause a lower
             diversity curve, less information per unit energy used.
      16.4–3 The graph with a logarithmic horizontal scale curves
             upward, a property observed in field data on species
             distributions. There is no tendency to level off.

      16.5 Models of Island Speciation and Diversity (Program
      SPECIES.bas, Figure 16.5)

      16.5–1 Diversity that can be sustained is larger.
      16.5–2 Diversity decreases to a level that can be sustained.


       CHAPTER 17 MODELS OF MICROECONOMICS

      17.1 Model of Sales (Program SALES.bas, Figure 17.1)

      17.1–1 Change statement 80 to K1 ⫽ 0.05. The quantity of
             goods will be less so the price will be higher. The money
             coming in will not change.
      17.1–2 Increase J to 2. Changing production does not change
             the money income. However, it does increase the prod-
             ucts the consumer can buy for the dollar.
                In this case the value of production to the business is
             not the same as the value to the economy. The more
             product made, the lower the price and the more the
             consumers get for their money.

      17.2 Model of Economic Use of Mined Resources (Program
      TANKSALE.bas, Figure 17.2)
      17.2–1 With higher sale price there is more money accumulating
             faster so the reserves are mined faster and more is pro-
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                               425


                        cessed before money runs out. With price set as 20, only
                        negligible reserve remains after the mining pulse.
                 17.2–2 Some initial capital is required to start. With more initial
                        capital, mining develops sooner, but the final result is
                        the same.
                 17.2–3 With more reserves available, more money is obtained
                        and ultimately the reserves are mined to a lower level
                        before money runs out.
                 17.2–4 With small availability, other things being equal, there
                        is no net gain in money and mining does not get started.


                 17.3 Model of Loans, Interest, and Banking (Program
                 BANK.bas, Figure 17.3)
                 17.3–1 If the higher interest is paid to depositors, enough money
                        is diverted from the bank’s capital so that the accounts
                        spiral down to bankruptcy.
                 17.3–2 With half the depositor income there are also some re-
                        duced costs and interest paid out; net profit is maintained
                        and the growth spiral develops sooner than before. With
                        no depositors JD is set to zero but the spiral of growth
                        continues because of favorable interest from loans.
                 17.3–3 With its main income source from loans reduced, bank-
                        ruptcy results. Adding the lines to make a ceiling to the
                        money out in loans produced a steady state.
                 17.3–4 The run with less interest from loans causes the bank
                        to crash unless the bank also decreases the interest it
                        pays depositors.


                 17.4 Model of Money Countercurrents in Production and
                 Consumption (Program ECONP&C.bas, Figure 17.4)

                 17.4–1 When the environmental energy source is half, the pro-
                        duction and environmental products are less, but the
                        circulation of money and city assets are the same.
                 17.4–2 Increasing the money supply in this particular condition
                        increased the circulation of the economy, causing more
                        of the rural production to go into city assets.
                 17.4–3 Increasing the wages (price of goods and services) with
                        the same amount of circulating money in this condition
                        increased the city assets because outflow to the rural
                        sector was less.
426                                Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


      17.5 Model of Economic Use of Environmental Resource
      (Program ECONUSE.bas, Figure 17.5)

      17.5–1 Type 150 PG ⫽ 3.0. Money is down, assets are down,
             but the quantity of natural product stays up. The busi-
             ness will not do as well.
      17.5–2 Products, assets, and money are less. It might be better
             to use the start-up money in another venture.
      17.5–3 Type 90 M ⫽ 100, and to show both graphs on some
             computers type in the command panel RUN 60. The
             money does not increase as fast, because it is used to
             buy assets quickly. These assets process the product
             faster and keep it from growing up as much as it did
             when money started low. After a time the business gets
             to the same steady state.
      17.5–4 When you halve the price of your product (100 PE ⫽
             .5), less of the product gets sold and there is not enough
             money to exploit the resource very much. When you
             double the price of your product, money goes up, assets
             go up, and the resource is used up faster.
      17.5–5 With price rising as the storage is used up, the money
             going into more effort increases and the environmental
             structure (storage Q) is pulled below its ability to sustain
             itself. There is a very high short-range profit but ulti-
             mately the business will collapse without sustainable
             environmental resources.



      17.6 Model of the Economic Role of Biodiversity Reserve
      Areas (Program RESERVE.bas, Figure 17.6)

      17.6–1 The coefficient for land moving out of the economic
             production area is K1. Using an increased rate of soil
             deterioration reduces the economic yield and increases
             the area of land that is bare. More reserve area is needed
             to get maximum yield.
      17.6–2 Maintaining the economic yield with a small reserve area
             and small area of bare land implies very rapid seed-
             ing: large K2. Seeding rates are increased by having
             large populations of birds, mammals, and bats and/or
             favorable winds and climatic conditions for germina-
             tion.
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                             427


                               CHAPTER 18 MODELS OF
                              MACROECONOMIC OVERVIEW

                 18.1 Model of Money Driven Growth (Program
                 MONEYGRO, Figure 18.1)

                 18.1–1 Growth of both money and assets is slower, but it is still
                        exponential, with no limit.
                 18.1–2 Growth of money and assets is faster.
                 18.1–3 With a higher rate of adding money, money and assets
                        grow faster; with a lower rate, they grow more slowly.
                 18.1–4 Assets and money increase more rapidly. If the company
                        is in competition, it is an advantage to start with more
                        assets (for example, by borrowing).


                 18.2 Model of Price in Relation to Unsustainable Growth
                 (Program BUYPOWER.bas, Figure 18.2)

                 18.2–1 Assets go higher and prices lower, but they both come
                        to the same level as before when the fuels are used up.
                 18.2–2 At first assets will go up faster and prices down, but
                        since fuel will be used up faster, assets go higher and
                        reach the steady state sooner. Faster conversion makes
                        use more rapid.
                 18.2–3 Assets will go higher and prices will be lower, but these
                        differences will be permanent since they are based on
                        the renewable sources.


                 18.3 Model of Textbook Macroeconomics (Program
                 MACROEC.bas, Figure 18.3)

                 18.3–1 A higher depreciation rate decreases the rate of growth.
                        If the depreciation rate is made high enough, the assets
                        decay without growth.
                 18.3–2 More savings and reinvestment accelerate conversion of
                        available energies into stored assets. With unlimited en-
                        ergy (E constant), growth is faster. With flow-limited
                        resources, more capital assets develop.
                 18.3–3 More available energy generates higher growth rates and
                        higher levels of developed assets.
                 18.3–4 More available energy increases Q and Y, but they still
                        level off because the energy is limited.
428                               Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


      18.4 Model of an Economy in Relation to Land Use
      (Program ROTATION.bas, Figure 18.4)

      18.4–1 With no seedlings and environmental restoration, urban
             development goes to the maximum as all the area becomes
             urban (A2 ⫽ 1.00). As soils and other environmental stor-
             ages are used up, urban development Q declines.
      18.4–2 With large starting storage of S, its levels are higher,
             causing more assets Q to develop.
      18.4–3 With less area, all of the variables are reduced in
             quantity.


        CHAPTER 19 MODELS OF INTERNATIONAL
               RELATIONS AND TRADE

      19.1 Model of Cooperation through Trade (Program
      ENTRADE.bas, Figure 19.1)

      19.1–1 The assets of A go up, and those of B down, because there
             is only a limited inflow of energy. The total empower is
             increased, since A is being more efficient.
      19.1–2 If you change K3 to 0.2, the assets of A are much less
             than B, and the total power with trade is slightly less.

      19.2 Model of Impact of Global Economy on a Nation.
      Programs FREEMARK.bas and EMEXCHANG.bas, Figure
      19.2

      19.2–1 With the investment sequence debt (top panel of plot)
             increases and decreases again. The borrowed money
             allows an acceleration of growth of assets.
      19.2–2 Lowering the sale price of environmental products or
             increasing the price of purchased goods–services–fuels
             reduces the nation’s growth of assets, because fewer
             assets can be imported. Little general benefit comes when
             developed countries selling raw products use money to
             buy expensive goods. With these unfavorable prices, run-
             ning the borrowing sequence reduces growth.
      19.2–3 Even though the prices are favorable enough to cause
             some growth of assets and emergy (EmA), the net benefit
             in emergy terms is negative. The prices must be 40 times
             more favorable to get an emergy exchange ratio greater
             than one.
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                             429


                 19.2–4 Selling assets (finished products) and using the money
                        to buy other finished products from outside is a benefit
                        only if the prices for emergy sold are greater than the
                        prices for emergy purchased. For example, selling manu-
                        factured goods and using the money to buy fossil fuels
                        is a net benefit because of the high emergy/money ratio
                        in fuels.

                 19.3 Model of Warring Competition (Program, WAR.bas,
                 Figure 19.3)
                 19.3–1 If you make all K the same for each country, they coexist.
                        Change K6 to 0.01 and K7 to 0.05.
                 19.3–2 If you increase I to 1.2, A increases faster and more, the
                        total production is greater, and B is destroyed sooner.
                        Since A increases more and faster, its power of destruc-
                        tion is greater.
                 19.3–3 If you increase K10 to 0.06, nation B wins the war. You
                        have increased the proportion of B’s assets going into
                        defense enough to outcompete A.

                 19.4 Model of Sharing Information (Program
                 INFOBEN.bas, Figure 19.4)

                 19.4–1 With less energy the whole system is reduced. When
                        fossil fuels become scarce, medical information will be
                        reduced in both countries and the total power and shared
                        information will be correspondingly reduced.
                 19.4–2 Without the sharing of information, competition drives
                        out one unit, and total power and information are re-
                        duced.
                 19.4–3 With only one nation contributing information, the pro-
                        ductivity and assets of both nations are reduced, but
                        coexistence is still supported.


                              CHAPTER 20 MODELS OF THE
                                GLOBAL GEOBIOSPHERE

                 20.1 Model of World Carbon Dioxide (Program
                 WORLDCO2.bas, Figure 20.1)

                 20.1–1 When you double the rate of forest production, CO2 goes
                        down, forest organic matter increases, the bicarbonates
430                                Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems


             increase, and the limestone increases slightly. The refor-
             estation uses the CO2 in its photosynthesis.
      20.1–2 When continuous forest cutting is increased, CO2 in the
             air and in the water bicarbonates increases. The forest
             biomass does not change much since the cut area
             grows back.
      20.1–3 Change statement 505 to FC ⫽ 2*(FCS ⫺ .00035*YR).
             At first the CO2 goes higher from the burning of fossil
             fuel; later, as fossil fuels decrease, the CO2 decreases.
             The CO2 from the fuel burning goes into the bicarbonates
             and not much into the plants, because CO2 is not the
             limiting factor for the plant growth in this model.


      20.2 Model of World Population (Program PEOPLE.bas,
      Figure 20.2)

      20.2–1 Assets and population grow up slowly to level off at the
             same place as the original, but there is no spurt of growth
             because there is no fossil fuel to stimulate the production
             of assets or population.
      20.2–2 If you increase K9, the medical care, to .01, the popula-
             tion increases a lot and the assets increase a little during
             the time of fossil fuel use. Later the population levels
             off a fraction higher and the assets a fraction lower than
             in the original graph: Any medical care uses assets.
      20.2–3 With the lower birthrate the population goes to almost
             nothing. The population is so low the fossil fuels are not
             completely used.
      20.2–4 If you increase the death rate 10 times, the population
             and assets do not get as high as in the original graph;
             they level off at about the same place. If you then cut
             medical care to 0, the population and assets grow very
             little before the population decreases to a level about
             20% lower than in the original graph. Much of the fossil
             fuel was not used.


      20.3 Overview Model of Geological Processes in Earth
      Evolution (Program EARTHGEO.bas, Figure 20.3)

      20.3–1 Increasing the solar energy increases the energy in the
             hydrologic cycle, ultimately generating more continen-
             tal mass.
Appendix C Answers to ‘‘What If ’’ Experimental Problems                                 431


                 20.3–2 Reducing water inflow reduces the size of the ocean and
                        the land mass.
                 20.3–3 Reducing earth energy reduces the continental mass
                        that develops.

                 20.4 Model of a State Driven by a World Minimodel
                 (Program STATECON.bas, Figure 20.4)

                 20.4–1 Pattern is similar but the assets are fewer and less water
                        is used.
                 20.4–2 More sunlight produces more world assets, using up
                        fuels faster. The state’s assets grow faster and to a slightly
                        higher level, using up the water more quickly.
                 20.4–3 At T ⫽ 400, both world and state assets have a short
                        pulse of growth but decline later as this new fuel is
                        used up.


                          CHAPTER 21 MODELING PROJECTS
                                AND COMPLEXITY

                 21.1 Model of Main Components in a Shallow Marine
                 Lagoon (Program LAGOON.bas, Figure 21.1)

                 21.1–1 With more nutrient inflow, production, detritus, stock
                        of shrimp, and frequency of oscillations increase. Small
                        consumers are reduced.
                 21.1–2 Without mangroves, there is less filtration of inflowing
                        nutrients. There are more oscillations, detritus, and con-
                        sumers.
                 21.1–3 Without the larger consumers, the systems loses its oscil-
                        lation. Small consumers become more abundant and lev-
                        els of detritus are reduced.
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
                  Appendix D
                                 䉬

    USE OF ENERGY
  SYSTEMS SYMBOLS*



   System Frame A rectangular box is drawn to represent the
boundaries that are selected. Boundaries selected must include
three dimensions. For example, the analysis of a city would prob-
ably include its political boundaries, a plane below the ground
surface (example: 10 m), and a plane above the city (example:
100 m).




   Source Any input that crosses the boundary is a source,
including pure energy flows, materials, information, genes,
services, and inputs that are destructive. All of these inputs
are given a circular symbol. Sources are arranged around the
outside border from left to right in order of their solar
transformity, starting with sunlight on the left and information
and human services on the right. No source inflows are drawn
in to the bottom.
  *Modified from Odum, 1996, with permission of John Wiley, New York.



                                433
434                                           Appendix D Use of Energy Systems Symbols




         Pathway Lines Any flow is represented by a line, including
      pure energy, materials, and information. Money is shown with
      dashed lines. Where material flows of one kind are to be empha-
      sized, dotted lines are suggested (or color). Barbs (arrowheads)
      on the pathways mean that the flow is driven from behind the
      flow (donor driven) without appreciable backforce from the next
      entity. Lines without barbs flow in proportion to the difference
      between two forces; they may flow in either direction.




         Heat Sink The heat sink symbol represents the dispersal of
      available energy (potential energy) into a degraded, used state,
      not capable of further work. Representing the second energy
      law, heat sink pathways are required from every transformation
      symbol and every tank. At the start, one heat sink may be placed
      at the center bottom of the system frame. Then two lines at about
      45 degrees to the bottom frame border are drawn to collect heat
      sink pathways. Using finer lines or yellow lines for heat sinks
      keeps these from dominating the diagram. No material, available
      energy, or usable information ever goes through heat sinks, only
      degraded energy.
Appendix D Use of Energy Systems Symbols                                             435


                   Outflows Any outflow that still has available potential, ma-
                terials more concentrated than the environment, or usable infor-
                mation is shown as a pathway from either of the three upper
                system borders, but not out the bottom.




                   Storage Tank Any quantity stored within the system is given
                a tank symbol, including materials, pure energy (energy without
                accompanying material), money, assets, information, image, and
                quantities that are harmful to others. Every flow in or out of a
                tank must be the same type of flow and measured in the same
                units. Sometimes a tank is shown overlapped by a symbol of
                which it is part.




                   Adding Pathways Pathways add their flows when they join
                or when they go into the same tank. No pathways should join
                or enter a common tank if they are of different type or transform-
                ity or measured in different units. A pathway that branches repre-
                sents a split of flow into two of the same type (Figure 2.2).
436                                             Appendix D Use of Energy Systems Symbols


         Interaction Two or more flows that are different and both
      required for a process are connected to an interaction symbol.
      The flows to an interaction are drawn to the symbol from left
      to right in order of their transformity, the lowest quality one
      connecting to the notched left margin. The output of an interac-
      tion is an output of a production process, a flow of product.
      These should usually go to the right, since production is a quality-
      increasing transformation.




         Constant Gain Amplifier A special interaction symbol is
      used if the output is controlled by one input (entering symbol
      from left), but most of the energy is drawn from the other (enter-
      ing from the top).




         Producers Producer symbols are used for units on the left
      side of the systems diagram that receive commodities and other
      inputs of different types interacting to generate products. The
      producer symbol implies that there are interactions and storages
      within. Sometimes it may be desirable to diagram the details of
Appendix D Use of Energy Systems Symbols                                               437


                interactions and processes inside Figure 2.9. Producers include
                biological producers such as plants and industrial production.




                   Miscellaneous Box The rectangular box is used for any
                subsystem structure and/or function. Often these are appropriate
                for representing economic sectors such as mining, power plants,
                and commerce. The box can include interactions and storages
                with products emerging to the right. Details of what goes on
                within the consumer is not specified unless more details are de-
                scribed or diagrammed inside.




                   Small Box A very small box on a pathway or on the side
                of a storage tank is used to initiate another circuit that is driven
                by ‘‘force’’ in proportion to the pathway or storage. This is
                sometimes called a sensor when it delivers its action without
                draining much energy from the original pathway or tank.
438                                               Appendix D Use of Energy Systems Symbols




         Consumers Consumer symbols are used for units on the
      right side of the systems diagram that receive products and feed-
      back services and materials. Consumers may be animal popula-
      tions or sectors of society, such as the urban consumers. A con-
      sumer symbol usually implies autocatalytic interactions and
      storages within (Figure 2.10). However, the consumer symbol is
      a class symbol (refers to many similar but different units), and
      details of what goes on within the consumer are not specified
      exactly unless more details are diagrammed inside.




         Counterclockwise Feedbacks High quality outputs from
      consumers, such as information, controls, and scarce materials,
      are fed back from right to left in the diagram. Feedbacks from
      right to left represent a diverging loss of concentration, the service
      usually being spread out to a larger area. These flows should be
      drawn with a counterclockwise pathway (up, around, and above
      the originating symbol—not under the symbol). These drawing
      procedures are not only conventions that prevent excess line
      crossing and make one person’s diagrams the same as another’s,
      but they allow the diagrams to be used as a way of representing
      energy hierarchies.
Appendix D Use of Energy Systems Symbols                                            439




                   Switch The concave sided box represents switching pro-
                cesses, those that turn on and off. The flows that are controlled
                enter and leave from the sides. The pathways that control the
                switches are drawn to the top. This includes thresholds and other
                information. Switching occurs in natural processes as well as
                with human controls. Examples are earthquakes, reproductive
                actions, and water overflows of a river bank.




                   Exchange Transaction Where quantities in one flow are ex-
                changed for those of another, the transaction symbol is used.
                Most often the exchange is a flow of commodities, goods, or
                services exchanged for money (drawn with dashed lines). Often
                the price that relates one flow to the other is an outside source
                of action representing world markets; it is shown with a pathway
                to the top of the symbol.
440                                             Appendix D Use of Energy Systems Symbols


         Material Balances Because all inflowing materials either ac-
      cumulate in system storages or flow out, each inflowing material,
      such as water or money, needs to have outflows drawn.




         Loop Limited Conversion This short symbol represents a
      cycle of material that interacts with, captures, and transforms
      an input flow. The internal cycle becomes a limiting factor as
      the amount of input increases (Explanation in Chapter 12). For
      example, light energy is captured by the green chloroplasts in
      plant cells transferring the energy to a biochemical web beyond
      the symbol. The chlorophyll cycles in a closed loop in the process.
      Increasing the light intensity has a diminishing effect because of
      the lag in materials circulating within the unit.
                                  Appendix E
                                                䉬

                    CONTENTS OF THE
                    CD SUPPLIED WITH
                       THIS BOOK



TABLE E.1
Contents of the CD Supplied with This Book

Folders     Description                                       PC files             Macintosh files

Extend Folder
    EXTEND4—Program, Imagine That, Inc.                       EXTEND4.exe          EXTEND4

    Mathsim—Folder using generic blocks from Imagine That, Inc., Chapter 6:
          Generic library of blocks                          GENERIC.lix           GENERIC LIB
          TANK simulation, math blocks                       MATHTANK.mox          MATHTANK

    IntrModl—Folder for introductory files and pictorial icon blocks, Chapter 4:
          Icon blocks for Chapter 4                              PICTLIB.lix       PICTLIB
          Storage model, gen. symbols*                           TANK.mox          TANK
          Pictorial exponential model                            PEXPO.mox         PEXPO
          Storage model in pictures                              PONDWATR.mox      PONDWATR
          View of EDM icons                                      BIOICON.mox       BIOICON

    EarthSys—Folder for model of earth system, Chapter 4:
           Instruction manual in WORD                         ESMANUAL.doc         ESMANUAL
           Library of picture blocks                          ESLIB.lix            ESLIB
           View of pictorial icons                            ESICONS.mox          ESICONS
           View of GENSYS blocks used*                        ESGSYMB.mox          ESGSYMB
           EARTHSYS model in pictures                         EARTHPIC.mox         EARTHPIC
           EARTHSYS in gen. symbols*                          EARTHGS.mox          EARTHGS
                                                                                         (continues)



                                               441
442                                                                     Appendix E Contents of the CD


TABLE E.1 (Continued)

Folders      Description                                     PC files                 Macintosh files

      Biosphr2—Folder for model of Biosphere 2, Chapter 4:
             Instruction manual, WORD                        SBMANUAL.doc             SBMANUAL
             Library of Biosphr2 blocks*                     SB2LIB.lix               SB2LIB
             View of pictorial icons                         SB2PICONS.mox            SB2PICONS
             View of gen. system blocks used*                SB2GSYMB.mox             SB2GSYMB
             SimBio2 model in pictures                       SIMBIO2P.mox             SIMBIO2P
             SimBio2 model in gen. symbols*                  SIMBIO2G.mox             SIMBIO2G

      EDM—Folder for BioQUEST ‘‘Environmental Decision Making,’’ Chapter 4:
          Instruction manual in WORD                       EDMANUAL            EDMANUAL
          View of pictorial icons                          See BIOICON in IntrModl folder
          Library of EDM blocks*                           BIOQULIB.lix        BIOQULIB
          Fishing model in pictures                        FISHPIC.mox         FISHPIC
          Fishing in gen. symbols*                         FISHGSYM.mox        FISHGSYM
          Grass-fire model in pictures                     GRASSPIC.mox        GRASSPIC
          Grass-fire, gen. symbols*                        GRASSGS.mox         GRASSGS
          Logging model in pictures                        LOGGINGP.mox        LOGGINGP
          Logging in gen. symbols*                         LOGGINGG.mox        LOGGINGG
          Fishsale model in pictures                       FISHSALE.mox        FISHSALE

      Gensymb—Folder for general systems models (GENSYS), Chapter 5:
            Library of GENSYS blocks*                       GNSYSLIB.lix              GNSYSLIB
            Model of exponential growth*                    EXPO.mox                  EXPO
            Model of prod., cons., recycle*                 PC&CYCLE.mox              PC&CYCLE
            Model of Earth, gen. symb.*                     EARTHGS.mox               EARTHGS
            View of GENSYS blocks*                          GENSYMB.mox               GENSYMB

Spreadtab—Folder for spreadsheet programs, Chapters 7 and 8:
          Spreadsheet calibrating FISH                       FISHNUMB.wk1             FISHNUMB
          Spreadsheet simulating FISH                        FISH.wk1                 FISH

Basic—Folder with models and programs to simulate in BASIC
    Chipmunk Basic 3.4.6—MacIntosh Freeware Program
          Program, Ronald H. Nicholson, Jr.                  —                        Chipmunk
                                                                                      Basic
             Notice about updates                            —                        Readme
             Tutorial from T. S. Ferrel                      —                        Tutorial
             Manual-text file                                —                        basic.man
             Quick reference, Graphics                       —                        quick-ref

      Basicprg—Model simulation programs Chapters 1, 9, 11, Part III, and Chapter 21:
             Autocatalytic growth—two sources                  2SOURCE.bas            2SOURCE
             Material limited autocat. growth                  AUTOCYCL.bas           AUTOCYCL
             Processes in a bank                               BANK.bas               BANK
                                                                                            (continues)
Appendix E Contents of the CD                                              443


TABLE E.1 (Continued)

Folders    Description                          PC files       Macintosh files

           Production and prices in growth      BUYPOWER.bas   BUYPOWER
           Simple storage of money              CASH.bas       CASH
           Chaos of oscillators on two scales   CHAOS.bas      CHAOS
           Model of succession                  CLIMAX.bas     CLIMAX
           Two cooperating units                CO-OP.bas      CO-OP
           Diurnal metabolism                   DAYP&C.bas     DAYP&C
           Destruction-assisted recycle         DESTRUCT.bas   DESTRUCT
           Exponential outflow of storage       DRAIN.bas      DRAIN
           Minimodel of earth evolution         EARTHGEO.bas   EARTHGEO
           Money circulation in economy         ECONP&C.bas    ECONP&C
           Resource use interface               ECONUSE.bas    ECONUSE
           Emergy in internatl. exchange        EMEXCHNG.bas   EMEXCHNG
           Emergy in a storage with yield       EMFISH.bas     EMFISH
           Storage emergy without outflow       EMGTANK.bas    EMGTANK
           Cooperation through trade            ENTRADE.bas    ENTRADE
           Competition for limited source       EXCLUS.bas     EXCLUS
           Exponential growth                   EXPO.bas       EXPO
           External limiting factors            FACTORS.bas    FACTORS
           Switching control of consumption     FIRE.bas       FIRE
           Global influence by free market      FREEMARK.bas   FREEMARK
           Emergy in market influence           INFOBEN.bas    INFOBEN
           Interactive competition              INTERACT.bas   INTERACT
           Internal limiting factors            INTLIMIT.bas   INTLIMIT
           Model of tropical lagoon             LAGOON.bas     LAGOON
           Crowding limited logistic growth     LOGISTIC.bas   LOGISTIC
           Classical macroeconomics model       MACROEC.bas    MACROEC
           Exponential economy                  MONEYGRO.bas   MONEYGRO
           Net production, seasonal changes     NETPROD.bas    NETPROD
           Growth on a stored resource          NONRENEW.bas   NONRENEW
           Species diversity and resource       NUTRSPEC.bas   NUTRSPEC
           Metabolism in open aquarium          OPENAQ.bas     OPENAQ
           Three-level prey–predator model      OSCILLAT.bas   OSCILLAT
           Production, consump., and recycle    PC&CYCLE.bas   PC&CYCLE
           Global population model              PEOPLE.bas     PEOPLE
           Classical prey–predator model        PREYPRED.bas   PREYPRED
           Pulsing use of accumulations         PULSE.bas      PULSE
           Emergy in autocatalytic growth       RENEMGY.bas    RENEMGY
           Source-limited growth                RENEW.bas      RENEW
           Optimum diversity reserves           RESERVE.bas    RESERVE
           Economy and land rotation            ROTATION.bas   ROTATION
           Production and sales                 SALES.bas      SALES
           Slowly renewable growth source       SLOWREN.bas    SLOWREN
           Model of species with area           SPECAREA.bas   SPECAREA
           Species development on islands       SPECIES.bas    SPECIES
           Global-driven state economy          STATECON.bas   TATECON
                                                                     (continues)
444                                                                                 Appendix E Contents of the CD


TABLE E.1 (Continued)

Folders      Description                                                 PC files                  Macintosh files

             Simple storage model                                        TANK.bas                  TANK
             Storage with scaling                                        TANK2.bas                 TANK2
             Sales from a resource reserve                               TANKSALE.bas              TANKSALE
             Two units with unlimited energy                             TWOPOP.bas                TWOPOP
             Essence of war                                              WAR.bas                   WAR
             Wetland processes                                           WETLAND.bas               WETLAND
             Global carbon dioxide                                       WORLDCO2.bas              WORLDCO2
   * Programs and libraries with general systems symbols are marked with an asterisk.
   Also included in the disk are the book’s BASIC programs for Macintosh converted to run on Chipmunk Basic. The
converted files have the prefix ‘‘Chip’’ added in front of the model name. For example, the program TANK for Chipmunk
BASIC is labeled Chiptank. Load Chipmunk Basic and use its menu to open and run these programs.
  REFERENCES AND
SUGGESTED READING




Alexander, J. F. 1987. Energy basis of disasters and cycles of order and
   disorder. Ph.D. dissertation, Environmental Engineering Sciences,
   University of Florida, Gainesville.
Bala, B. K. 1998. ‘‘Energy and Environment, Modeling and Simulation.’’
   Nova Science Publishing, Commack, NY.
Banks, J., Carson II, J. S., and Nelson, B. 1996. ‘‘Discrete Event System
   Simulation.’’ Prentice Hall, NJ.
Barnsley, M. F., and Hurd, L. P. 1993. ‘‘Fractal image compression.’’
   A. K. Peters, Wellesley, MA.
Beltrami, E. J. 1997. ‘‘Mathematics for Dynamic Modeling,’’ 2nd Ed.
   Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
Bennett, D. J. 1998. ‘‘Randomness.’’ Harvard University Press, Cam-
   bridge, MA.
Bossel, H. 1994. Modeling and Simulation. A. K. Peters, Natick, MA.
Bunn, D., and Larsen, E. R. 1997. ‘‘Systems Modeling for Energy Pol-
   icy.’’ John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Campbell, D. E., and Newell, C. R. 1998. ‘‘MUSMOD, a production
   model for bottom culture of the blue mussel, Mytilus edulis L.
   J. Exper. Marine Biol. Ecol. 219, 171–203.
Cartwright, J. J. 1993. ‘‘Modeling the World in a Spread Sheet: Environ-
   mental Simulation on a Microcomputer.’’ Johns Hopins Univ. Press,
   Baltimore, MD.
Casti, K. 1998. ‘‘Would-be Worlds: How Simulation Is Changing the
   Frontiers of Science.’’ John Wiley & Sons, New York.
DeAngelis, D. L. 1992. ‘‘Dynamics of Nutrient Cycling and Food Webs.’’
   Chapman and Hall, New York.
De Wit, C. T., and Goudriaan, J. 1978. ‘‘Simulation of Ecological Pro-
   cesses.’’ John Wiley & Sons, New York.


                                  445
446                                                              References and Suggested Reading


      Evans, J. R., and Olson, D. L. 1998. ‘‘Introduction to Simulation and
         Risk Analysis.’’ Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
      Forrester, J. W. 1961. ‘‘Industrial Dynamics.’’ The MIT Press, Cam-
         bridge, MA.
      Gilman, N., and Hails, R. 1997. ‘‘An Introduction to Ecological Model-
         ing, Putting Practice into Theory.’’ Blackwell Science, London, UK.
      Grant, W. E. 1986. ‘‘Systems Analysis and Simulation in Wildlife and
         Fisheries Sciences.’’ John Wiley & Sons, New York.
      Grant, W. E., Pedersen, E. K., and Main, S. L. 1997. ‘‘Ecology and
         Natural Resource Management, Systems Analysis, and Simulation.’’
         John Wiley & Sons, New York.
      Hall, C. A. S., and Day, J., ed. 1977. ‘‘Ecosystem Modeling in Theory &
         Practice, An Introduction with Case Histories.’’ J. Wiley, NY.
      Hall, C. A. S., Taylor, M. R., and Everham, E. 1992. A geographically-
         based ecosystem model and its application to the carbon balance
         of the Luquillo Forest, Puerto Rico. Water Air Soil Pollut. 64, 385–
         404.
      Hannon, B., and Ruth, M. 1994. ‘‘Dynamic Modeling.’’ Springer-
         Verlag, New York.
      Haefner, J. W. 1996. ‘‘Modeling Biological Systems: Principles and
         Applications.’’ Chapman and Hallm, NY.
      Hurst, C. J., ed. 1996. ‘‘Modeling Disease Transmission and Its Preven-
         tion by Disinfection.’’ Cambridge Univ. Press, London.
      Jacobsen, M. Z. 1998. ‘‘Fundamentals of Atmospheric Modeling.’’ Cam-
         bridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.
      Jorgensen, S. E. 1986. ‘‘Fundamentals of ecological modeling.’’ Develop-
         ments in Environmental Modeling, Vol. 9. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
      Jorgensen, W. E., Halling-Sorensen, B., and Nielsen, S. N., ed. 1995.
         ‘‘Handbook of Environmental and Ecological Modeling.’’ Lewis
         Publ, Boca Raton, FL.
      Keen, R. E., and Spain, J. D. 1992. ‘‘Computer Simulation in Biology,
         a Basic Introduction.’’ John Wiley & Sons, New York.
      Kheir, N. A., ed. 1995. ‘‘Systems Modeling and Computer Simulation.’’
         M. Dekker, NY.
      Kemeny, J. S., and Kurtz, T. W. 1971. ‘‘Basic Programming.’’ 2d ed.
         John Wiley and Sons, New York.
      Kirkby, M. J., Naden, P. S., Burt, T. P., and Butcher, D. P. 1993.
         ‘‘Computer Simulation in Physical Geography.’’ John Wiley & Sons,
         New York.
      Klir, G. J., and Folger, T. A. 1988. ‘‘Fuzzy Sets, Uncertainty, and Infor-
         mation.’’ Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
      Koch, A. L., J. A. Robinson, and G. A. Milliken, ed. 1997. Mathematical
         Modeling in Microbial Ecology. Kluwer, Academic, Boston, MA.
      Kulkarni, V. G. 1995. ‘‘Modeling and Analysis of Stochastic Systems.’’
         Chapman and Hall, NY.
      Law, A. M., and Kelton, W. D. 1990. ‘‘Simulation Modeling and Analy-
         sis.’’ McGraw Hill, NY.
      Lendrum, D. 1986. ‘‘Modelling in Behavioral Ecology.’’ Timber Press,
         Portland, OR.
References and Suggested Reading                                                             447


                  Logan, M. O. 1998. A simulation model of health care in the United
                     States (STELLA). Ph.D. dissertation, College Mursing and Health
                     Science, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia.
                  Logofet, D. O. 1993. ‘‘Matrices and Graphs.’’ CRC Press, Boca Ra-
                     ton, FL.
                  Mandelbrot, B. B. 1983. ‘‘The Fractal Geometry of Nature.’’ W. H.
                     Freeman, San Franciso, CA.
                  Mangel, M., and Clark, C. W. 1988. ‘‘Dynamic Modeling in Behavioral
                     Ecology.’’ Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
                  Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., and Randers, J. 1992. ‘‘Beyond the
                     Limits.’’ Chelsea Green Publishing Co., Post Mills, VT.
                  Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J., and Behrens, W. W.
                     1972. ‘‘Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s Project on
                     the Predicament of Mankind.’’ A Potomac Associates Book. Universe
                     Books, New York.
                  Meinhardt, H. 1982. ‘‘Models of Biological Pattern Formation.’’ Aca-
                     demic Press, NY.
                  Nelson, B. L. 1995. ‘‘Stochastic Modeling: Analysis and Simulation.’’
                     McGraw Hill, NY.
                  Odum, H. T. 1971. ‘‘Environment Power and Society.’’ J. Wiley and
                     Sons, New York.
                  Odum, H. T. 1996. ‘‘Environmental Accounting, Emergy, and Decision
                     Making.’’ John Wiley & Sons, NY.
                  Odum, H. T. 1983, 1993. ‘‘Systems Ecology’’ (reprinted as ‘‘Ecological
                     and General Systems’’). University Press of Colorado, Niwot, CO.
                  Odum, H. T. and Munroe, M. 1993. Simulation of the Laguna Joyuda
                     ecosystem in Western Puerto Rico. Acta Cientifica 7(1–3), 189–227.
                  Odum, H. T. and Peterson, N. 1996. Simulation and evaluation with
                     energy systems blocks. Ecol. Model. 93, 155–173.
                  Oster, G. F. and Auslander, D. 1971. Topological representation of
                     thermodynamic systems. I. Basic concepts. J. Franklin Inst. 292,
                     1–16.
                  Richardson, G. P., and Pugh III, A. L. 1981. ‘‘Introduction to Systems
                     Dynamics Modeling with DYNAMO.’’ MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                  Richardson, J. 1987. Spatial patterns from pulsing simulation. Ph.D.
                     dissertation. Environmental Engineering Sciences, University of Flor-
                     ida, Gainesville.
                  Ripley, B. D. 1987. ‘‘Stochastic Simulation.’’ John Wiley & Sons,
                     New York.
                  Robertson, D., Muetzelfeldt, P., and Bundy, A. 1991. ‘‘Ecologic: Logic-
                     Based Approaches to Ecological Modeling. Logic Programming.’’
                     The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
                  Ross, S. M. 1992. ‘‘Applied Probability Models with Optimization Ap-
                     plications.’’ Dover, New York.
                  Roughgarden, J. 1998. ‘‘Primer of Ecological Theory.’’ Prentice Hall,
                     Upper Saddle River, NJ.
                  Ruth, M. and Hannon, B. M. 1997. ‘‘Modelling Dynamic Economic
                     Systems.’’ Springer-Verlag, New York.
                  Schroeder, M. 1991. ‘‘Fractals, Chaos, Power Laws.’’ W. H. Freeman,
                     New York.
448                                                              References and Suggested Reading


      Sheldon, R. M. 1996. ‘‘Simulation: Statistical Modeling and Decision
         Science.’’ Academic Press, San Diego.
      Smith, R. F. 1970. The vegetation structure of a Puerto Rican rain forest
         before and after short-term gamma irradiation. In ‘‘A Tropical Rain
         Forest’’ (H. T. Odum and R. F. Pigeon, eds.) Div. Technical Informa-
         tion, Atomic Energy Commission, Oak Ridge, TN. TID-24270
         (PRNC-138), Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical In-
         formation, National Bureau of Standards, U.S. Dept. of Commerce,
         Springfield, VA 22151.
      Swartzman, G. L. and Kaluzny, S. P. 1987. ‘‘Ecological Simulation
         Primer.’’ Macmillan, NY.
      Taylor, H. M., and Karlin, S. 1984. ‘‘An Introduction to Stochastic
         Modeling.’’ Academic Press, San Diego.
      Vose, D. 1996. ‘‘Quantitative Risk Analysis, a Guide to Monte Carlo
         Simulation Modeling.’’ John Wiley & Sons, New York.
      Weber, T. C. 1994. Spatial and temporal simulation of forest succession
         with implications for management of bioreserves. M.S. thesis. Envi-
         ronmental Engineering Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville.
      Yount, J. L. 1956. Factors that control species numbers in Silver Springs,
         Florida. Limnol. Oceanogr. 1, 286–295.
                                        Index
                                              䉬




              A                 Assets, in economic models,       commands, 115
2SOURCE model, 204                   281, 285, 293, 298, 302,     program for TANK, 114
Acclerating growth model, 69         337                          simulation, 110
Adding flows, 23, 41            Attractor, 245                    table of useful mechanisms,
Agriculture                     Autocatalytic                          131
  slash and burn pulsing, 239     AUTOCYCL model, 187           Beltrami, E.J., 374
  land rotation, 286, 300         reinforcing design, 38        Bennett, D.J., 370
Aggregation                       RENEMGY model, 160            Biodiversity
  model simplification, 17        RENEW model, 194                RESERVE model, 286
Alexander, J., 242                SLOWREN model, 198              SPECIES model, 265
Amplifier                         TWOPOP model, 215             Biogeochemical
  constant gain symbol and      AUTOCYCLE model, 187              cycle diagrams, 40
        use, 6, 29              Available energy                Biomass production and
Analysis                          definition, 20                     storage
  versus synthesis, 11                                            CLIMAX model, 254
Analog functions, 36                                              FIRE model, 235
Aquarium                                      B                   ROTATION model, 302
  model OPNEAQ, 184             Backforce                         WETLAND model, 251
APPLE II, 379                     inertial, 27                  BioQUEST models
ARCINFO, 367                      on pathways, 22                 introduction, 61
Arctic animal oscillations,       time lag, 94                    figure with icons, 62
     247                        BANKS model, 276                Biosphere, 2
Arrays                          Barnsley, M.F., 370               EXTEND minimodels
  sharing information in        Barter                                 SIMBIO2 and
        EXTEND, 386               on diagrams, 26                      SIMBIO2P
  entering data in BASIC, 408   BASICA, 114, 400                BOD (biochemical oxygen
Artificial chaos, 119           BASIC programming, 399               demand), 127
ASCII text format, 399            chipmunk basic, 132           Bottom up modeling, 15


                                             449
450                                                                                         Index


Boundary                         Chi Squared distribution, 373       limits, 354
  frame of system model, 11        for testing simulation-data       of models, 15, 352
Box symbol                              fit, 362                     uniqueness, 357
  use, 21, 35, 438               Chipmunk basic, 132,              Computer uses, 399
  small sensor, 36, 438            converting QUICKBASIC           Conservation
BQFISH model, 62                        programs, 403                of energy, 8, 45
BQGRASS model, 62                  instructions for simulating,      of matter, 16, 44, 441
BQLOG model, 62                         405                          of recycling land area, 303
Budget                             programs on the book disk,        of recycling money, 281
  materials and energy, 44              445                        Constants of equations
Bunn, D., 383                      simulating the model              explanation, 79
Building New Models, 75                 TANK, 9                      calibrating, 99
Buypower model, 291              Chlorophyll, 33                   Constant gain amplifier
                                 Circulation                         symbol and use, 6, 29, 437
                                   materials, 23                   Consumer
                                   money, 24, 281                    symbol and use, 21, 34, 439
              C                  City                              Consumption
C⫹⫹, 383                                                             and recycle, 70
                                   pictorial minimodel
Calculations                                                       Control
                                        PEXPO, 57
  coefficients, 98                                                   feedback to interaction,
                                   logistic example, 209
  hand simulation, 112                                                    28, 38
                                   balance with rural,
Calibration                                                          switching processes, 36
                                        ECONP&C model, 281
  EARTHGEO MODEL, 334                                              Cooperation
                                 Civilization and land rotation,
  FISH model, 101                                                    CO-OP model, 223
                                      304
  numbers on diagrams, 45                                            INFOBEN model, 318
                                 Clark, C.W., 374
  PC&CYCLE model, 102                                                quadratic feedback effect,
  procedure, 96                  CLIMAX model, 253
                                 Coefficient                              125
  STELLA models, 138                                               Cosmos
  table, 99                        calculation procedure, 98
                                   matrix, 377                       and scale, 14
  with spreadsheets, 99                                            Countercurrent of money, 25,
  with steady state values, 96   Colors
                                   use in diagrams, 16                  281, 284
Campbell, D., 360                                                  Course projects, 344
Capital                            for numbers on diagrams, 97
                                   designation in chipmunk         CSMP, 383
  assets MACROEC model,                                            Cumulative error, 381
        297                             basic, 405
Carbon dioxide                     designation in PC QBASIC,
  EARTHGS, 76                           115, 406
  EARTHPIC model, 58             Comparison of systems                          D
  WORLDCO2 model, 325                 languages, 149               DAYP&C model, 181
CASH minimodel, 117              Competition                       De Wit, C.T., 134
Casti, K., 383                     competitive exclusion, 220      Debugging, 345
CD-rom, computer files in this     EXCLUS model, 212               Decomposition, 127
     book’s CD, 439                INTERACT model, 219             Defense, in WAR model, 316
Cecropia, 368                      WAR model, 316                  Depreciation, 27
Cell of spreadsheet, 104         Compiling, 376                      in MACROEC model, 300
Change equation for BASIC, 79    Complexity                        DESTRUCT model, 240
Chaos                              aggregating, 17                 Destruction
  artificial, 119                  cross application of models,      outside impact, 240
  CHAOS model, 244                      358                          mutual in WAR model, 316
  mathematical, 228                diagramming, 357                Detritus, 348, 356, 361
Index                                                                                        451


Diagramming                                    E                     notation, 154
  details within group           EARTHGEO model, 332                 of transformation equations,
       symbols, 21               EARTHGS model, 75                         diagrams, 154
  energy systems, 13             EARTHPIC model, 57                  of trade in EMEXCHNG
  enlarged configurations for    Earth system model for                    model, 313
       calibration, 356               EXTEND                         per unit mass, 153
  inflows and outflows, 20         diagram with numbers, 76          plotter for EXTEND, 68
  numbers on pathways, 40          general symbol model              simulating with BASIC, 151
  system from word models,               EARTHGS, 75                 simulating with EXTEND,
       15–16                       pictorial model                         164
Dialog boxes                             EARTHPIC, 57              EMEXCHNG model, 308
  calibrating EXTEND, 52, 70     Earthsys folder, 75               EMFISH model, 155
  designing dialog pages in      Economic models                   EMGTANK model, 158
       EXTEND, 389                 exponential decline, 127        Empower
Difference equations, 79           emergy valuation, 153             plotter for EXTEND, 68
Differential equations, 78         environmental interface, 283      in trade model ENTRADE,
Diffusion, 27                      first economic law, 117                 306
Digital functions                  interest, 278                   Energy
  box symbol, 36                   input–output, 379                 budget values on
  logic operations, 381            macroeconomic models, 291               diagrams, 44
Diminishing returns                microeconomic models, 271       Energy hierarchy
  external limits, 176             money circulation and             and scale, 11
  internal limits, 32                    storage, 24, 117            on systems diagram, 13
Directions modeling, 16, 345       money supply, 292                 and transformity, 151
  also see instructions            net production, 173             Energy laws
Discrete processes and models,     oscillation, 236                  conservation (1st law), 8
     380, 382                      state driven by global            dispersal (2nd law), 8
                                                                     hierarchy (5th law?), 11
Dispersal, 27                            minimodel, 335
                                                                     maximum power principle
  DRAIN model, 125               Economic production
                                                                           (4th law?), 37
Diurnal production &               ECONP&C model, 281
                                                                   Energy quality
     consumption, 181              optimum biodiversity
                                                                     and transformity, 13
Diversity                                reserves, 288
                                                                   Energy systems language
  CLIMAX model, 254              ECONP&C model, 281
                                                                     degraded energy flow, 20
  NUTRSPEC model, 259            ECONUSE model, 283
                                                                     diagramming, 5–6
  RESERVE model, 288             EDM (environmental decision         diagrams from equations, 89
  SPECAREA model, 262                 making) models, 62             equations from diagrams, 84
  SPECIES model, 265             Eigenvalues and eigenvectors,       left-right transformity, 13
Divisor                               378                            symbol blocks for
  interaction, 29                Electrical                                EXTEND, 66
  division by zero, 121            forces and flows, 22              symbols, 6, 433
Domar–Harrod growth model,         analog computers, 382             use of colors, 16
     292                         Emdollars ⫽ (emergy)/(emergy/     Energy transformation
DRAIN minimodel                       $ ratio), 152, 160             between storages, 47
  equations, simulation, 90      Emergy                              chain, 13
  diagram and program, 126         definitions and concepts, 152   ENTRADE model, 306
DT, iteration interval, 119        equations, 157                  Environmental Decision
Dynamic equilibrium, 43            exchange, 164                        Making, EDM, 62
DYNAMO simulation                  exchange ratio, 311             Environmental resource
     program, 134, 383             money ratio, 153                     production, 283
452                                                                                          Index


Equations                         comparing two populations,        pushed by force, 22
  change equation for                  TWOPOP model, 215            pure energy, 23
        BASIC, 79                 money driven in                   between two storages, 45
  difference, 79                       MONEYGRO model,              plotter for EXTEND, 68
  differential, storage                292                        Flow limited source
        example, 78             Exponential Decrease                MACROEC model, 298
  emergy stored, 157              equations & model                 RENEW model, 194
  exponential decrease, model          DRAIN, 90                  Flow use junction (flow
        DRAIN, 91                 BASIC program DRAIN,                 remainder), 86, 332
  exponential growth, model            126                        Fluid dynamics, 375
        EXPO, 123               EXTEND                            Folger, T.A., 383
  for five types of               minimodels, 62                  FOR NEXT commands, 122
        pathways, 86              programming blocks, 385         Force
  from systems diagram, 84        sensitivity analysis, 376         constant from unlimited
  into systems diagrams, 88       simulating TANK model,                 source, 69, 229
  macroeconomic, 298                   8–9                          driving a source, 20
  simulating with generic         simulating with generic           generalized concept and
        EXTEND, 93                     library, 93                       flow, 22
  with many storages, 85          simulation with pictorial         sensor symbol, 35
Equilibrium, 43                        icons, 52                  FORTRAN, 383
Errors                          Extinction                        Forests
  division by zero, 121           in species model, 265             rainforest, 254
  evolution, 250, 332                                               RENEW model, 196
  rounding off, 114                                                 spruce and bud worms, 230
  cumulative, 381                                                   spatial model, tropical forest,
                                               F
Evans, J.R., 372, 383           Factoring and symbols, 92                369
EXCEL spreadsheet, 101          FACTORS model                     Formulas
Exchange transaction               BASIC simulation, 174            for pathways, 85
  diagramming, 26               Family of curves, 175, 207          in spreadsheet FISH, 107
  symbol and use, 6, 26, 30,    Feedback                          Forrester, Jay
        440                        autocatalytic, 28                DYNAMO, 134
EXCLUS model, 212                  quadratic, 125                   symbols, 135
Experimental problems              counterclockwise on            Fractals, 369
     (simulation)                       diagrams, 439             Frame defining a system, 4,
  answers to ‘‘what if’’        FIRE model, 234                        434
        problems, Appendix C,   FISH minimodel                    FREEMARK model, 308
        409                        diagram and numbers, 98        Friction, 47
  ‘‘what if’’ procedure, 55        spreadsheet calibration, 100   Frontiers and perspectives,
  ‘‘what if’’ examples: See        simulation with spreadsheet,        383
        Chapters 4, 5, and 9            105                       Fuel Resources
        through 21              FISHNUMB.wk1 calibration            2SOURCE model, 204
EXPO model simulation                spreadsheet, 101               BUYPOWER model, 294
  BASIC, 124                    FISH.wk1 simulation                 EARTHPIC, 60
  diagram and equations, 123         spreadsheet, 105               exponential growth models,
  EXTEND, 69                    Five pathway model, 84                   125
  STELLA, 142                   Flip-flop action, 37                MINIWORLD model, 337
Exponential Growth              Flow                                NONRENEW model, 201
  equations, 123                   direction according to           SLOWREN model, 199
  simulation, see EXPO                  concentration, 22           TANKSALE model, 275
Index                                                                                          453


Fundamental minimodels          Heat sink                            format for BASIC simulation,
  study instructions, 166         symbol and use, 6,8, 31                  121
  Examples Chapters, 12–20      Herbivores, 231                   Integral equation
FUTUREBASIC, 399                Hierarchy, 22                        exponential growth, 123
                                  of dynamic oscillations, 372       storage function, 94
                                Hurricane, 369                    INTERACT model, 221
              G                 Hurst, C.J.                       Interaction
Gamma distribution, 372                                              symbol and use, 6, 28, 436
Gaussian distribution, 370                                           units separating types of
                                               I                           flow, 45
General Systems                 Icons
  Blocks for EXTEND, 69                                           Interest
                                  EXTEND, 54, 66                     BANKS model, 276
  GENSYS library, 66              STELLA, 136
Geology                                                              FREEMARK model, 308
                                  Imagine That, Inc., 52          International relations and
  Earth system in EXTEND,       Income
       57, 75                                                           trade, 305
                                  MACROEC model, 298              INTLIMIT model
  EARTHGEO model, 332           Inertial storage, 27
  also see water and carbon                                          Loop limit converter, 32
                                INFOBEN model, 318                   BASIC simulation, 177
       dioxide                  Information
Ghost town, 202                                                   Intrinsic growth rate, 30, 220
                                  sharing, 318                    Introductory EXTEND models,
GIS, 367                          in species, 268
Global Geobiosphere models,                                             IntrModl folder, 54
                                Initial conditions                Investment in trade models,
     58, 75, 323                  starting values for
GNSYSLIB library for                                                    312
                                        EXTEND, 70                Iteration
     EXTEND                     Input–output simulation, 379
  icons and use, 66                                                  interval, 97
                                Instructions                         basic programs, 118
  figure with icons, 67           arranging EXTEND models,
Goudriaan, ?, 134                                                    format in BASIC programs
                                        55, 76
GOTO commands, 122                calibration numbers in dialog
Grant, W.E., 373, 378                   boxes, 70
Graphing output                   calibration explanation and                   K
  BASIC, 120                            procedure, 96             Kemeny, J.C., 406
  EXTEND, 67                      calibration with                Klir, G.J., 383
  STELLA, 140                           spreadsheet, 99           Kurz, T.E., 406
GRID, 367                         converting a word model,
Group symbols                           15–16
  use, 21, 33                     icon assembly for a                           L
Growth models, 193                      model, 60                 LAGOON model, 347
                                  make new blocks for             LAGOONII
                                        EXTEND, 386               Land rotation
              H                   modeling, 16                      RESERVE model, 286
Half-life of decay processes,     running EXTEND                    ROTATION model, 300
    127                                 models, 54                Languages
Hall, C.A.S., 369                 simulating emergy and             comparison, 149
Halobacteria, 243                       transformity, 154           modeling, 383
Hand calculation                  simulating with                 Larsen, E.R., 383
 coefficients, 98                       QUICKBASIC                Laws, energy, 8
 simulation of TANK model,              (QBASIC), 111             Lendren, D., 374
       112                        writing BASIC program for       Leontief coefficients, 380
Hannon, B., 150                         TANK, 114                 Leslie matrix, 378
454                                                                                          Index


Libraries of blocks for           Mangroves, 341                    Meadows, D.L., 373
     EXTEND, 52                   MAP, 367                          Methods: see modeling
  BIOQULIB, 62                    MAPLE, 375                        MFWORKS, 367
  ESLIB, 58                       Market price, 26                  Mice population example, 209
  generic, 93                      in economic models, 272,         Michaelis-Menten Module, 32
  GNSYSLIB, 66                          281, 291                    Microeconomics, 271
  PICTLIB, 54                     Martin, Jay F., 133               Minimodels, 34
  SB2LIB, 62                      Material conservation with         fundamental in Chapters
Limiting Factors                      recycle                             12–20
  external, 174                    AUTOCYCL model, 187               uses, 346
  internal, 32, 177                balance, 441                     Mining minimodels
Loans                              FIRE model, 234                   NONRENEW model, 201
  BANKS model, 276                 INTLIMIT model, 177               SLOWREN model, 199
Log example, NONREN                Loop limited converter, 32        TANKSALE model, 274
     model, 203                    PC&CYCLE model, 128              MINIWORLD model, 337
Log normal distribution, 372      MATHEMATICA, 375                  Modeling
Logarithmic                       Mathematics software, 375          analytic and synthetic, 11
  equation, 91, 123               Mathematical expressions           approaches, figure in the
  semi-log plot, 90                approach to modeling, 374              Preface
Logic networks, 381                corresponding to                  larger simulation programs,
Logistic equation                       networks, 91                      376
  alternate designs, 88            exponential decay, 90             real systems, 345
   time lag, 94                    exponential growth, 123           top down-bottom up, 15
  AUTOCYCL model, 187              factoring and symbols, 92         state change, 374
  LOGISTIC model, 206              for pathways, 85                  translating a word model
  equation of ecological texts,    graph (network sense), 374        useful mechanisms in BASIC,
       220                         Gaussian distribution, 371             131
LOGISTIC model, 206                inverse square and migration,    Models
Logofet, D.O., 379                      266                          cooperation and competition,
Loop limited Converter             logistic models, 88, 189               211
  symbol and use, 6, 32, 441       matrix equations, 377             explanation, 4
                                   outputs by integration, 90        macroeconomic, 291
                                   software, 375                     microeconomic, 271
              M                    spreadsheet formulas, 107         of global geobiosphere, 323
MacIntosh directions               square root of area and           preassembled minimodels for
 BASIC, 167                             species, 262                      EXTEND, 54
 CHIPMUNK BASIC, 167,              tree (network sense), 374         production and recycle, 169
      403                          too general to represent          series and oscillation, 227
 QUICKBASIC, 402                        systems, 88                  succession and evolution,
MACROEC model, 297                MATLAB, 375                             249
Macroeconomics modeling           Matrix equations in simulation,    word models, 15
 equations, 297                       377                           Money
 BUYPOWER model, 291              Maximum economic yield, 288        circulation, 24, 281
 MONEYGRO model, 292              Maximum power principle            on diagrams, 16
 ROTATION model, 300               basis for policy, 152             storage and spending, 117
Macroscope, 14–15                  depends on diversity, 258         supply, driving growth, 292
MACWIN converter, 398              example, sharing                 MONEYGRO model, 292
Mandelbrot, B.B., 369                   information, 318            Monod model, limiting factors,
Mangel, M., 374                    explanation, 37                      175
Index                                                                                       455


Mortality                       Nutrients and diversity, 259    PEOPLE model, 328
 in population models, 214,     NUTRSPEC model, 258             PEXPO pictorial model, 56
      217                                                       Phase plane graphs, 213, 229,
 per individual, 221                                                 244
 PEOPLE model, 328                             O                Phosphorus
Muetzelfeldt P., 381            Olsen, D.L., 372, 383             cycle, 24, 41, 45
MUSMOD model, 361               OPENAQ model, 184                 flow values on diagram, 41,
Mussels, 361                    Operational analog computers,          44-45
                                    382                            on systems diagram,
                                Organics, 24, 45, 70                   overlay, 24–25
                                OSCILLAT model, 230             Photorespiration, 243
             N                  Oscillation                     Photosynthesis
Nelson, B.L., 372                 arctic population, 233          loop Limited model, 33
Net production                    models, 228                   Phytoplankton & zooplankton
   aquarium production and        one oscillator driving           CHAOS model, 244
       consumption, 185                another, 244               PREYPRED model, 230
  seasonal, explanation, 171      switching, 234                PICTLIB for EXTEND
  tropical rain forest, 255     Outflows, 435                     combining icons for a
NETPROD model                   Oxygen, air exchange with              model, 60
  BASIC simulation, 170             water, 184                    figure with icons, 61
  simulation by hand
                                                                Pictorial icons
       calculation, 173
                                                                  assembly of pictorial
Network diagrams                               P
                                                                       models, 60
  energy systems language,      Parallel Processing, 382
                                                                  EXTEND simulation, 52, 66
       7, 19                    Parts and wholes
                                                                Plotting
  EXTEND generic icons, 94        model boundaries, 11
                                                                  plotter blocks for EXTEND,
  Forrester symbols, 135        PASCAL, 383
  pathway numbers, 39           Pathway                                54, 67
  phosphorus, 24                  between two storages, 47        statements in BASIC
  STELLA icons, 135               lines on diagrams, 22                programs, 120
Neural networks, 382              numbers, adding and             STELLA, 140
Newell, C.R., 360                       subtracting, 23, 436    Pond minimodels
Nicholson, Ronald H., 132         types and junctions, 23         OPENAQ model, 184
Nonrenewable resources          PC computers                    PONDWATER
  NONRENEW model, 201             BASICA, 400                     EXTEND pictorial model,
Normal distribution, 371, 373     file transfer to MacIntosh,          53, 56
Numbers                                 401                     Population models
  from diagrams to dialog         suggestions for simulating      age classes, 378
       boxes of EXTEND, 70              BASIC minimodels,         competition and cooperation,
  mixed units on networks, 45           166                            211, 219
  on networks, 39               PC&CYCLE model                    growth, 124, 193
Nutrients and recycle             BASIC, 128                      logistic equation of ecological
  AUTOCYCL model, 187             calibration, 101                     texts, 208
  diurnal variation, 181          explanation, 69, 129            PEOPLE model, 328
  FIRE model, 234                 equations, 87, 128              prey and predators, 229
  hay, horses, and manure in      EXTEND, 69                    Prey predator oscillation
       Paris, 283                 STELLA, 145                     in LAGOON model, 348
  NETPROD, 170                  Peat in WETLANDS model,           in LAGOONII model, 356
  PC&CYCLE model, 128                253                          OSCILLAT model, 230
  PULSE model, 237              Peterson, N., 385                 PREYPRED model, 228
456                                                                                             Index


Prices                              Quadratic flow                    Reproduction
  exchange symbol and                autocatalytic, 217                 rabbits, 30
       diagrams, 26, 30              feedback interaction               mice, 124
  inverse to supply in SALES              (growth), 125, 214          RESERVE model, 286
       model, 272                    losses from crowding, 206        Richardson, J., 366
  ECONP&C model, 281                 extinction, 266                  Robertson, D., 381
  BUYPOWER model, 291                epidemic mortality, 330          Ross, S.M., 372
Primary production, 34              Quantity                          ROTATION model, 300
Procedure, See Instructions          plotter for EXTEND, 68           Rotation of land
Producer symbol and use, 21,        Queues, 382                         RESERVE model, 288
     33, 438                        QUICKBASIC                          ROTATION model, 300
Production function                  Macintosh, 402                   Roughgarden, J., 375
  autocatalytic with nutrient        program for TANK, 115            Rounding off errors, 114
       recycle, 187                  simulation, 111                  Ruth, B., 150
  economic, 281, 291
  of an interaction, 28
  simulation of model
       FACTORS, 174                 Rabbit reproduction               SALES model, 272
  simulating steady state levels,       minimodel, 30                 Saving
       180                          Radioactive decay, 127              EXTEND models, 55
  supporting herbivore              Rainforest succession, 367          large spreadsheet templates,
       carnivore chain, 232         Ramp model, 82                           108
  within producers, 34              Randomness, 365, 370              Scale
Profit                              Rate equation, 78                   and energy hierarchy, 11
  BANKS model, 278                  Readings, 446                       keeping plots on scale, 120
Programming                         Real wealth                         modeling, 14, 346, 353
  energy systems blocks for           ECONP&C model, 281                separation in diagrams, 13
       EXTEND, 385                    assets in MONEYGRO              Scaling
  in BASIC, 109                            model, 292                   instructions, 406
  of model TANK, 116                Recycle                             in BASIC programs, 120
  simulation format and               AUTOCYCL model, 187               in TANK2 minimodel, 121
       remarks, 121                   FIRE model, 235                 Schroeder, M., 369
  useful mechanisms in BASIC          hay, horses, and manure in      Seasonal cycle
       (Table), 131                        Paris, 283                   WETLAND model, 251
Projects and reports, 344             in Loop limited converter, 32     NETPROD model, 171
PULSE model, 237                      PC&CYCLE model for              Secondary production, 34
  spatial version, 367                     EXTEND, 69                 Self organization
Pulsing                               PULSE model, 238                  spatial, 366
  paradigm, 228                     REM remarks in BASIC,             Sensitivity analysis, 377
  designs, 228, 349                     121                             explanation, 117
  chaotic, 244                      RENEMGY model, 160                  STELLA, 144
Purpose and teleology, 15           RENEW model, 194                  Sensor
                                    Renewable source                    diagramming force, 35
                                      RENEW model, 194                Shifting agriculture, 239
                                      RENEMGY model, 160              SIMBIO2 model, 62
               Q                      MACROEC model, 298              Simulation
QBASIC (QUICKBASIC)                 Replacement time                    at steady state, 97
 use instructions, 9, 111, 115,       and territory, 14                 economics, 271, 291
      132                             concept and example, 43           FISH, 106
Index                                                                                         457


  hand calculations, 112          Standard error, 373               Suggested readings, 446
  judging success, 359            Starting values                   Survival, 127
  PC&CYCLE with                     in dialog boxes for             Switch
       EXTEND, 74                         EXTEND, 73                  FIRE model, 234
  steps and continuous              set to calibration values, 97     symbol and use, 6, 36, 440
       process, 81                State                             Symbiosis, 224
  TANK for EXTEND, 8, 68            change modelling, 374           Symbols, 431
  using EXTEND, 52                  variables, 374                    concise type, 25
  with spread sheets, 104           vector, 377                       energy systems, 6
Simulation approaches, 363        STATECON model, state               group, 33
  mathematical methods,                economy, 337                   group vs. concise, 20
       374                        Statistical                         icon blocks for EXTEND, 66
  matrix methods, 377               fitting simulations and data,   Synthesis
  spatial models, 365                     362                         explanation, 11
  stochastic modeling, 372          models, 370                     Systems
  suggestion for simulating       Steady State                        definition, 4
       BASIC models, 166            concept and example, 41           and subsystems, 12
Sine wave for energy source, 25     simulating production levels,     with numbers of one
  half wave for diurnal                   180                              kind, 40
       variations, 184, 405         small scale fluctuations, 159     t distribution, 373
  seasonal, 58, 407                 values for calibration, 96
  solar variation in geologic       eigenvalues and vectors,
       time, 334                          378
                                  STELLA simulation program                       T
Skewed distribution, 372
                                    calibration, 138                Tabonuco forest, 368
SLOWREN model, 198
                                    icons, 135                      TANK storage model
Smith, R.F., 369                                                      BASIC program listing, 10,
Software, commercial packages       instructions, 133
                                    model EXPO, 142                        116
     for simulation, 383                                              calibration, 112
                                    model PC&CYCLE, 145
Source, 435                                                           equations, 79, 112
                                    model TANK, 134
   constant unlimited, 69                                             script of EXTEND program,
                                    quantification table, 148
  external pulse, 242                                                      391
                                  Step simulation and continuous
  nonrenewable, 201, 275                                              simulating an equation with
                                       process, 82
  position on diagram, 16                                                  generic EXTEND, 93
                                  Stochastic Models
  renewable, 194                                                      simulation by hand
                                  Storage
  source symbol, 6, 20, 25          concept, 4                             calculations, 112
  vector, 377                       connection to other               simulation with BASIC, 9
Source limited flow                       storage, 45                 simulation with EXTEND,
  pathway expression, 85            diurnal changes, 181                   8, 68
  RENEW model, 195                  equations for TANK, 78            simulating with
Spatial models, 364                 five pathway model, 84                 QUICKBASIC
SPECAREA model, 262                 inertial, 27                           (QBASIC), 111
Speciation                          model TANK, 4–5                   simulating with STELLA,
  Galapagos Islands, 265            symbol and use, 6, 27, 435             134
SPECIES model, 265                Subtracting Interaction, 29         systems diagram, 5
Spreadsheets                      Succession                        TANK2 MODEL, 117
  for calibration, 99               RENEW model, 194                TANKSALE model, 274
  for simulation, 104               CLIMAX model, 253               Teleology
Square root of area and             rainforest spatial model,         and scale, 15
     species, 262                         367                       Temperature effect, 360
458                                                                                            Index


Templates                                        U                    WETLAND model, 250
  saving spreadsheet files, 108   Unit conversion in STELLA,          ‘‘What if’’ experimental
Territory                             145                                  problem
  and replacement time, 14        Units for calibration, 45, 97         answers, 409
Tilley, D.R., 133                 Unsustainable growth                  See Chapters 4, 5, and 9
Time                                BUYPOWER model, 294                      through 21
  iteration, 118                    NONRENEW model, 201               Windows, QBASIC, 399
  plotting, 9, 113                Used energy                         Word models
  scaling in BASIC, 406             outflow on diagrams, 16, 21         translating into symbols, 20
  turnover, 43                                                        Work gate, 28
Time lag, 94                                     V                    World minimodels
Top down modeling, 15             Validation, 360, 362                  see maroeconomics modeling
Trade models                        statistical measures, 372           EARTHPIC and EARTHGS
  ENTRADE model, 306              Valuation, emergy, 153                     models, 58, 75
  FREEMARK and                    Variation and statistical             BUYPOWER model, 296
        EMEXCHNG                       models, 370                      WORLDC02 model, 324
        MODELS, 308                 as small scale oscillation, 371     PEOPLE model, 328
Transformation                    Verification, 359                     EARTHGEO model, 332
  energy, 48                      VISUALBASIC, 383, 399               WORLDCO2 model, 324
  unit conversion in STELLA,      Volcanoes
        145                         explosion shading light in
Transformity                             year 1815, 283
  and scale, 14                   Vose, D., 372                                     Y
  definition, 13, 152                                                 Yield
  high values and effect on                     W                       in model FISH, 105
        information, 318          WAR model, 316                        maximum economic in
  plotter for EXTEND, 68          Wastes, 22, 183                           RESERVE model, 288
  simulating with BASIC, 154      Water                                 shrimp in LAGOON
  simulating with EXTEND,          budget flows, 44                         MODEL, 348
        164                        EARTHGEO model, 332
  with interactions, 28, 153       spatial model, 365
TRUEBASIC, 406                     STATECON model, 335
Turnover time                      storage model, 5                                 Z
  concept and example, 14, 43     Weber, T., 367                      Zoom
TWOPOP model, 215                 Weibull distribution, 372             modeling perspective, 15
