ADVANCES IN CHEMICAL PHYSICS

                           VOLUME XC
                                     EDITORIAL BOARD

CARLBALLHAUSENK,obenhavns Universities Fysisk-Kemiske Institut, Kemisk
     Laboratorium IV, Kobenhaven, Denmark

BRUCEBERNE,Columbia University, Department of Chemistry, New York, New
     York, U.S.A.

RICHARDBERNSTEINU, niversity of California, Department of Chemistry, Los
     Angeles, California, U.S.A.

G. CARERI,Istituto di Fisica "Guglielmo Marconi," Universita delli Studi,
     Piassle delle Scienze, Rome, Italy

MORRELCOHEN,Exxon Research and Engineering Company, Annandale, New
     Jersey, U.S.A.

KARL F. FREED, The James Franck Institute, The University of Chicago,
     Chicago, Illinois, U.S.A.

RAYMONDE. KAPRAL,University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
WILLIAMKLEMPERERD, epartment of Chemistry, Harvard University, Cam-

    bridge, Massachusetts, U.s.A.

Yu. L. KLIMONTOVICHD,epartment of Physics, Moscow State University, Mos-
     cow, U.S.S.R.

MICHELMANDEL,Goriaeus Laboratories, University of Leiden, Department of
     Chemistry, Leiden, The Netherlands

RUDYMARCUS,Department of Chemistry, California Institute of Technology,
     Pasadena, California, U.S.A.

PETERMAZUR,Instituut-Lorentz, voor Theoretische Natuurkunde, Leiden, The
     Netherlands

GREGOIRENICOLIS,UniversitC Libre de Bruxelles, FacultC des Sciences, Brux-
     elles, Belgium

A. PACAULT,Centre de Recherches Paul Pascal, Domaine Universitaire, Tal-
     ence, France

Y. POMEAU,Service de Physique Theorique, Centre d'Etudes NuclCaires de
     Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

A. RAHMAN,Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, U.S.A.
P. SCHUSTERI,nstitut fur Theoretische Chemie und Strahlenchemie, Universitat

     Wien, Wien, Austria
ISAIAHSHAVITT,Ohio State University, Department of Chemistry, Columbus,

     Ohio, U.S.A.
KAZUHISATOMITAD, epartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of

     Kyoto, Kyoto, Japan
       Advances in
CHEMICAL PHYSICS

                            Edited by

                         I. PRIGOGINE

                            University of Brussels
                                Brussels, Belgium
                                         and
                              University of Texas
                                  Austin, Texas

                               and

                       STUART A. RICE

                          Department of Chemistry
                                         and

                          The James Franck Institute
                          The University of Chicago

                                 Chicago, Illinois

                               VOLUME XC

                        AN INTERSCIENCEa PUBLICATION  SINGAPORE

                     JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.

NEW YORK rn CHICHESTER BRISBANE rn TORONTO
This text is printed on acid-free paper.

An Interscience@Publication

Copyright @ 1995 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. Published simultaneously in Canada.
Reproduction or translation of any part of this work
beyond that permitted by Section 107 or 108 of the
1976 United States Copyright Act without the permission
of the copyright owner is unlawful. Requests for
permission or further information should be addressed to
the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Library of Congress Catalog Number: 58-9935
ISBN 0-471-04234-X

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
         CONTRIBUTORS TO VOLUME XC

D. ALONSOS, ervice de Chimie Physique and Centre for Nonlinear
     Phenomena and Complex Systems, UniversitC Libre de Bruxelles,
     Brussels, Belgium

I. BURGHARDSTe,rvice de Chimie Physique and Centre for Nonlinear
     Phenomena and Complex Systems, UniversitC Libre de Bruxelles,
     Brussels, Belgium

P. GASPARDS,ervice de Chimie Physique and Centre for Nonlinear
     Phenomena and Complex Systems, UniversitC Libre de Bruxelles,
     Brussels, Belgium

EDWARDR. GRANTD, epartment of Chemistry, Purdue University, West
     Lafayette, Indiana

B. VINCENTMCKOY,Arthur Amos Noyes Laboratory of Chemical
     Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California

KLAUSMULLER-DETHLEFInSs,titut fur Physikalische und Theoretische
     Chemie, Technische Universitat Munchen, Garching, Germany

EDWARWD . SCHLAGIn,stitut fur Physikalische und Theoretische Chemie,
     Technische Universitat Munchen, Garching, Germany

KWANGHWSIANGA, rthur Amos Noyes Laboratory of Chemical Physics,
     California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California

                                                                                                                                V
                      INTRODUCTION

Few of us can any longer keep up with the flood of scientific literature,
even in specialized subfields. Any attempt to do more and be broadly
educated with respect to a large domain of science has the appearance of
tilting at windmills. Yet the synthesis of ideas drawn from different
subjects into new, powerful, general concepts is as valuable as ever, and
the desire to remain educated persists in all scientists. This series,
Advances in Chemical Physics, is devoted to helping the reader obtain
general information about a wide variety of topics in chemical physics, a
field which we interpret very broadly. Our intent is to have experts
present comprehensive analyses of subjects of interest and to encourage
the expression of individual points of view. We hope that this approach to
the presentation of an overview of a subject will both stimulate new
research and serve as a personalized learning text for beginners in a field.

                                                                          I. PRIGOGINE
                                                                      STUARAT . RICE

                                                                                          vii
                CONTENTS

ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY:HIGH-RESOLUTSIPOENCTROSCOWPIYTH

PHOTOELECTRONS                                                 1

By Klaus Miiller-Dethlefs, Edward W.Schlag, Edward R . Grant,
Kwanghsi Wang and B . Vincent McKoy

NEWWAYSOF UNDERSTANDSIENMGICLASSICAL

QUANTIZATION                                                   105

By P. Gaspard, D . Alonso, and I . Burghardt

AUTHOIRNDEX                                        365

SUBJECITNDEX                                       379

                                                               ix
  ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION
  SPECTROSCOPY WITH PHOTOELECTRONS

     KLAUS MULLER-DETHLEFS AND EDWARD W. SCHLAG

     Institut fiir Physikalische und Theoretische Chemie, Technische

             Universitat Munchen, 0-85747 Garching, Germany

                               EDWARD R. GRANT

 Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West-Lafayette,IN 47907

             KWANGHSI WANG AND B. VINCENT McKOY

Arthur Amos Noyes Laboratory o j Chemical Physics, California Institute
                     of Technology, Pasadena, C A 91125*

                                      CONTENTS

    I. Introduction
         A. Evolution of Photoionization Experiments
         B. Principle of ZEKE Detection
         C. The Delayed Pulsed-Field Ionization of ZEKE Rydberg States
         D. Details of the ZEKE Experiment: Towards Highest Resolution

   11. Rotationally Resolved ZEKE Spectra
         A. Nitric Oxide
         B. Benzene
              1. The Electronic Ground State of the Benzene Cation
               2. The 6'(e,,) Excited Jahn-'Teller State

  111. Theory and Formulation

      A . (n + 1') REMPI for Linear Molecules

               1. Rotationally Resolved Photoelectron Spectra
               2. Photoelectron Matrix Element
               3. Parity Selection Rules

    * Contribution No. 8844.
Advances zn Chemical Physics, Volume X C , Edited by I. Prigogine and Stuart A. Rice

ISBN 0-471-04234-X 01995 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                           1
2  K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

      B. (n + 1') REMPI for Asymmetric Tops

               1. Rotationally Resolved Photoelectron Spectra
               2. Photoelectron Matrix Element
              3. Parity Selection Rules

      + C. (n 1') REMPI for Symmetric Tops

         D. Computational Procedures
  IV. Results and Discussion

         A. Linear Molecules
               1. Single-Photon Ionization of NO
              2. Single-Photon Ionization of OH
               3. Single-Photon Ionization of CO and N,
              4. ( 2 + 1) REMPI of HBr
              5. ( 2 + 1) REMPI of OH

         B. Nonlinear Molecules
               1. Single-Photon Ionization of H,O
              2. Single-Photon Ionization of H,CO
               3. Single-Photon Ionization of CH,

   V. Deviations of ZEKE Intensities from the Predictions of Direct Ionization
         A. Effects of Spin-Orbit Relaxation and Rotational Coupling in the ( 2 t 1)
               Threshold Photoionization of HCl and DCl
              1. Rotational Line Intensities
               2. Intensities of Transitions to the Spin-Orbit Substates of HC1'

  VI. Three-Color Triple-Resonant Threshold Photoionization of NO,
         A . Electronic Structure and Photoselection
        B. State-to-State Threshold Photoionization of NO,: Vibrational Structure of NO:
               1. Rotational Structure
               2. Rotational Intensities: Complex Resonances and the Effects of Intra-
                    molecular Relaxation
         C. Intensities at Vibrationally Excited Thresholds: Effects of Vibrational Relaxa-
               tion

 VII. Vibrationally Resolved Structure of the para-Difluorobenzene Cation
         A . ZEKE Spectra
        B. ZEKE Spectra via Different Vibrational Intermediate S, States
               1. ZEKE Spectrum from the S,Oo
              2. ZEKE Spectrum from the S,6l
         C. Self-consistent Field ab initio Computations of the p-DFB Cation

VIII. Vibrationally Resolved Structure of the Phenol-Water Cation
        A. ZEKE Spectra
               1. Ionization Energy
              2. Intermolecular Vibrations
         B. Comparison with ab initio Results
               1. Intramolecular Vibrations
              2. Intermolecular Vibrations

  IX. Conclusions and Outlook
Acknowledgments
References
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  3

I. INTRODUCTION

Zero-kinetic-energy (ZEKE) photoelectron techniques [1-41 have now
become new tools of physical chemistry that go far beyond the measure-
ment of the spectra of molecular ions [5-91. The unprecedented res-
olution of the ZEKE method [8,9], which is essentially limited by the
laser bandwidth, has already led to many new and exciting applications in
chemical physics and chemistry within the last few years [lo-231. The
rapid expansion of this method to a number of very active laboratories
clearly suggests that this trend can be expected to continue [24-471.

   In this section, selected examples will be presented demonstrating the
much superior resolution of ZEKE spectroscopy compared to conven-
tional photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) (two to three orders of mag-
nitude). These examples also give a flavor of the perspectives of the
method. The first molecule investigated by ZEKE spectroscopy in 1984
was nitric oxide (NO) [ l , 21, which was chosen because it had already
been studied extensively by vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) and resonant
enhanced multiphoton ionization techniques. In addition, at that time,
there was much interest in the Rydberg states in NO and substantial
progress was being made through the application of multichannel quan-
tum defect theory (MQDT) [lo, 48-50] to molecules as a means of
understanding the structure of their Rydberg states and their couplings in
a manner similar to what had been done for molecular hydrogen (H,)
[49]. Nitric oxide also seemed to be a good starting point to further
develop theories of photoionization processes, in particular, by using ab
initio theories [12,51] to explain the ionization dynamics. In classical
VUV photoelectron techniques [52], information about such dynamics is
usually lost since rotational resolution is not achieved (particularly at
threshold); the reader is referred to [4] for further discussion. Figure 1
shows the result of the greatly improved resolution of the ZEKE method
compared to conventional PES. TheVUV-PE spectrum [52] (Fig. 1, top)
shows the vibrationally resolved structure of the lowest electronic state of
the NO' cation. In contrast, the fully resolved rotational structure within
a single vibrational band [l] (in this case the lowest vibrational band with
u + = 0) is seen in the bottom of Fig. 1 due to the much higher resolution
of the ZEKE technique. Details of the photoionization dynamics will be
discussed later in this chapter. Note here that for ZEKE spectroscopy
different rotational selection rules from those observed for bound-bound
transitions are to be expected. For rotational transitions observed in
ZEKE spectroscopy higher angular momentum transfers from molecule
to ion transitions than AJ = +1, as for bound-bound transitions, are to
be expected and are seen. This apparent difference in rotational selection
rules arises because the ejected electron carries an angular momentum i?
4           K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

                   Ebind lev1

            9      10                   11    12

         I     I'

   -

    0
   C

   .0 _

   Y,

   w
   wY

   N

               c)  10.0                 20.0

                   E int I ~ r n - ~ l

    Figure 1. Comparison of VUV-PES [52] and the first rotationally resolved ZEKE
spectrum [2] of NO. Here N' denotes the total angular momentum quantum number
(excluding electronic spin). (Reproduced from [2] and [52] with permission.)

that couples to the total angular momentum J + of the ion to yield a state
of total angular momentum J,,,. For ionization from a neutral state with

rotational quantum number J it is this total angular momentum Jtot

+ bounded by the triangular condition J - 15 J,,, 5 J 1, that is preserved.

It can be seen that different rotational states 'J arise for a given 8 when

+ Jtotis decoupled according to the triangular condition J + - 8 iJ,,, 5

J + e.

   The state-of-the-art of ZEKE spectroscopy is best illustrated in its

ability to resolve the question of the structure of the benzene cation. The
benzene cation, due to its electronically degenerate state, is the textbook
example [53] of the Jahn-Teller effect [54,55]. The strength of this
Jahn-Teller interaction has been predicted theoretically [56]. Experimen-
tally, matrix isolation electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra seemed to
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  5

support a DZhstructure at low temperatures ( 4 K ) and a D,, structure at
higher temperatures (100 K) [57],However, matrix perturbations could
not be excluded as the cause of the observed effects. Efforts to analyze
the free cation spectroscopically in the gas phase have failed since
methods of ion spectroscopy [58] are not applicable. With ZEKE
spectroscopy it has become possible to completely resolve the rotational
structure of the benzene cation, and hence to deduce its molecular
structure [8]. Figure 2 shows one of these rotationally resolved spectra,
corresponding to the transition from the J' = 2, K' = 2 rovibronic state in
the intermediate resonant S161 eVElustate to the ground state DOeElgof
the benzene cation [8]. The observed resolution is essentially laser-
limited. The rotational structure shows certain symmetry selection rules
[6, 8,9] that will be discussed later. By applying these symmetry selection
rules, the observed ZEKE transitions can be interpreted and the structure
of the benzene cation and its molecular symmetry group can be un-
ambiguously determined. The results for the benzene cation are fully
consistent with the D,, molecular symmetry group. This leads to the

             K+= O

        m

        012 3 4 5 6 NS

35,945  35,955                        35,965

        Ionizing Laser Energy (cm-I)

   Figure 2. Recorded (bottom) ZEKE spectrum of the ionizing transition Do *El, + S,
6' ' E l , (J' = 2, K' = 2) of benzene. The fully resolved rotational structure, assigned as N'
progressions in K + = 0 and K * = 6, was fitted (top) with the experimentally determined
rotational constants and the experimental intensities using a fwhm of 0.3cm-'. (Re-
produced from [8] with permission.)
6  K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

conclusion that the structure of this fluxional molecule is governed by the
dynamic Jahn-Teller effect.

   To demonstrate the relationship between ZEKE spectroscopy and
photoionization efficiency (PIE) measurements, Fig. 3 shows a com-
parison of a PIE measurement of nitrogen dioxide (NO,) with its ZEKE
spectrum. The PIE measurement shows an obscure onset of ionization. It
is obscured because the ionization intensity is not only governed by the
threshold signal, but is dominated by transitions into autoionizing states.
Such autoionizing states are members of Rydberg series of lower principal
quantum numbers converging to higher ion limits. In the photoionization
signal these states show up as more or less sharp, resolved structures.
Though the dynamics of autoionization is interesting in its own right, here
it obscures the observation of the true ionization threshold (i.e., the true
states of the corresponding cation). Clearly, in the ZEKE measurement
the corresponding structure of the cation is fully resolved. There is
essentially no interference from autoionizing states. However, there are
certain interactions between Rydberg states (also termed final-state
interactions), which have attracted considerable interest [7, 19, 25, 261,
Some of these aspects and the apparent intensity distributions and their
influence on ZEKE intensities will be discussed in a later section in this
chapter. The spectrum of Fig. 3 shows that the ZEKE method filters out
the relevant ionic states. It is already apparent that this technique offers
the possibility of state-selected production of ions, that is, with selection
of the rovibronic ionic state.

   A manifold of information on vibrational states of molecular ions has
been provided by the use of conventional PE techniques. For many
applications in chemistry vibrational resolution is sufficient. However,
vibrations of low frequency, and many combination bands cannot be
resolved by conventional PES. Even with resonance enhanced mul-
tiphoton ionization-photoelectron spectroscopy (REMPI-PES, also
termed excited state PES) the resolution is only partly enhanced due to
the selection of the intermediate state (see [4] for a discussion of this
problem and additional references). Figure 4 shows such a state-of-the-art
time-of-flight (TOF) photoelectron spectrum of para-difluorobenzene
obtained with the S161vibronic state as intermediate resonance [59]. The
experimental PE resolution in this experiment is better than 10meV
(80 cm-'). Vibrations in the cation are resolved in the TOF-PE spectrum
and have been assigned. Comparison of the TOF-PE spectrum with the
ZEKE spectrum (Fig. 4, bottom) [60,61] makes the apparent gain in
resolution obvious. The vibrational structure seen in the PES is congested
by many more vibrational states that are fully resolved in the ZEKE
spectrum. Some of the peaks observed in the ZEKE spectrum are
                                                                                             2,

                                                           2                                 1  0   Delayed TFI Signal (arb.)
                                                     +z

               r

                                           +-3I-
                                       z

        tmm

mm

                                                                                             "

                                                                                             '

                                                                                             "

                                                                                             '

                                                                                                Ln

                                                                                             '

                                                                                             '

                                                                                             ~

                                                                                             ,

                                                                                                0

                                              Three Photon Frequency (cm-')

    Figure 3. Comparison of (top) photoionization efficiency and rotationally resolved ZEKE
spectrum of NO,.
8          K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

   74,000  75,000  76,000

   Figure 4. Bottom: ZEKE photoelectron spectrum of p-difluorobenzene through the
S,6' intermediate state [61]. Top: TOF photoelectron spectrum [59]. (Reproduced from
[59] and [61] with permission.)

combination bands while others are fundamentals. Most of these spectra
can now be assigned and understood using ab initio methods, which
allows comparison of calculated with measured frequencies. Low-fre-
quency fundamentals have also been observed for the first time. Another
interesting feature of such vibrationally resolved spectra is that vibra-
tional symmetry selection rules derived from the Franck-Condon princi-
ple do not always completely hold. Furthermore, symmetry-forbidden
transitions have been unambiguously identified in the ZEKE spectra of
several molecuIes [62,63].

   Another class of chemical compounds addressed in this chapter are
molecular clusters. Molecular clusters represent model systems of micro-
solvation. Interest here has moved very strongly towards a detailed
understanding of structural and dynamical properties of such model
systems. Molecular clusters are bound by weak intermolecular forces and
spectroscopic results can be expected to provide a better understanding of
the intermolecular potentials involved and of processes such as charge
and proton transfer, which are very important in biological systems. The
ZEKE technique can yield new information on such systems that actually
provides the structure and vibrational frequencies when these clusters are

photoionized [MI.An example is given in Fig. 5, which shows the ZEKE
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  9

0  500  1000

   Ion Internal Energy [cm-'1

   Figure 5. ZEKE spectrum of the h, (top) and d, (bottom) 1:l phenol-water complex
via the intermediate S, 0' level. The spectra have been corrected for the dye laser output
intensity variation of the ionizing laser. (Reproduced from [64] with permission.)

spectra of the protonated Phe-OH. * .H,O (h,, top), where Phe is phenol

and the deuterated Phe-OD- . .D,O (d,, bottom) phenol-water complex-

es [64]. In these spectra one can see fully resolved vibrational peaks, most
of which must be interpreted as intermolecular vibrations. A thorough
analysis of the effects of deuteration of the acidic hydrogen on the
observed frequencies, the measurement of ZEKE spectra with selection

of different intermediate S, vibrations (see Fig. 46), and the comparison

with ab initio calculations [65] lead to the conclusion that six fundamental
frequencies, one strong intramolecular ( 7 ~ ~an~d ~ fi)ve intermolecular
vibrations (out of six), can be identified. The problem of understanding
the observed fundamental vibrations relies on the ability to assign
molecular movements to these fundamental frequencies. This assignment
has been made successfully with the help of ab initio computations [65],
leading to what is now believed to be a rather definitive assignment [64]

(including one antisymmetric, i.e., Franck-Condon forbidden vibration).

   In addition, this chapter will trace the development of the ZEKE
technique and also describe procedures for obtaining optimized res-
10  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

olution. It will be necessary to introduce the concept of pulsed-field
ionization of high n Rydberg states [3] and discuss the ab initio calcula-
tions of matrix elements involved in such rotationally resolved photoioni-
zation processes (see Section I11 on theory). We will also discuss what has
now been termed ZEKE Rydberg states [45,46] (or ZEKE states for
short) and their properties that can be exploited experimentally.

                 A. Evolution of Photoionization Experiments

Zero-kinetic-energy PE spectroscopy should be understood in the context
of the historical development of photoionization techniques. Photoioniza-
tion efficiency measurements, VUV-PES, and X-ray photoelectron spec-
troscopy (XPS) are related to the development of ZEKE spectroscopy.
In particular, the threshold PE techniques that originated in parallel to
the development of VUV-PES are important.

   Experimentally, PES became a general technique for the investigation
of photoionization processes in molecules with the invention by Turner et
al. [52,66] of the stable and background-free high-intensity VUV (21.2
eV) He(1) light source. A somewhat similar experiment was independent-
ly described by Vilesov et al. [67]. A different development, using X-ray
sources, arose from the group of Siegbahn [68], namely, the XPS
technique which, reflecting its well-established application, is also termed
ESCA (electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis) [69].

   Concepts of ab initio methods such as an orbital description of the
electronic structure of molecules and insight- into the nature of the
chemical bond have very much profited from the results obtained by PES.
In many cases, not only the electronic but also the vibronic states of
molecular ions have been observed by PES. However, conventional PES
techniques are limited in their energy resolution, since the kinetic energy
of the ejected electron cannot be determined with sufficient accuracy to
resolve rovibronic levels, that is, to obtain the molecular eigenstates.
Hence, the orders of magnitude in resolution between laser spectroscopy
and conventional electron spectroscopy are essentially due to experimen-
tal, but not conceptual limitations. An almost invariant resolution limit of
some 10meV (80cm-l) seems to be approached by the plethora of PE
analyzers that have been employed (see [4] for references). Such res-
olution is at best sufficient for electronic states and in some cases for the
vibronic levels of the molecular ion; rotational state resolution is,
generally, beyond the reach of any PES or ESCA technique with the
exception of hydrogen [70-731 and ionization from high rotational states
in NO [74-771, where partial rotational resolution is achieved.

   Indirect threshold measurements were first tried by employing a 127"
electron analyzer set to transmit zero-energy electrons. The first direct
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  11

threshold experiment consisted of the steradiancy analyzer, which ex-
ploited the characteristic of threshold energy electrons to faithfully follow
an external extraction field. It allowed for the first state selection of
molecular ions and detailed information about the kinetics of molecular
ions has emerged from such studies [78]. This method is generally
referred to as threshold photoelectron spectroscopy (TPES) [78-821. The
resolution, however, was still limited by the presence of fields and the
characteristics of the analyzer which leads to a background signal from
autoionization, that interferes with the detection of the true ZEKE
electrons [83,84].

                        B. Principle of ZEKE Detection

Let us recall that the difference between conventional PES and ZEKE-
PES is that for PES the system (i.e., atom, molecule, or cluster) is
irradiated with light of fixed wavelength and the kinetic energy of the
emitted electrons is measured [52,66,67] (Fig. 6, right), whereas for
ZEKE-PES (as well as for TPES) the wavelength is scanned and only
electrons within a small detection window near threshold are measured
(Fig. 6, left). The disadvantages of PES are the need for calibration of

       Threshold  r*'eV
e- Ekrn=O
                              PES

IC M *

                  II M

    Figure 6 . Comparison of ZEKE threshold ionization (left) with PES (right). Excita-
tion, for both cases, is achieved either with one-photon or multiphoton ionization (MPI),
nonresonant or resonant MPI.
12  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

the PE spectrometer and, more importantly, the limited resolution of
about 5-10 meV (i.e., 40-80 cm-l) and the low transmission of the PE
analyzer. In contrast, the ZEKE method involves scanning the wave-
length of the light source across the ionic states and detection of the
electrons that are formed with zero-kinetic energy, whenever the wave-
length of the incident light matches the energy of a rovibronic transition
between the initial state of the molecule and the ion [4] (Fig. 6, left). The
ionization itself takes place under zero-field conditions and the ZEKE
electrons (with 100% transmission) are discriminated against kinetic
electrons by delayed pulsed-field extraction. Besides the advantage of
having the full accuracy of optical spectroscopy, the ZEKE technique
offers a spectral resolution of up to 0.2cm-l, which is sufficient for the
rotational resolution of molecules such as NO [2, 71, ammonia (NH,)
[5,6] and benzene (C6H6) [8,9,85].

   The principal advance in this method came in 1984 when the complete-
ly resolved rotational structure, at threshold, of the NO' ion was
observed in the first true ZEKE experiment [ l , 21 (see Fig. 1). This
advance came from the delayed pulsed-field extraction principle: ioniza-
tion under field-free conditions is followed by a delayed extraction pulse,
thus only collecting those electrons specific to the ionic eigenstate-the
ZEKE electrons-and rejecting all other electrons from unspecific chan-
nels, the near-ZEKE electrons. The signature of a ZEKE electron is its
zero velocity. The basic idea is that when the energy of the exciting
photon exactly matches the ionization energy of the molecule (i.e., the
energy necessary to eject an electron from a molecular orbital) then the
electron emitted will have virtually zero kinetic energy. Thus, after some
delay the kinetic electrons will have moved away from the ZEKE
electrons. This technique is schematically shown in Fig. 7. If the electrons
are extracted by a pulsed electric field into a long tube, then the ZEKE
electrons will arrive at the other end at a time different from that of the
kinetic energy electrons. Such a typical TOF distribution is shown in Fig.
7. Hence, the pulsed-field extraction leads to a strong "time amplifica-
tion": An initially small energy difference results in a large TOF
difference. Therefore, if one sets a detection gate at the right time
(marked 1 in Fig. 7), it is possible to see the ZEKE electrons separated
from the other electrons. Thus, instead of trying to determine the energy
of the photoelectrons, one is looking for signal/no signal at the correct
TOF. As the laser energy is scanned, different (ro)vibrational levels in
the ion are accessed, and ZEKE electrons will appear each time the
energy of the laser matches a transition from a neutral energy level to an
ionic level. The ZEKE signal versus wavelength constitutes the ZEKE
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY                13

ZEKE a n d near - ZEKE photoelectrons

                                  - ZEKE electrons:

                                  transmission = 100%

                                  1,3) Near-ZEKE
                                         photoelectrons

\delayed pulsed extraction field

    Figure 7. ZEKE photoelectron detection scheme. Left: When ionization occurs (t = 0)
the electrons with nonzero kinetic energy start to fly away from the ZEKE electrons. Right:
After the delay time (t = r,) kinetic electrons flying away (1)or towards (3) the detector are
spatially separated from the ZEKE electrons (2); the spatial separation is then transformed
into a TOF separation as observed in the electron signal versus TOF curve.

spectrum. Essentially, the resolution of the technique is limited only by
the energy spread of the laser radiation, which is usually very well known
(<I cm-I).

C. The Delayed Pulsed-Field Ionization of ZEKE Rydberg States

The experimental observation of long-lived (i.e., up to 100 ps) Rydberg
states converging to (ro)vibronic levels of the ion has led to a second
variation of the ZEKE technique: the detection of pulsed-field ionized
Rydberg electrons [3]. The behavior of the lifetime of molecular Rydberg
states is very different from that of atoms (see Fig. 8). Molecular Rydberg
states can decay via predissociation or other intramolecular processes that

are not open to atoms. Some of these processes are shown schematically
in Fig. 9: autoionization and predissociation. Hence, for molecular
systems one finds a very short lifetime for those Rydberg states below
about n = 150, corresponding to about 5 cm-' below threshold. On the
contrary, within the magic region of about 5 cm-' below threshold (see

Fig. S), the lifetime of these highly excited Rydberg states (n > 150) can
be exceedingly large. These high n , long-lived Rydberg states are called

ZEKE Rydberg states. Lifetimes up to tens of microseconds have been
observed and it appears that the usual T O( n3 dependence is not valid in
this region. Instead, the lifetime of these Rydberg states even seems to be
strongly enhanced compared to the T 0~ n3 law, possibly due to 8 and m,
14  K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

                             T IPSI

    IE ionization  0

                         -5

    < relaxation / -10

                               ; atom

                               I

                             t

                                                 E Icrn-'l

    Figure 8. Left-hand side: ionization energy (IE): Adiabatic (field-free) ionization
energy; top: Ionization region above threshold; magic region: long-lived high n Rydberg
states; relaxation region: short-lived (predissociating) Rydberg states. Right-hand side:
approximate lifetime curves for Rydberg states of (1) atoms and ( 2 ) molecules following a
7 3~ n3 decay law (dashed line) and with lifetime enhancement.

    .*.1

    I. I?

    Figure 9. Rydberg couplings: autoionization and predissociation
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  15

mixing by small fields present during the excitation. The longevity of the
high-lying Rydberg states is presently understood as being due to the
effects of small electric fields in the apparatus [7,36] and/or effects of
higher multipole moments of the core [38] and the presence of ions [46].
The effects of such electric fields have also been investigated [34,35], for
example, in the ZEKE spectrum of NO [34] (exciting via an intermediate

A *Z+resonant state), and Ar [45] (via a one-photon process).

   The ZEKE Rydberg states with their highly excited electrons can be
ionized by a very small amount of energy. This energy can be supplied by
the pulsed electric extraction field (mentioned above), that is, the electric
field pulls the electron away from the ionic core and the molecule is
ionized (see Fig. 10). Since the Rydberg states will not move out of the
ionization volume, the electrons formed from their ionization will appear
at the same TOF as the ZEKE photoelectrons. This result poses no real
problem, however, as the spectra obtained are very similar to those that
would have been obtained from the ZEKE electrons alone; here both
types of electrons will be called ZEKE electrons. (It should be noted,
however, that some intensity effects can be observed from the Rydberg-
electron spectra and recently, these effects have been reviewed [26].) This
technique is now known as ZEKE-PFI spectroscopy (PFI = pulsed-field

    Figure 10. Pulsed-field ionization scheme. In the presence of an electric field F the
Coulomb potential V, is modified by an additional linear potential V,,,, resulting in the final
potential V (solid line). The field-free IE is lowered by the Stark shift A E , given by the
formula: AE = c . v'F. Hence, by applying a delayed extraction field F at time t, the
high-lying, long-lived Rydberg states will be field-ionized.
16  K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL,

ionization) and is easier to implement experimentally because stray
electric fields (always present in an apparatus) can influence the ZEKE
electrons quite easily, making them more difficult to detect; the ZEKE
Rydberg states will not be influenced by these stray fields, so these states
are more efficiently detected. This method has now been found to be
generally applicable to molecular systems. One major advantage of the
ZEKE-PFI technique is the insensitivity to stray fields inside the
apparatus, which in the case of free ZEKE electrons can cause the
electrons to move during the delay time. This result also indicates how
PFI electrons and free ZEKE electrons can be detected independently: A
small dc electric field across the ionization volume will cause the ZEKE
electrons to move slightly, so they will appear at a TOF different from the
PFI electrons.

   Both types of photoelectrons, either those from pulsed-field ionization
of long-lived Rydberg states or the free electrons emitted at or just above
threshold, carry the same information about the ionic state since the
cross-sections must be continuous across threshold. The spectra obtained
are hence very similar, although there is a small energy shift between
them that can be empirically calculated and corrected for in order to
obtain the true ionization energies with spectroscopic precision. It should
be noted, however, that the PFI technique is not applicable to photo-
detachment studies, because no Rydberg states exist for anions. In this
case the original ZEKE method involving the detection of free electrons
with negligible kinetic energy must be applied.

   D. Details of the ZEKE Experiment: Towards Highest Resolution

The idea and principles of ZEKE spectroscopy have already been
discussed in a number of papers [1,3,5,6], review articles [4,26], and in
Nature [20]. Here, we only give a description that focuses on the
ZEKE-PFI technique [3] in combination with a slowly rising electric field
extraction pulse (i.e., with a linear or multistep slope). The application of
this specially shaped pulse has proven to be the key for obtaining the very
high resolution (up to 0.2 cm-l), which is essential for rotational res-
olution in larger molecules, such as benzene [8,9,85]. By variation of the
slope of the pulse, the spectral resolution of the ZEKE-PFI technique
can be adjusted according to the laser bandwidth and to the needs of the
system under study, (i.e., whether vibrational or rotational resolution
must be achieved). In fact, using a linear or multistep staircase-like
extraction pulse provides a technique for the exact determination of the
ionization energy under field-free conditions [86,87].

   A typical experimental setup for a ZEKE experiment is shown in Fig.
11. It consists of a laser system and a vacuum apparatus including the
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  17

                             iodine cell

or+ FEU Id valve-.

                          n  "1' 2w1:p SHJ G -   +

                    2 w1

    Figure 11. A typical ZEKE apparatus for the two-color ionization scheme employing
two synchronously pumped dye lasers.

molecular beam source, the extraction plates, and a p-metal shielded
flight tube with electron detectors (i.e., multichannel plates or a channel-
tron) at its end. The laser system depends on whether one-color, one-
photon VUV [13,26], one-color, two-photon nonresonant [21,23,28], or
two-color, two-photon resonant [ l , 41 measurements are performed, the
latter being the ionization scheme most extensively used. In a typical
two-color experiment both lasers are pumped simultaneously by an
excimer laser or a Nd:YAG laser. The first dye laser excites a specific
vibrational or rotational level of the intermediate resonance and the
second dye laser ionizes the molecules or promotes them into long-lived
Rydberg states (n > 150) converging to (ro)vibronic levels of the elec-
tronic ground state or an electronically excited state of the cation (see
below). After a delay time of several microseconds, an extraction pulse is
applied by either a simple electronic pulsing device or by using an
arbitrary function generator (i.e., LeCroy AFG 9100). The electrons are
detected with multichannel plates and their TOF signal is recorded with
18  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

boxcar integrators or a transient digitizer by setting narrow time gates
(10-30 ns).

   The field ionization of Rydberg states allows the adjustment of the
spectral resolution by a variation of slope and magnitude of the delayed
extraction pulse. This adjustment can be understood in the following way:
Consider a molecule with long-lived Rydberg states in the range of
3-4cm-' below a particular ionic eigenstate. With the application of a
slowly rising pulse, only a small segment of Rydberg states is field ionized
at a certain time within the rising slope of the extraction pulse. The TOF
of the electrons so produced will hence depend on the energy separation
of this segment of Rydberg states from the corresponding ionization limit.
This energy separation is defined by the field strength reached at the
point in time when the Rydberg state segment is field ionized. Electrons
produced at a different point in time within the rising slope of the
extraction pulse (i.e., from another Rydberg state segment) will have a
different TOF [Fig. 12(a)]. Therefore, only a small region of Rydberg
states will be monitored within a certain time gate, thus enhancing the
spectral resolution significantly. In contrast, the application of a fast-
rising extraction pulse of about 1V cm-' will cause the field ionization of
all Rydberg states in the above-mentioned region and results in the

    Rydberg molecule  slow-rising pulse

                      E - : :0.2: : 0.4 t b]
                                    !! !!
                        L
                             Gales: 1 2 3 4

    Rydberg molecule  fast-rising pulse

                      . . 1..              L
                       : : 0.2 E  0.4 1 b]Fu,
                      O

                                                         !!

                                   L

                                                                       Gates: 1 2 3 4

    Figure 12. Pulsed-field ionizatim of long-lived Rydberg states using a slow-rising (a)
and a fast-rising ( b ) extraction pulse and collection within a certain time gate.
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  19

collection of the resulting electrons within a small time gate [Fig. 12(b)].
The scanning of the laser wavelength over this region will therefore
produce a ZEKE signal over the entire range, thus limiting the spectral
resolution to about 3-4cm-l. This value is high enough for vibrational
resolution, but does not allow for the rotational resolution in most
molecules.

           11. ROTATIONALLY RESOLVED ZEKE SPECTRA

                                   A. Nitric Oxide

Nitric oxide, (NO), is the molecule most extensively studied in photoioni-
zation. It serves as a model for the theoretical description of the
photoionization process. The ZEKE spectra from the C 211 state [2], for
example, were successfully interpreted by Fredin et al. [lo] using
multichannel quantum defect theory (MQDT). Ionization from the A
2C + state was also investigated. The 6u orbital is of nearly pure atomic s
character (94% s, 0.5% p , and 5% d character) [12]. Thus, in the sudden

approximation the electron is ejected into the odd e continuum channel.

Considering parity conservation, AN' = IN+ - 1"' should be restricted to

even values. Since the A state is a Rydberg state with only weak
interaction between the core and the electron one would expect no
change in core rotation, that is, AN' = 0. In the corresponding ZEKE
spectra [7,11] (reproduced in Fig. 13), however, strong AN' = -+2 and
less intense A N + = t 1 transitions are observed, with the AN' = 0
transition seen as the most intense peak. The peaks with A N + = t l and
1-2 are forbidden in an atomiclike or sudden approximation and reflect
the molecular character of the ionization process. Rudolph et al. [12, 881
showed in their ab initio calculations that scattering of the electron by the
non-centrosymmetric core potential into other angular momentum (t)
continuum channels (of opposite parity, for instance) causes the appear-
ance of these AN' peaks which are forbidden in an atomic picture. The
molecular nature of the ionization process is clearly demonstrated. The
calculation of intensities observed in such ZEKE spectra is fully described
in Section 111.

                                      B. Benzene

To date, only a few symmetric rotor molecules have been studied with
rotational resolution using ZEKE photoelectron spectroscopy
[5,6,8,9,89]. The first example was the ammonia molecule (NH,) [5,6].
In this section the discussion is extended to the benzene (C,H,)
molecule. Both NH, and C,H, have been studied using single rovibronic
20             K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

               NO'X, ~'-0N,+--NO A , V-0. N,

           I1  I      I  I                     I

    - 01 2            3  4                    5 N'

    In     8

    c
    C

    3                                  N, = O

    -e0 3             c

    -
    O
                                       N, = I
    C

    .0- )     n L A

    v)

    w
    Y
    w          1

    N

                                       N, = 2

           0      20     Eint Icm- 11         60

    Figure 13. ZEKE spectra of NO via the A * C + u + = 0 state with intermediate rotational
states selected from NA = 0 to NA = 2. (Reproduced from [7] with permission.)

states as intermediate resonances and full rotational resolution in the
cation has been obtained, providing very distinct information about the
rotational selective ionization dynamics of these systems. Since the

molecular symmetry group is D,,in the case of NH, and D,, for C,H,, it

will be interesting to see how the even- and odd-fold symmetry of the
principal axes affects the rovibronic transitions that occur in the spectra
and changes in the projection quantum number K of the total angular
momentum J on going from the intermediate state to the cation.

          1. The Electronic Ground State of the Benzene Cation

The neutral C,H, molecule has a hexagonal, planar structure with D,,

symmetry [90-931. In the electronic ground state the outer electron
configuration is (azu)' (elg14. Upon ionization, one elg electron is
removed from the highest molecular orbital, thus leaving an unpaired elg
electron. This results in a doubly degenerate ' E l , electronic ground state
of the cation.

   The perturbation of the 7~ electron system due to the removal of an
electron to form the benzenc cation is expected to cause a change in the
structure and symmetry of the neutral molecule. Reduction to three-fold
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  21

symmetry is conceivable, which would correspond to a "localization" of
the double bonds, either to D3,, in which the planar structure is
maintained, or to a chairlike structure similar to the chair conformation
of cyclohexane. However, an in-plane symmetry reduction to D,, is also
feasible, as can be concluded from theoretical considerations [56]. The
analysis of Rydberg series converging to the electronic ground state of the
cation, and also of PE spectra, point more towards the maintenance of a
planar structure in the cation [94]. Nevertheless, the ground-state geome-
try cannot be deduced exactly because of the poor resolution of conven-
tional PE spectroscopy.

   The removal of an electron from a degenerate bonding elg orbital
results in the formation of a degenerate state of 'El, symmetry species.
The Jahn-Teller coupling that accompanies the electronic degeneracy
causes a distortion along a nontotally symmetric normal coordinate that
lifts the degeneracy [53,54]. Model calculations therefore predict a D,,
symmetry for the cation for which there are three equivalent structures
[56]. This distortion to D,, can be detected experimentally in a matrix at
low temperatures [57]. The ESR spectra of C,Hi in a freon matrix
indicate an increased spin density at C1 and C4 at 4.2 K but an equivalent
spin density at 100 K. Thus the question arises whether the D,, structure
is static and destabilized at higher temperatures by collisions with the
matrix or whether a dynamic D,, structure is stabilized by the matrix
lattice. For weak Jahn-Teller coupling the stabilization energy for the
distorted symmetry is smaller than the zero-point energy of the Jahn-
Teller active mode. Isolated (i.e., under collision-free conditions), the
three equivalent D,, structures of the cation would rapidly dynamically
interconvert, and the ground state of the cation would still be described in
the D,, symmetry group [95]. For strong Jahn-Teller coupling the cation
would spend much time in either one of the three structures, and would
therefore be described in D2,,.The knowledge of the structure and the
symmetry of the isolated benzene cation is desirable not only for testing
quantum mechanical models but is also of fundamental importance for
organic chemistry. Rotationally resolved PE spectroscopy allows an
unambiguous determination of the symmetry of the cation. The molecular
symmetry group can be deduced from the rotational transitions that
occur, together with group theoretical considerations [53,96].

   A first attempt to resolve the question was carried out by gas-phase
PES [95]. These authors obtained the PE spectrum shown in Fig. 14 by

using the standard TOF technique and two-photon, two-color (1+ 1`)

ionization with the S161 state as intermediate resonance. The vibrational
structure found in that PE spectrum was assigned to the 0" vibrational
origin and the 6' progression; the 6'(5) and 6l(;) states show the linear
22     K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

    r  I                  I       ,  I

    0  100  200

            E i n +I meV

    Figure 14. Time-of-flight PE spectrum of benzene with the S, 6' state as intermediate
resonance (Redrawn from [76].)

Jahn-Teller splitting. No resolution of the quadratic Jahn-Teller splitting
of the 6l(:) state into the two B,, and B,, components nor any resolved
rotational structure was seen in that experiment.

   In the ZEKE experiments the C,H, molecules are ionized in a

+ two-photon, two-color (1 1') process via the first vibronically excited

state S16l as intermediate resonance (here the symbol 6l represents a
vibrational state in which the normal vibrational mode u, is excited with
one quantum). The first laser selects a rovibronic state in Sl6l and the
second laser ionizes the molecule from this state. Depending on the
rovibronic symmetry of the intermediate state, different rovibronic states
of the ion are populated. The conservation of the symmetry of the
nuclear spin wave functions on transition and the symmetry selection
rules and rules for coupling of angular momenta severely restrict the
number of possible transitions. The symmetry of the cation can be
deduced from the assignment of the transitions and the rotational
progressions that occur.

   Figure 15 shows the ZEKE spectrum for the transitions into the ion
ground state from the intermediate state Sl6l(J' = 1,K' = 1, + I ) (see
Fig. 2 for the corresponding ZEKE spectrum from S161(J'= 2, K' = 2,
+ I ) [S]). The assignment of rotational states in S161is discussed in Ref.
[92]. The most notable feature in the observed rotational structure is the
appearance of progressions in the total angular momentum quantum
number N + (without electron spin) of the ionic core. The selection rules
AJ = 0, 51 and AK = 0, k1 are valid for transitions between bound
states. Here, however, for a transition from a bound to an unbound state
the ZEKE electron can compensate for the angular momentum by vector
coupling depending on its angular momentum (s,p , d , , . .), thus enabling
higher rotational angular momentum changes [6,12].

   The following model was developed to explain the observed transitions
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  23

           K+= l

      m

          1 2 3 4 5 N+

i

35,945  35,955          35,965

                                   Ionising Laser Energy ( cm')
    Figure 15. Measured and fitted Zeke spectrum of benzene for the ionizing transition

Do ' E l , +- S , 6'E,, ( J ' = 1, K' = 1+ I ) . (Redrawn from [8].)

[6]: By starting with the vibronic symmetry of the intermediate state, the
vibronic symmetry species of the final state(s) that can be reached in an
electronically allowed one-photon transition can be determined. The

vibronic symmetry species of this state is decoupled into the vibronic
symmetry species of the ion core and the symmetry species of the ejected
electron, according to the molecular symmetry group [96]. From the

correlation of the symmetry group of the cation with the D,, group the

partial wave character of the photoelectron is obtained [53] and hence the
possible rotational states of the ion core [6]. Those transitions for which
the partial wave functions of the ZEKE electron correlate with symmet-
ries that are permitted in an allowed electronic transition are expected to
be the strongest. For the D,, symmetry of the benzene cation, this will be

the symmetry species eZg with partial wave functions 18 = 2, A = 2 ) , I & =

4, h = 2 ) , and 18 = 4, h = 4 ) where A is the projection of the orbital
angular momentum I of the ZEKE electron on the sixfold principal axis.

Analogously, one obtains for D,,the species e' with the additional partial

+ wave function lI = 1, A = 1) and for D,, the species a, b,, with the

additional partial wavefunction lI = 0, A = 0 ) . In all three cases only the
24        K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

lowest electron angular momentum partial waves from s to g are
considered. A determination of the symmetry of the cation is thus
possible through the assignment of the rotational transitions in the ZEKE
spectrum. On the basis of the above-mentioned model, all spectral lines
are consistent with the assumption of D,, symmetry. None of the intense
lines expected from the additional partial wave functions for D,, or D,,
are observed in the spectra, hence D,, or D,, symmetry can be excluded.
Hence, the benzene cation in its electronic ground state is completely
compatible with D,, symmetry [S]. Therefore, the conclusions are that
the stabilization by Jahn-Teller distortion is smaller than the energy of
the zero-point vibration, and the reduction in symmetry induced by the
distortion has no influence on the observed rotational transitions.

   With 10 rotational states in the P and R branches of the intermediate
resonance S,6' as initial state, 44 lines could be assigned in the ZEKE
spectra [S] and the rotational constants of the cation have been de-
termined. In Table I these constants, as well as the values for the ground
state So and the intermediate resonance state S,6' of the neutral
molecule, are listed [97]. A comparison of the ground-state constants of
the neutral and the ionized molecule reveals that the benzene ring is only
marginally influenced by the removal of an electron. In particular, the
values of the rotational constant C, corresponding to the moment of
inertia about the axis perpendicular to the ring, are almost identical. A
slight contraction or expansion of the ring on ionization is compatible
with the error limits. The deviation from the planarity condition C = B / 2
lies within the error limits for the rotational constants of the cation. This
result is consistent with the deduced D6h symmetry, which requires a
planar structure. The rotational constants were therefore also fitted under
the assumption of planarity, and the constants obtained in this way were
thus given preference. These values are given in Table I1 and contrasted
with the results of an ab initio calculation [56]. The pairs of values of C
shown in Table I1 suggest a stretching of the ring bonds, in agreement
with the intuitive expectation of what happens when an electron is
removed from a bonding orbital. The experimentally obtained stretch of

                                                   TABLE I
Spectroscopic Constants of the Ground State of Neutral Benzene [97], the S , State [92,93]

                       and the D , Ground State of the Benzene Cation 181"

B (cm-')      so          S, 6'                                                 Do

c (cm-')  0.18977389    0,1817904                                      * 0.18912k 0.00056
          0.0948637     0.0908482
i,,,      0           - 0.57873                                        0.09494 0.00022
                                                                       0.4534 t 0.0065

    * For the latter constants the constraint B = C i 2 was not used.
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY                     25

                                TABLE I1

Spectroscopic Constants of the Ground State D o'El, of the

       Cation Using the Relation C = B i 2 for the Fit (81"

          D,                  Calculation

B (cm-')  * 0.18956 f0.00034  0.18844
                              0.09422
c (cm-')  0.09478 0.00017
          0.4543 f 0.0066
Cf*

    "For comparison, the values from an ab initio calculation [56]
are also reported [ 5 ] .

approximately 0.1% is, however, about a factor of 5 smaller than that
predicted by theory. The strength of the bond in the benzene molecule is
apparently affected less by the removal of one of the four el, electrons
than previously assumed.

                   2. The 6' (eZg)Excited Jahn-Teller State

It is interesting to see the effect of excitation of a Jahn-Teller active
vibrational mode on the structure of the ion and how vibronic interactions
affect the vibrational structure of the ion's ground state. According to
theory, excitation of a degenerate vibration in a degenerate electronic
state should lift the degeneracy, and splitting into vibronic states of
different energies is expected [98,99]. Because of vibronic coupling, the
electronic wave function depends on the vibrational coordinate. The
Jahn-Teller effect is thus one of the most significant examples of the
breakdown on the Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation, which has
as its basic tenet the separability of the motion of electrons and nuclei.

   In the case of linear vibronic coupling, a good quantum number for the
characterization of the vibronic wave function for a doubly degenerate
electronic state is simply the sum j = p ? h of the vibrational angular
momentum p = + v and one half of the electronic angular momentum
h = + A (A = ?l), and not the individual angular momenta alone
[98,100]. For the benzene cation this implies that excitation of one

*3 quantum of the degenerate v6 (e2,) vibrational mode (6l) results in a

splitting into two states with different vibronic angular momenta j =
and j = k;. The level with angular momentum j = 5 ; should split

* + *; further into two states due to quadratic JT coupling. This differing

behavior of the two components with j = and j = can also be
explained by group theory. The direct product of the irreducible repre-
sentations of the electronic state El, and the v, vibrational mode e2,
generates one doubly degenerate state with the symmetry species El, and

two states with the symmetry species B(T,0r, = El, 0e2g=
E l , @Big @B2,). Higher order couplings can only split the state re,=
26  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

* 3) B,, CI3 B2,( j = ?t); the state re,= El,( j = remains degenerate. An

unambiguous assignment of the individual, split vibronic states and an
exact determination of their energies is necessary for a precise de-
termination of the strengths of the vibronic coupling. Rotationally
resolved ZEKE spectroscopy is the method for the unambiguous assign-
ment of the symmetry species of the vibronic states and thus the
vibrational modes of the benzene cation, thereby providing reliable
values for the vibronic coupling strengths.

   The rotational state of an oblate symmetric rotor is characterized by
two quantum numbers. For the ground state (So) and the intermediate
state ( S , ) of the neutral benzene molecule, these are the quantum

numbers J of the total angular momentum and the quantum number K

for its projection along the molecule-fixed principal axes. For the benzene

3, cation with the electronic spin S = the rotational states are character-

ized (with the assumption of only a weak spin-orbit interaction) by the

quantum number N +, which describes the total angular momentum

without electronic spin, and the projection quantum number K + . In
degenerate vibronic states the rotational states split by Coriolis interac-
tions must be differentiated by an additional quantum number [S3] k l .

   The determination of the rotational structure of the benzene cation
and the assignment of the rotational transitions observed in the ZEKE
spectra allow the determination of the vibronic symmetry species of the
corresponding vibrational state. This determination is done in a similar
way for ammonia [ S , 61 and for the vibrationless ground state of the
benzene cation (see above). If we start with the known symmetry of the
intermediate state, in which only one rovibronic state is populated, the
possible final states are determined based on group theoretical considera-
tions. The conservation of symmetry of the nuclear spin wave function
and the rules for electronic symmetry selection and the coupling of
angular momenta greatly restrict the possible transitions; depending on
the vibronic symmetry of the final state, only a few rotational pro-
gressions can be observed [6,9].

   For the benzene cation the v6(e2,) mode is the Jahn-Teller active

4 + mode with the lowest frequency [56, 1011. Photoelectron spectra of

benzene [9S] indicate a splitting of the j = and j = components of the
6l band by roughly 300 cm-l. Measurements with a variant of the ZEKE
method, in which the ions remaining after the pulsed-field ionization are
detected (referred to as mass analyzed threshold ionization, MAT1
[41,42]) show vibrational structure in the region up to 800 cm-' above
the first ionization potential [43]. In this vibrational structure the splitting

of the two components with j = k t and j = f+,and to some extent the

separation of the quadratic JT components, can be seen. However,
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  27

rotational resolution that would ensure the unambiguous assignment of
the bands, was not achieved in these measurements [43]. This resolution
is especially necessary for the j = ? + band, as it lies close to high-
intensity combination modes of other vibrations.

   Figure 16 shows the completely rotationally resolved ZEKE spectrum
in the region of the 6l(j = *+)band of the benzene cation [9, 851. The
first laser is tuned to the S,6' t S,R,(O) transition, and thus a single

rovibronic level (1'= 1,K' = 1, + I ) is populated in the intermediate

state [92]. The second laser is scanned over the range v, =36,598-
36,638cm-l, and the ZEKE signal is recorded versus v,. Figure 16 shows
two vibrational bands in this region with almost the same intensity and
both with resolved rotational structure. Without rotational resolution it is
not possible to decide with certainty which of the two states should be

           6 1(?I/,)

           K+= l
           rrrn

           1234 5 N+

            +

           Kn= 5

           L 5 6 N+
                        best fit

t

I

   36,618             36,638

   E [cm-'1 -- >

    Figure 16. Measured and fitted ZEKE spectrum of the transition 6 l ( + + )
' E l , + S, 6l ' E l , (J' = 1, K ' = 1, + l ) . (Redrawn from [9].)
28                    K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

assigned to the 6'(j = ? +)El, band. Starting from the rotational transi-

tions characteristic of a given vibronic symmetry, two rotational pro-

gressions with K + = 1 and K + = 5 can be assigned to the state higher in

energy (Fig. 16, right). The rotational structure indicates that El, is the

vibronic symmetry species of this band, which can thus be unambiguously

assigned to the 6'(j = ?+)El, state. This assignment is supported by

comparison with the spectrum of the vibrationless ground state [8] (see

above), which also has El, symmetry. The two spectra are very similar

with the exception of the Coriolis splittings, which result from Coriolis

coupling constants J of different magnitude and sign. In contrast, the

rotational structure of the lower energy state (Fig. 16, left) is not

compatible with an El, symmetry species. This result probably corre-

sponds to a component of the combination mode 16'6'(j = *+).

    The second component of the split v, band, the state with vibronic

angular momentum j = ?+, is split into two states with B,, and B,,

symmetry due to the quadratic, dynamic Jahn-Teller effect [98]. Very

similar rotational structures are expected for the two states since both

vibronic states have the same symmetry species B and their rotational

constants should have almost the same values. Figure 17 shows the ZEKE

spectrum via the same intermediate state S16' (J' = 1,K' = 1, + I ) [9], in

which the second laser is scanned over the range vz=36,288-

36,328 cm-'. Two clearly separated vibronic states with almost identical

rotational structures can be seen, which can both be assigned to a

progression with K + = 3. This result leads to the vibronic symmetry

species B,, and B,,, which is in agreement with the symmetry selection

rules for ZEKE spectroscopy; these components must be assigned to the

two JT states 6' ( j = ?3). So far it cannot be determined which state has

the vibronic symmetry species B,, and which has Bzg.The separations of

each set of two transitions with the same quantum numbers Nfand K +

agree to within k O . 1 cm-'. The mean splitting between the states is

20 cm-'.

The differences in band origin energy between the 6, ( j = 2 ; ) bands
-3) and the 6' ( j =  +3) and 6' ( j =
                                        bands is 331 and 311cm-',

respectively. This result corresponds to roughly one half of the vibrational

energy of the v, mode. Thus the benzene cation is a good example of

intermediate coupling, in which the vibrational frequency of the Jahn-

Teller active mode and the accompanying coupling strengths have almost

the same values [ l o l l . With the precise values given here for the energies

of the components of the v, band that are affected by vibronic inter-

action, the results of quantum chemical ab initio calculations can be

examined very closely. Comparison with values published recently shows

how well these latest dynamic Jahn-Teller calculations can take into
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY       29

                        6'(t3i2)   K+= 3

        K+= 3                     rm

        m                         3 4 5 6 N+

        3 4 5 N+

36,288  36,308                                36,328

        E [cm-'1 -+

    Figure 17. Measured and fitted ZEKE spectrum of the transition 6'(+3)

+ *Big82*B,,+- S, 6' ' E l , (J' = 1, K' = 1 1 ). The two components originating from the

quadratic Jahn-Teller splitting show clearly resolved rotational structure (Redrawn from

[91.)

account several active modes [1021. The difference between the calculated
value for the 6l ( j = ?+) band of 694 cm-' and the measured value of
676.4cm-I is only 3%.

   The determination of the symmetry of a vibronic state by rotationally
resolved ZEKE spectroscopy, demonstrated here for the v, mode, would
allow the elucidation of the full vibrational structure of the benzene
cation, which is predicted to be very irregular due to multiple-mode
Jahn-Teller coupling. This would be a significant contribution to the
understanding of the Jahn-Teller effect and vibronic interactions. High-
resolution experimental analysis of the cation of the benzene molecule,
the prototypical aromatic molecule, which is frequently the subject of
theoretical studies, was not possible previously [1021.
30  K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

    111. THEORY AND FORMULATION

Section I1 has given some examples of rotationally resolved ZEKE
spectra; in this section we will focus on ab initio theoretical concepts for
calculations of intensity for such spectra.

   Rotationally resolved PE spectra and their associated PE angular
distributions can clearly provide significant insight into the dynamics of
molecular photoionization, one of the simplest of molecular fragmenta-
tion processes. Such state-resolved spectra are an obvious signature of the
exchanges of energy and angular momentum between the photoelectron
and molecular ion. The recent development of ZEKE photoelectron
spectroscopy now makes it possible to exploit the narrow bandwidth of
laser radiation to routinely achieve subwavenumber resolution in ion
rovibronic state distributions [3, 4, 11, 13, 201. These and other rotation-
ally resolved measurements [1481 are providing useful insight into
significant spectral features, such as the dependence of photoelectron
angular distributions on rotational levels [77, 1031, rotational propensity
rules, parity selectivity in transitions involving electronically degenerate
states [75, 105-107, 1481, autoionization [108, 109, 1401, effects of
alignment [110], and the influence of Cooper minima [lll-1131 and shape
resonances [114] on ion distributions. The underlying dynamics of such
rotationally resolved PE spectra can clearly be expected to present new
theoretical and computational challenges.

   In this section, we present an ab initio theoretical framework and
computational approach [115,116] for studying vibrational and rotational
distributions of ions resulting from the REMPI of single rotational levels
of excited electronic states of molecules and from single-photon ioniza-
tion of ground electronic states of molecules. This formulation, in which
an intermediate coupling scheme between Hund's cases (a) and (b) is
used to represent the initial and ionic states of linear molecules and where
multiplet-specific final state wave functions are assumed, has been used to
carry out quantitative theoretical studies of rotationally resolved PE
spectra for a wide range of diatomic molecules. A similar formulation for
a pure Hund's case (b) coupling scheme is also given for specific C - C
ionization processes. Several of these examples and the dynamical insight
they provide will be reviewed here. An extension of this formulation to
symmetric top [117] and asymmetric top [118] nonlinear polyatomic
molecules as well as several applications of this extension are also
discussed.

   Numerous examples illustrating the widespread implications of parity
selection rules, effects arising from Cooper minima, and strong 8 mixing
in.molecular PE wave functions will be used to highlight the underlying
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  31

dynamics of rotationally resolved molecular photoionization. These

include spectra at low PE energies resulting from the (2 + 1) REMPI of a

single rotational level of HBr and OH and ZEKE-PFI photoelectron
spectra for single-photon ionization of the ground states of OH, NO, CO,
N,, H,O, H,CO, and CH,. These studies reveal the rich underlying
dynamics of quantum state specific studies of molecular photoionization
and provide a robust prediction of key spectral features of interest in
related experimental studies.

           + A. (n 1') REMPI for Linear Molecules

               1. Rotationally Resolved Photoelectron Spectra

In an (n + 1') REMPI process of interest here, the resonant intermediate

state is created by absorption of n photons from an initially unaligned (all
M J , levels equally populated) state. This aligned state (levels with

different 1MJ,I values have different populations) is subsequently ionized

by absorption of another photon. The photon energies of the excitation
and ionization steps of REMPI may differ from each other in a two-color
experiment. Under collision-free conditions, ionization out of each M J ,
magnetic sublevel of the initial state forms an independent channel for
linearly polarized light. The differential cross-section for photoionization
of the resonant state by a single photon can then be written as

where (7 is the total cross-section, p,, are the asymmetry parameters,

P2L(cos6 ) are the Legendre polynomials, and 6 is the angle between the

direction of the PE and the electric vector of the polarized light. The total

cross-section u and asymmetry parameters p for ionization of a 4. level of

the resonant or initial (n = 0) state can be written as [116]
32  K. MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

where t is an angular momentum component of the PE and m is its

projection in the laboratory frame. In Eq. (1.2), ~Ctm(MJzMijs +th)e ~z

probability for photoionization of the MJ, level of the resonant or initial

state leading to the MJ+ level of the ion. The expression for Ce,(MJIMj+)

will be derived later. For the branching ratios of interest here, the

constant implied in Eq. (1.2) is unimportant and will be suppressed.

    In Eqs. (1.2) and (1.3), pM is the population of a specific MJ, level

in the optically aligned resdnzhnt state. For single-photon ionization

processes (n = O)pM is the population of the unaligned M J , levels of

                                4 3,

the initial state. For the REMPI examples of interest here, we will limit

our discussion to only the n = 2 case, that is, (2 + 1') REMPI processes.

For the low-intensity experiments of interest here, pM for two-photon

excitation has the general form  J, J,

where K is a normalization constant, Jk is the total angular momentum of
a dipole-allowed virtual state ( k ), and Bk is related to the rotational line
strength [1191. Evaluation of Eq. (1.4) generally requires summation over
all dipole-allowed virtual states Ik). For rotational branches other than

the Q branch, Eq. (1.4) can be further simplified into a product of a 3-j
symbol and rotational line strength B [120],

However, in the case of a Q branch, evaluation of p M requires two
                                 3, J ,
factors B, and B, [119],

Note that B, contains no polarization information, but is crucial in

determining the alignment pM of the intermediate state for (2 + 1')

REMPI via the Q rotational bJ, raJt nch. An expression for p M for the
                                                4 J ,
n # 2 case is given in [116].

    In Eqs. (1.2) and (1.3), C,,(MjiMJ+) are just the expansion co-

efficients of the bound-free matrix element (flD,,li), that is

    ( f I ~ p , I i >= Cem Ctrn(MJLMJ+)Ytrn(')                  (1.7)
     ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY      33

for photoionization of an MJi sublevel of a parity level of the resonant
state leading to an M J + level of a parity component of the ion. In Eq.
(1.7), Dp0is the dipole moment operator with po as the light polarization

If) index in the laboratory frame, and the total final state continuum wave

function is defined as

where IA,C,) are the multiplet-specific final state wave functions includ-

If'), ing spin. The IAfC,) are antisymmetrized products of the photoelectron
16,) and ion wave functions                which may consist of several spin

components

            IA,C,> =C. C, JA+S+C+J+R+M!+;  8mSeCe)        (1.9)

* 3 with S, = and C, = $ for the PE and C, is an expansion coefficient.

Therefore, the bound-free transition moment of Eq. (1.7) can be

rewritten as

In Eq. (1.10) we use an intermediate coupling scheme between Hund's

cases (a) and (b) to represent the intermediate (or initial) state ti) and the
If') ionic state wave functions
                                 [116]. The dipole moment operator Dp0

and the PE wave function are given, respectively, as

            c," DPO= ( 4 7 r / 3 y r (-l)"-"";:o,Ylp(P')  (1.11)

and

            C x i`e +Q(- 1lmY -:(i'~) 9 +kfA              (1.12)
                emh

where p is the light polarization index in the molecular frame, $3'; are

the rotational matrices in Edmonds' notation [121], ve is the Coulomb

phase shift, h is the projection of 8 in the molecular frame, and IClkeA is a

partial wave component of the PE orbital [122] with momentum k .

   With the following basis for both the intermediate and ionic state wave
34             K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.
functions

and making use of properties of the 3-j symbol, we obtain

           J+  Ji Jr S S e 'i)]                            (1.15)
           (-a+-ai A,>(ZI C e C i                          (1.16)
                                                           (1.17)
with

           'lAf &A, ;C, =  t ) ( + e f' )'8Ap(Af C f )
               4C f  (A +

           +: I,,, = (-i)'eis! dRX (R>y;;, ( R>X",( R)

and

               P = AJ + AS + 2S, + Ap + Aq + 4 + 1         (1.18)

where AJ = J+ - J,, AS = S + - Si, Ap = p + -pi,Aq = q+ - q,, p and q
     ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  35

are parity indexes [123],J, and J, are angular momentum transfers, C, +,;
and Cnj, are expansion coefficients for the wave functions of the
rovibronic states of the ion and resonant states [116],respectively, and
the summations in Eq. (1.15) go over all possible indexes. In Eq. (1.17)
Y;~A'*(Ris) the PE matrix element and IeAyis the vibrationally averaged PE
matrix element between the resonant state and the PE continuum wave
function.

   If pure Hund's case (b) bases are used for the ionic and intermediate
state wave functions, which are appropriate for C - C type transitions, the
coefficient C,,(M,! M,+ ) becomes

     q. Si Ji N+ S+

C + (-1)"(2Nt 1)( M N L M S i - M J ) ( M N +  MS+

                                                                                    (1.19)
with

and

     Z"'=N+ -4+ t + p + - p i + 1                     (1.21)

where Ni and N+ are total angular momenta apart from spin of the
resonant and ionic states, respectively, M,, and M,+ are their projections
along the internuclear axis in the laboratory frame, N, is the angular
momentum transfer, and Ms, is the spin projection along the internuclear
axis in the laboratory frame.

                        2. Photoelectron Matrix Element

The matrix element for photoejection of an electron from a bound
molecular orbital +i (or li)) into a PE continuum orbital $;)(r) (or +J is
a central quantity in these studies. Here k is the momentum of the P E
36  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

and the (-) denotes incoming-wave boundary conditions. For linear

tiik molecules, the partial wave components of $ i ) ( r ) are defined by an

expansion in spherical harmonics about k of the PE

                                                              (1.22)

Single-center expansions of 4ii?,(r) and +i(r'),for example,  (1.23)

          (cliil c= gf?,k"A(kr>)':Ayt`'A('')
                                     e `A

define partial wave PE matrix elements r;:'"(R) in the molecular frame
for ionization of orbital +i(r'),

   2 I I r;;'" ( R1= 1 1 1 ( &, e 'A ( k3 r , R)ye`A (2' r y ,'"(` ' +ito ( r ,R)yeoA,. ('' )
                   c',eo
                                                                                    (1.24)

where R denotes a dependence on internuclear distance.
   Equation (1.24) reveals an important underlying dynamical aspect of

molecular PE wave functions. Whereas only e = 8' terms are allowed in

Eq. (1.24) for atomic systems with their central fields, where the angular

momentum of the PE must be conserved, 8 # e` terms arise in Eq. (1.24)

due to the nonspherical potential fields of molecular ions. This angular

momentum coupling between partial waves e and t 'is brought about by

the torques associated with the molecular ion potential and makes a
molecular PE orbital an admixture of angular momentum components.

Viewed very simply, this means that whatever angular momentum e a PE

may have at a given instant can be changed as the PE scatters off the
molecular ion. The use of molecular PE orbitals that correctly incorpo-
rate such angular momentum coupling is essential at the low PE energies
of interest here.

    3. Parity Selection Rules

Parity selection rules [115, 116, 124, 1251 govern changes of rotational
angular momentum upon ionization. Equations (1.15) and (1.18) yield
the parity selection rule

    AJ + AS + Ap + Aq + e = even                              (1.25)

for a coupling scheme intermediate between Hund's cases (a) and (b).
Note that Eq. (1.25) is also suitable for pure Hund's case (a) coupling
since the intermediate coupling scheme assumes a Hund's case (a) basis.
This parity selection rule is the same as that of Xie and Zare [124] and of
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY        37

Dixit and McKoy [115]. The Aq term does not arise in the results of Dixit

and McKoy [115] since C - states were not explicitly considered there. For

these states the spin-orbit splittings are always negligible and pure
Hund's case (b) applies. In Hund's case (b) limit, Eqs. (1.19) and (1.21)
lead to [115, 116, 124, 1251

AN + Ap + t= odd                                       (1.26)

with A N = N + - N,. For a C - C transition, Eq. (1.26) reduces to A N +

t = odd [51].

           + B. (n 1') REMPI for Asymmetric Tops

1. Rotationally Resolved Photoelectron Spectra

+ The formulation for rotationally resolved PE spectra resulting from

(n 1') REMPI of asymmetric tops is basically the same as that for linear

molecules. The defining equations for the differential cross section [Eq.

(1.l)], total cross section [Eq. (1.2)], and asymmetry parameters [Eq.

(1.3)] for linear molecules still hold for nonlinear polyatomic molecules

except that the coefficients C e m ( M J t M J +m) ust be redefined. In this

section, we will derive an expression for these Cem(MJtMJ+co) efficients

primarily for asymmetric tops with C,, molecular symmetry even though

it can also be applied to other molecular symmetries.

To evaluate Ce,(MJtM,+), explicit forms for the wave functions of the
,)'fI intermediate state li), the ionic state
                                               and the PE lr$e) are needed

   )'fI = *+X"+(-1)N+-s++"J+(2J++ 1 p 2 N+ s+

and

where 13m,) is the spin eigenfunction of the PE, k defines the PE kinetic
energy, y is one of the irreducible representations (IR) of the molecular
38              K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

point group, T is a component of this representation, h distinguishes

between different bases for the same IR corresponding to the same value
+ijy(r) of t?,
               is a partial wave component of the PE orbital, Xhy`eA(ki)s a

generalized harmonic, and qi and ,y, are the electronic and vibrational

wave functions of the state li), respeitively. Note that a Hund's case (b)

coupling scheme is chosen to represent both the intermediate and ionic

states [see Eqs. (1.27) and (1.28)]. The rotational levels of both the

intermediate and ionic states are given in terms of asymmetric top wave

functions

where J = K, - K,, K,, and K, are the projections of the total angular
momentum along the a and c axes, respectively, and the coefficients a N I K
are determined by diagonalizing the rigid rotor Hamiltonian

                      =JZ- +J 22 + J 2 L          (1.31)
                        21, 2 4 21,

in a basis of symmetric top eigenfunctions. In Eq. (1.30) S(NM,Kp) is a
linear combination of symmetric top functions and has the form [126]

                      + 1      (-l)"lNM, - K ) )  (1.32)

           S(NM,Kp) =-(INMNK)
                llj_

for K > 0 and

                S(NMNOO)= lNM,O)                  (1.33)

for K = 0. The parity index p in Eq. (1.32) takes a value of 0 or 1. The
symmetric top wave functions l N M N K )in Eqs. (1.32) and (1.33) are
given by

                                                  (1.34)

Note that the S(NMNKp)functions adopted in Eq. (1.30), instead of

symmetric top eigenfunctions INM,K ) ,fulfill the symmetry requirements

of the V, group [126]. In Eq. (1.29) we use the generalized harmonics
X;;*(k') as bases for the IR of the molecular point group. These
symmetry-adapted angular functions satisfy well-known orthonormality
relations [127] and can be expressed in terms of the usual spherical
           ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  39

harmonics

           X,",(ii'> = b;>AY[A(+ktb);;-AYt-A(kf)            (1.35)

in the body-fixed frame. The coefficients bl>Afor C,, and 0, symmetries
have been given by Burke et al. [127]. These Yfi(cf) can be further
written in terms of the spherical harmonics Y,,(k) in the laboratory
frame as

           2 Y&') = (-l)A-m%J;AYtm(k)                       (1.36)
                              m

With steps similar to those for the case of linear molecules, we obtain

Ei C,,(MJiMJ+) =  [(2Ji + 1)(2J+-t1)(2Ni + 1)(2N++ 1)(2s,+ 1)]"*

           + Q = AN AMJ - Si + Msi - po- m + M,+ + Ki-      (1.37)
                                                            (1.38)

and
40  K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

                        2. Photoelectron Matrix Element

For asymmetric top molecules, the partial wave components I/Iiip; of

Wj>)(r) are similarly defined by an expansion in generalized harmonics

about k of the PE

                                                                             (1.41)

With single-center expansions for I/Iiip;(r) and +y'T'(r'),partial wave PE
matrix elements ri>Ar(R)in the molecular frame for ionization out of
orbital q5y'T'(rf)are given by [118]

    c rhy>Ap(R) = (ghY>,f'A(k>' 9 R ) x i > ' A ( r ' ) l r y ~ ~ ( ~ f ) l
                   e',eo

    x +g'JrR, ) X ~ ~ > : , ~ ~.( P ) )                                      (1.42)

   Note that while 4'# 4'' terms arise in both Eqs. (1.24) and (1.42) due

to the nonspherical potential fields of molecular ions. For nonlinear
molecules, coupling of the projections of angular momenta along appro-
priate axes can become pervasive.

    3. Parity Selection Rules

Equation (1.37) yields the general parity selection rule

    + + AN Ap i? = odd                                                       (1.43)

which has the same form as diatomic molecules with Hund's case (b)
coupling [115, 116, 124, 1251. However, this selection rule is not
particularly transparent since the parity indexes p i and p + are defined
with respect to the S(NM,K,) functions used to expand the asymmetric
top wave functions [see Eq. (1.32)]. Equation (1.43) must be further
developed to explicitly reveal its dependence on the angular momentum
changes AKa and AKc.

   Here we choose a left-handed coordinate system for the molecular
internal x, y and z axes with the molecular z axis as the symmetry axis.

+ With the symmetry properties of the asymmetric top [126], it can be

shown that AK, is even (odd) when AN Ap is even (odd). Here 7 is the
principal axis lying along the molecular x axis and the K, is the projection
of the total angular momentum along the axis. The parity selection rule of
Eq. (1.43) then reduces to

    AK, + 4'= odd                                                            (1.44)
       ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY            41

The selection rules also depend on which principal axis coincides with the

molecular z axis. With the properties of 3-j symbols, Eq. (1.37) provides

additional selection rules [126]

                  AK, if allzllthe symmetry axis                  (1.45)
                  AK, if bllzllthe symmetry axis
                  AK, if cllzllthe symmetry axis

To relate the selection rules of Eq. (1.44) and (1.45), a relationship
among AK,, AK,, and AKc is essential. This relationship, which can be
obtained from the symmetry properties of an asymmetric top [126], is

                  AK, + AK, = even(odd)t,AK, = even(odd)          (1.46)

+ Determination of p A now becomes a critical step in the application of

these selection rules. Whereas Eqs. (1.44-1.46) are suitable for any

+ nonlinear polyatomic molecule, p A must be determined specifically for

a given molecular symmetry. These selection rules will be further

illustrated in later sections.

                  + C. (n 1') REMPI for Symmetric Tops

In view of the applications to CH,, to be discussed later, it is convenient

to give explicit expressions for molecules of D,,symmetry. To obtain the

C,,(MJzM,+) of Eqs. (1.2) and (1.3) for (n + 1') REMPI of symmetric

tops, the wave functions of the intermediate state li) [Eq. (1.27)] and
)'fI ionic state
                  [Eq. (1.28)] are replaced by

                  I N* SLJL                                       (1.47)
                  x(MN, M S L - M J ) ' S ~ M S L ) NiMNLKiP)i

       )'fI = I , ! J + X ~ , ( - ~ ) ~ + - ~ + ++~ '1+)"(*~ J +

where

                  + INM,Kp) =$[INM,K) ( - l ) " l N M , - K ) ]   (1.49)
42               K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

With manipulations similar to those for asymmetric tops, we obtain

@ C,,(MJiMJ+)= [(2Ji+ 1)(2J+ + 1)(2N,+ 1)(2N++ 1)(2Si+ l)]"'

                                                                                    (1.50)

Note that no parity selection rules relating Ap, AN,and 8 are obtained

for photoionization of symmetric tops since the partial wave components
of each continuum have different phase factors [117]. However, Eq.

(1.50) does reveal that p + A = 5AK and p + A = *(K++ K,).

                          D. Computational Procedures

In applications of our procedure to REMPI of Rydberg states we use the
improved virtual orbital (IVO) method [128] to obtain the wave function
of the resonant state. The core orbitals of these Rydberg states are taken
to be those of the fully relaxed ion. For single-photon ionization, we
assume a self-consistent-field(SCF) wave function for the ground state of
the molecule. For the final state we assume a frozen-core Hartree-Fock
model in which the PE orbital is obtained as a solution of a one-electron
Schrodinger equation containing the Hartree-Fock potential of the
molecular ion yon(r,R ) , that is

                 (-71 ~2  +  yo  n(  r ,R  )  -  k2   i  -  )  (  r  ,  R  )  =  0  (1.51)
                                                 y)+

with +,$-)=;;$:  for linear molecules and 4L-l = $iiP: for nonlinear
molecules.
            ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  43

   To obtain the PE orbital +:-I, we have used an iterative procedure,
based on the Schwinger variational principle [122], to solve the Lipp-
mann-Schwinger equation associated with Eq. (1S l ) . This procedure
begins by approximating the static-exchange potential of the ionic core by
a separable potential of the form

                                                             (1.52)

where the matrix U-' is the inverse of the matrix with the elements

( U ) , = (ailUlaj>and the a values are discrete basis functions, such as

Cartesian or spherical Gaussian functions. The parameter U is twice the

static-exchange potential in Eq. (1.51) with the long-term Coulomb

potential removed. The Lippmann-Schwinger equation with this separ-

+p), $~p) able potential U(r, r') can be readily solved and provides an approximate
PE orbital  These orbitals can be iteratively improved to yield

converged solutions to the Lippmann-Schwinger equation containing the

full static-exchange potential. A few iterations of this iterative variational

method provide highly converged solutions for the molecular PE orbitals.

                       IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

                                A. Linear Molecules

                      1. Single-Photon Ionization of NO

Figure 18 shows the (a) measured and ( b ) calculated ZEKE-PFI
photoelectron spectra for single-photon ionization of rotationally cold NO
( X 2111/2u," = 0) molecules leading to NO+(X 'C', u, = 1) by coherent
VUV radiation [129]. The calculated ion rotational distributions assume a
temperature of 5 K . These spectra were calculated for a PE energy of
50 meV and convoluted with a Gaussian detection function with a full-
width at half-maximum (fwhm) of 2cm-'. In Fig. 18(b) each branch is
associated with a letter designation that refers only to the change in
angular momentum apart from spin, that is, AN = N , - N". The label 1'

3 denotes the N = 1,J"= level. The agreement between these measured

and calculated ZEKE spectra is excellent. To provide further insight into
the underlying dynamics of these ZEKE photoelectron spectra, Fig. 19
shows the (u)measured and ( b )calculated ion rotational branching ratios

5 for photoionization of the N'= 1, J"= rotational level of the X 2111/2

ground state of NO. The data of Fig. 19(a) are extracted from the
measured PE spectrum of Fig. 18(a) for rotationally cold NO where, in
addition to the N = 1 level, a few other rotational levels are also
44  K. MULLER-DETHLEFEST AL.

                                                        20

    Photon Energy (cm-')

    Figure 18. (a) measured and ( b ) calculated ZEKE-PFI photoelectron spectra for

single-photon ionization of rotationally cold NO ( X  by coherent VUV radiation. The

calculated spectrum is for 5 K. (Reproduced from [129] with permission.)

populated. These rotational branching ratios for ionization of this valence

2.rr orbital differ somewhat from those generally seen in ZEKE spectra of

Rydberg states.
   In Fig. 18, only small changes in total angular momentum are observed

2) (IAJI 5 with branch intensities that fall-off rapidly as IAJ( increases.

The observation of branches with IAJ1 5; suggests that the dominant

contributions to the PE matrix element at threshold are from e 5 1. This

result differs from expectations based on the calculated magnitudes of
these partial wave dipole elements lD$-'I, which are shown in Fig. 20,

where the d(& = 2) and f(e= 3) components are seen to be substantial

[129]. Unusually strong s and d waves are also predicted in addition to
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  45

         measured     n : calculated

                         5"=3/2
                         N"= 1

AN = -1  0         1  2  3

  + Figure 19. (a) measured B and ( b ) calculated ZEKE photoelectron spectra for

single-photon ionization of the N ' = 1, J" = level of the X zr11,2state of NO by coherent
VUV radiation. (Reproduced from [129] with permission.)

the p and f partial waves expected in photoionization of the 2rr orbital

with its 84% d ( t o= 2) character. This behavior reflects the significant
coupling of angular momentum in the PE continuum due to torques
associated with the molecular ion potential. Given that these calculated
PE matrix elements yield an accurate representation of the measured
threshold PE spectra (see Figs. 18 and 19), one may conclude that

photoexcitation into high t partial waves is not accompanied by observ-

able changes in ion-core angular momentum of comparable magnitude.
That such large changes in angular momentum AJ(AN) are not seen in
these spectra in spite of the significant magnitudes of the PE matrix
element for higher t ( = 3 ) is probably due to interference between these
partial waves in the PE continua. The effect of such interference on ion

+ rotational distributions has also been seen in (2 1) REMPI via the

f ' I I ( 3 p a ) and the g 'A(3prr) Rydberg states of NH [112].

                      2. Single-Photon Ionization of OH

Figure 21 shows (a) measured and ( b ) calculated ZEKE-PFI photoelec-
tron spectra for single-photon ionization of OH ( X ?Ii, u" = 0) leading to
OH' ( X 3C-, u, = 0) by coherent VUV radiation [130]. Agreement
between the calculated and measured spectra is again quite encouraging.
The PE spectrum [Fig. 21(b)] was calculated assuming a kinetic energy of
46                  K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

      0.4

 h

 5

 cd

 v

- 0.2

h

aLPI

    09.0-                          0.0

           0  2  4  6  8           10 0 2 4 6 8 1 0

    0.6 I                                    Kinetic Energy (eV)

                                   I

    0.4

    0.2

    0.0

           0  2  4  6  8           10

              Kinetic Energy (eV)

    Figure 20. Magnitude of the partial wave components of the PE matrix element lD$-'i
for photoionization of the X 2 n ground state of NO. (a) 2a-+ka, ( b ) 2 a + k a , and (c)
2 a -+k8 ionization channels. (Reproduced from [129] with permission.)

25 meV and a temperature of 220 K. This spectrum was convoluted with a
Gaussian detection function with an fwhm of 3 cm-'. Furthermore, the
ground state was assumed unaligned and the elf components of rotational
levels of the ground state were equally populated. In Fig. 21(a) each
branch is associated with a letter designation referring only to the change
in angular momentum apart from spin, that is, AN = N + - N", a subscript
denoting the spin ( F level) of the originating state, and a double prime
indicating the quantum numbers associated with the ground state of the
neutral molecule.

   The most prominent branches are the P I , Q , , and R , , which are
associated with the normal one-photon allowed electronic transitions
since IAN1 5 1. The corresponding branches originating from the F2
components of the ground state are nearly as strong since the spin-orbit
splitting is small relative to the rotational temperature. The observation
of one-photon branches with (AN1> 1 ( N , 0, and S) has no counterpart
in non-ionizing electronic transitions and is a consequence of the parti-
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  47

        5T1 measured

F:      L

Y

$       calculated

.rl

4

(d
e4 a:J

                    104,700 104,800 104,900 105,000 105,100 105,200

                                      Energy (cm-')

    Figure 21. (a) measured and ( b ) calculated pulsed-field ionization spectra of OH'

( X 'Y, u, = 0) for the X 'II ground state of OH. The branch designations refer to AN and

the subscript designates whether the transition originates from the F, or the Fz level. The
triplet splitting in the ion is not resolved and numbers on each ladder designate the value of
N". (Reproduced from [130] with permission.)

tioning of angular momentum between the ion core and PE in the
photoionization process. Of particular interest here is the low intensity of
the S branches compared to the 0 branches, both of which involve the
same absolute change in angular momentum, that is, IAN( = 2. This
behavior is also observed in the threshold photoionization spectra of N,O

[140] and HC1 [30, 1451. It is also evident in several (1+ 1') REMPI-

ZEKE photoelectron spectra for a single rotational level of the A 2 C +
(3sa) Rydberg state of NO [7, 11, 1311. A field-induced autoionization

mechanism involving the interaction of high n Rydberg states (n> 150)
48           K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

with lower n levels (20<n<80) converging to thresholds for higher
rotational levels of the cation has successfully accounted for this behavior
[ 1401.

                 3. Single-Photon Ionization of CO and N2

Figure 22 shows the ZEKE-PFI photoelectron spectra for single-photon
ionization of rotationally cold CO ( X 'C+) molecules leading to the
u, = 0 level of COf ( X '2') by coherent extreme ultraviolet (XUV)
radiation [132]. The calculated spectrum assumes a temperature of 8 K, a
PE energy of 50meV, and is convoluted with a Gaussian detection

    112,980  113,010  113,040           113,070

    102;980  103:OlO  103:040           103;070

             Photon Energy (cm-')

    Figure 22. ( n ) measured and ( b ) calculated ZEKE photoelectron spectra for single-

photon ionization of rotationally cold CO ( X 'I+)by coherent XUV radiation. The

calculated spectrum is for 8 K. (Reproduced from [132] with permission.)
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  49

function with an fwhm of 2 cm-'. The letter designation on each branch
again refers only to the change of angular momentum apart from spin.

The agreement between these calculated and measured rotational branch-
ing ratios is excellent for all branches except the Q(AN = 0) branches.
Although the Q(N"= 0 , 1 , 2 ) branches are the strongest in both spectra,
its calculated spectral intensity is about 10 times larger than that of the
R ( 1 )branch. This behavior is indicated by the broken scale in Fig. 22(b).
The strength of the Q branches in these spectra is consistent with the

+ parity selection rule, AN t = odd [115, 116, 124, 1251, and atomic-like

behavior for photoionization of the 5 u orbital (45.5% s, 24.1% p ,

25.2% d , and 2.7% f character at Re = 2.1322 u o ) . Another factor that

significantly enhances the Q branches is that these branches are much
denser than the spectral resolution due to the small difference in the
rotational constants for the ground states of CO and CO'. The origin of
this disagreement between these calculated and measured spectra is not
yet clear.

   The calculated spectral intensity of the 0(2)(AN = -2) branch is about
one half that of the S(2)(AN = 2) branch, while these branches have
almost the same intensities in the measured spectrum of Fig. 22. Similar
behavior favoring negative AN transitions is also seen in the N(4), 0 ( 4 ) ,
N ( 3 ) , and O(3) branches in the measured spectrum. Such enhancement
of negative AN branches over their positive counterparts is due to
field-induced rotational autoionization [1401.

   Figure 23 shows the (u) measured and ( b ) calculated ZEKE-PFI
photoelectron spectra for single-photon ionization of rotationally cold N,

' E l , (X u" = 0) molecules leading to the u+ = 0 level of N l (X'C,') by

coherent XUV radiation [132]. Again, the calculated spectrum assumes a
temperature of 8 K and a PE energy of 50meV. This spectrum is
convoluted with a Gaussian detection function with an fwhm of 2.7 cm-'.
Nuclear spin statistics are also taken into account in determining the
populations of the rotational levels of N,. Agreement between the
calculated and measured spectra is very encouraging, except for the 0
branches. It is again apparent that the abnormal intensities of these 0
branches with negative A N ( A N = -2) seen in the measured spectrum
must arise from rotational autoionization [140]. Note that no AN = odd
( N , P, R , or T branch) transitions occur in single-photon ionization of the

3wg orbital of the X 'Cg' state of N, in both the measured and calculated

spectra. However, these AN = odd branches are quite prominent in the
PE spectrum for photoionization of the 5w orbital of the X ' C + state of
CO (Fig. 22). On the basis of the selection rule of Eq. (1.26), these
AN = odd transitions must arise from even partial wave contributions to
the PE matrix elements. Since the 3wg orbital of N, has only even partial
50           K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

                                        measured

                            A

    20          125,650        125,680            125,710
      (b)
                                       calculated

                               (0) 41.1 %
                               (1) 32.1 %
                               (2) 24.8 %
                               (3) 2.1 %

                   )O(2)       S(0) S(1) S(2)

             ,  ,        I  I  I        i      I  l
    125,620     125,650        125,680            125,710

                Photon Energy (cm-')

    Figure 23. (a) measured and ( b ) calculated ZEKE photoelectron spectra for single-
photon ionization of rotationally cold N,(X 'E;) by coherent XUV radiation. The calculated
spectrum is for 8 K . (Reproduced from [132] with permission.)

wave character, the PE has only odd partial wave components for
single-photon ionization of this orbital, and, hence, no AN = odd transi-
tions can occur.

   Another significant difference between the calculated and measured
ZEKE-PFI spectra of Figs. 22 and 23 is the intensities of the Q branches
relative to other branches, such as the S(0) branch for N, and CO. The
measured N, ZEKE-PFI spectrum shows a much larger Q - t o 4 branch
intensity ratio than for CO. This ratio is in contrast to the calculated
spectra where these ratios are comparable for N, and CO. Since the even
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  51

partial wave character of the 5u (45.5% s and 25.2% d) orbital of CO
and the 3ug (55.5% s and 41.0% d ) orbital of N, are quite similar, we do
not expect the underlying photoionization dynamics of these orbitals to
differ significantly. This is the case in the calculated spectra. The reason
for this disagreement between the calculated and measured intensities for
CO is not clear.

                   4 . (2 + 1) REMPI of HBr

In Fig. 24 we compare our calculated ion rotational distributions of HBr'

in their X 2111,2ground state for (2 + 1) REMPI of HBr via the S(2)

branch of the F 'A2(5p7r)Rydberg state with the experimental data of
Xie and Zare [133,148]. Our studies of these spectra were motivated by
the recent measurements of Xie and Zare in which the populations of the
individual parity components of each ion rotational level were obtained
using laser-induced fluorescence [148]. These spectra show a strongly (-)
parity-favored ion rotational distribution for photoionization of the (+)
parity component of the .Ii= 4 level of the 5p7r Rydberg orbital of the
F 'A2 state, which has about 97% p ( f 0= 1) character. These (-) parity-
favored ion distributions can be readily understood on the basis of the
parity selection rules [115, 116, 124, 125, 1331 of Eq. (1.25) and the
dominance of the PE matrix element by its f = O and t ' = 2 angular
momentum components for photoionization of the 5p7r orbital with 96%
p character. However, the most striking result is that, in addition to the
dominant population seen in the (-) parity components of the A doublet
of the ion rotational levels, about 20% population is observed in the (+)
parity components that cannot be accounted for on the basis of atomic-
like behavior. Earlier theoretical studies of these ion rotational dis-
tributions had predicted extremely small populations for the (+) parity
levels [134]. Autoionization was subsequently proposed as a possible
underlying mechanism responsible for the population observed in the (+)
parity components of these ion rotational levels [134].

   Figure 24 shows our calculated spectra for photoionization of an
optically aligned 1,= 4 level, and an unaligned .I,= 4 level, along with the
measured spectra of Xie and Zare [133,148]. The agreement between the
calculated and measured ion distributions is excellent. Note that, on the
basis of selection rules [115, 116, 124, 125, 1331, this 20% population seen
in the (+) parity component (cross-hatched bars) of the A doublet is due
to odd partial wave components of the PE matrix elements that arise
from angular momentum coupling in the molecular PE orbitals. The
present results clearly demonstrate that the 20% population seen in the
(+) levels arises quite naturally in a correct quantitative description of
the direct photoionization and an autoionization mechanism need not be
52              K. MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

    :. 1.0

    4

     K!
    p:

    M

    .,d 0.5

    -5

    5

    k

    a 0.0

                fe fe fe fe fe fe fe fe

    ,z J+= 1/2  3/2  5/2  7/2  9/2 11/2 13/2 15/2
       1.0
    4

    K!
    p:

    ..=Ms: 0.5

    5

    L
       0.0

                            J+= 1/2 3/2 5/2 7/2 9/2 11/2 13/2 15/2

          :. 1.0

                         4
                         (d

              p:

       .sM
                   0.5

       2

                 F:

                          (d

                      h

                    0.0
                            fe fe fe fe fe fe fe fe

                           J+= 1/2 3/2 5/2 7 / 2 9/2 11/2 13/2 15/2

  + Figure 24. The measured and calculated rotational distributions of HBr' for (2 1 )

REMPI via the S ( 2 ) branch of the F 'Az state. The calculated distributions in ( b ) and (c) are
for an aligned and unaligned resonant state, respectively, and for a PE energy of 2.33 eV.
(Reproduced from [133] with permission.)

invoked. Examination of the PE matrix element rg' of Eq. (1.24)
reveals that the f wave of the 5 p + kti ionization channel makes the
dominant contribution to the population of these (+) parity levels of the
ion. Such behavior is entirely nonatomic-like [133]. Comparison of the
ion distributions for an unaligned .Ti= 4 level with those for an optically
aligned level and with the measured spectra serves to illustrate that,
although not large, the effect of alignment can be important. Further-
more, the ZEKE photoelectron spectra for photoionization of this F 'A,
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY     53

Rydberg state of HBr is predicted to display the same nonatomic-like
behavior seen in the spectra of Fig. 24.

                  5. (2 + 1) REMPI of OH

Figure 25 shows the measured and calculated rotationally resolved PE
spictra for ( 2 + 1) REMPI of OH via the 011(11)branch of the

1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3

2.95 3.05 3.15 3.25 3.35  2.95 3.05 3% 3.25 :
    Electron Energy (eV)
                              Electron Energy (ev)

    Figure 25. Measured and calculated rotationally resolved photoelectron spectra for

( 2 + 1) REMPI of OH: (a) measured spectrum for the D 'C- ( 3 p a ) state, v z = O + u , = 0,

Oil(11) rotational branch; ( b ) calculated D 'C- photoelectron spectrum, assuming a

Gaussian line shape with an Fwhm of 30 meV; (c) measured spectrum for the 3 'C- (4su)
state, u, = O + u, = 0, O,, (11) rotational branch; ( d ) calculated 3 'C- photoelectron
spectrum, assuming a Gaussian line shape with an fwhm of 35 meV. The labeling of peaks in
the calculated spectra indicates the change of rotational quantum number AN = N + - N , .
(Reproduced from [113] with permission.)
54  K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

D ,C- (3pa) [Fig. 25(a) and (b)] and the 3 ,C- (4sa) [Fig. 25(c) and (d)]

Rydberg states [113]. For ionization via the D ,C- state, we observe

strong AN = even signals in the PE spectrum, in contrast to the AN = odd

distribution expected for ionization of a 3pa (34.9% s and 63.3% p

character at the Re of 2.043 a,) Rydberg orbital with its dominant

3 p a + ks, kd components. On the other hand, the rotationally resolved

PE spectra for the 3 ,C- Rydberg state of Figs. 25(c) and (d) reveal a

qualitatively different and much broader distribution with prominent

AN = even and AN = odd transitions. The appearance of these spectra

arises from greater 8 mixing in this higher Rydberg orbital (54.3% s and

42.7% p character at R = 2.043 u o ) .

    To illustrate the rich photoionization dynamics of these strong even AN

peaks in the spectra, Fig. 26 shows the magnitude of the (incoming-wave

normalized) partial wave amplitude lDi-'I as a function of PE kinetic

energy for the (a) 3 p a + k o and ( b )3 p a + krr channels for photoioniza-

tion of the 3pa orbital of the D ' C - Rydberg state of OH. Two Cooper

minima, which are due to sign changes in the d ( t = 2 ) components

around the minimum in lD$-'I, are clearly seen at a kinetic energy of

about 3.0 eV for the k a and krr channels. The actual sign changes in the

dipole matrix elements occur in the principal value (standing-wave

normalized) dipole amplitude D:, as shown in the insets of Fig. 26 for the

8 = 2 wave. The energy positions of both minima in [Di-)l differ

somewhat from those of Cooper zeros in D:. These shifts reflect the

    cou                        .linTghien  the electronic continua on the
    0:-                                    strong even AN = 0 peaks of
P influence of angular momentum

transformation relating D: to

Figs. 26(a) and (b) can, in fact, be shown to be due to the presence of
Cooper minima in the 8 = 2 wave of the PE channels. Depletion of the d

wave (e = 2) contribution to the PE matrix element in the vicinity of both

Cooper minima subsequently enhances the relative importance of the odd
8 waves and, hence, that of the even AN rotational peaks. Similar effects

of Cooper minima on rotationally resolved PE spectra have also been

observed for REMPI of the f `II(3pa) state of NH [112] and the
D ,C+ (3pa) state of NO [135].

                               B. Nonlinear Molecules

                      1. Single-Photon Ionization of H,O

Figure 27(a) shows the rotationally resolved ZEKE-PFI spectrum of

H,O recently reported by Tonkyn et al. [31] for single-photon ionization

of the l b , orbital by coherent VUV radiation. This spectrum can be
assigned to two types of rotational transitions, corresponding to specific
changes in K, and K,. Most of the strong spectral lines could be classified
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGTI-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY                         55

0.3

n 0.2
  3

 d

-v

 -

L9

Cl 0.1

    0.0          2.0               4.0          6.0        8.0  10.0
         0.0
                                             T-0.10
- 0.2
                     0 0 0 0 0 1=2 cd 0.05

                     AILLA# Q = 3
                     QQQQD1=4 ~,o.oo

                                             -0.05 h            r

                                                     0.0 2.0 4.0 6.1

              -"Or'  3   c  -.     -". 0     ,  ..,- -r         -

0.0               ,   I         I         I  v       I          v

        I                                    I          I  I     I

     0.0         2.0               4.0          6.0        8.0       1(

                         Kinetic Energy (eV)

    Figure 26. Magnitude of the partial wave photoionization matrix elements as a function
of kinetic energy for the (a) 3 p a - k ~ and ( b ) 3pu-+kn. channels for the D 'C- ( 3 p a ) state
of OH. The inset shows the principal-value dipole amplitude D: for the 8 = 2 component.
(Reproduced from [44] with permission.)

as type c rotational transitions (AK, = odd, AKc = even), but type a

transitions (AK, = even, AKc = odd) are also clearly evident. Figure 27(b)

shows the calculated ion rotational distributions of Lee et al. 132, 1361 for

photoionization of the l b , orbital of the 2 ' A , (000) ground state of
jet-cooled H,O leading to the 2 ' B , (000) ground state of the ion. A PE

kinetic energy of 50meV and a rotational temperature of 1 5 K are

assumed in these calculations. Furthermore, we assume that there is no

spin exchange taking place during the jet-cooled expansion of room
56                  K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

                                                               900

     1 .o           1,,(82%)

               (b)  Po!.w. 52,,(18%)               calculated
                            k 202(98%)
                    % 2,,(2%)

                       s lIO(91%)

                    110 211(9%)

                                   ,lOlL~ll

                                      0,s 2,, 101 313

     0 .o                                       I  h

        101,700                 101,800                  101,900

                    Photon Energy (cm-')

    Figure 27. (a) measured and ( b ) calcula_ted ion rotational distributions for single-
photon ionization of the l b , orbital of the X ' A , ground state of jet-cooled H,O. The
calculated spectrum is for 15 K and has an fwhm of 1.5cm-'. The a and c labels indicate
type a and type c transitions, respectively. (Reproduced from [32] with permission.)

temperature water. The calculated spectrum is convoluted with a Gaus-
sian detection function with an fwhm of 1.5 cm-'. The agreement
between the calculated and measured spectra is clearly encouraging
except for the 0,, +2,, transition for which the calculated intensity is
somewhat stronger than that of the measured value.

   The underlying dynamics of these PE spectra is quite rich. From the
parity selection rules of Eqs. (1.44) and (1.45),we obtain [32,136]

                    AK, + 8 = odd                              (1.53)

and

                    p+X=AK,                                    (1.54)

Here we assume that the molecular z axis coincides with the C, symmetry
axis and the x axis lies in the plane of the molecule (ion). The molecular
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  57

x, y, and z axes hence coincide with the a, c, and b axes, respectively. For

+ photoionization of the lb, orbital of H,O, p h is always odd and,

hence, from Eq. (1.46)we have

AK, + AK, = odd                                  (1.55)

Clearly, both types a and c transitions are allowed and type b [AK, =
even(odd) and AKc = even(odd)] transitions are forbidden. Furthermore,
Eq. (1.53)shows that type a transitions ( l o l + O o o , O o o + l o l , 101+202,
and l,,+2J arise from odd (almost pure p ) wave contributions to the
PE matrix element of Eq. (1.42).These p waves of the ka, and kb,
continua are entirely molecular in origin, since the almost pure p (99.7%)
character of the lb, orbital would lead only to s and d (even) PE continua
in an atomic-like picture. The strong type c transitions in these spectra
arise from s and d (even) wave components of the PE matrix elements.
The ka, continuum makes almost no contribution to these type a
transitions due to the negligible f ( o d d ) wave. In a recent study using
MQDT, Child and Jungen [137]predicted that only type c transitions are
allowed for photoionization of the lb, orbital of ground-state water.
Gilbert and Child [1381 further proposed a rotational autoionization
mechanism, based on polarization-induced quasiautoionizing state-mixing
between the lb,+nd and lb,+np Rydberg series, in an effort to
account for these type a transitions. In contrast, the above analysis
[32,136]shows that these type a transitions arise quite naturally in a
correct quantitative description of the direct molecular photoionization
process itself and a polarization-induced autoionization mechanism need
not be invoked.

                     2. Single-Photon Ionization of H,CO

Figure 28 shows the ( a ) measured [139]and ( b ) calculated rotationally
resolved ZEKE-PFI spectra of H,CO for single-photon ionization of the
nonbonding 2b, orbital by coherent VUV radiation. The calculated
spectrum assumes a rotational temperature of 7 K, a PE kinetic energy of
50meV, and is convoluted with a Gaussian detection function with an
fwhm of 1.8cm-'. Furthermore, we assume that no spin exchange takes
place during the jet-cooled expansion of room temperature formalde-
hyde, that is, a population ratio of 2:lis kept for the ortho ( B symmetry)
to para ( A symmetry) species. The agreement between calculated and
measured spectra is very encouraging.

   In our calculations we assume that the molecular z axis coincides with
the C , symmetry axis and the x axis lies in the plane of the formaldehyde
molecule (ion). The molecular x, y, and z axes hence coincide with the b,
58              K . MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

     -(d (4              ow 202               220 322

     h             1-1                                      + 111

     2     calculatedI - ,101     303         221 321
                                                                110
      v)
                                                                                                                                                       +

     4 2                 ow 202               2 2 0 322

     H d           , , , 401 owI 202      2,     4; 211

     r               101 3m               221 321 423
     .7l

     4

     (d
     d

     ea:,

             I  I              I  I    I      I  I

          87,750 87,770  87,790 87,810, 87,830                                                                                                            87 50

    Figure 28. (a) measured and ( b ) calculated ion rotational distributions for single-
photon ionization of the 26, orbital of the X ' A ground state of jet-cooled H,CO. The
calculated spectrum is for 7 K and has an fwhm of 1.8cm-'. (Reproduced from [139] with
permission.)

c, and a axes, respectively. From the parity selection rules of Eqs. (1.44)
and (1.45), we obtain

                         AK, + e = odd                                                                                                                           (1.56)

and

                         p + A = AKa                                                                                                                             (1.57)
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  59

+ For photoionization of the 2b, orbital of H,CO, p h is always odd and,

hence, from Eq. (1.46) we have

AKb+ AKc= odd                                    (1.58)

Clearly, both type c (AK, = odd and AK, = even) and type b(AK, = odd
and A K , = o d d ) transitions are allowed, and type u(AK, =even and
AK, = o d d ) and other type b (AK, = even and AK, = even) transitions are
forbidden. Furthermore, Eqs. (1.56-1.58) show that the allowed type b
transitions arise from odd partial wave contributions to the PE matrix
elements of Eq. (1.42), whereas the type c transitions arise from even
angular momentum components of the PE.

   In Fig. 28(b), we label several of the more important transitions out of
rotational levels of the ground state of the neutral species leading to
different rotational levels of the ion. The quantum numbers used as labels
are NKaK,.Note that in this figure we use the same set of quantum
numbers to designate type c transitions out of the l,, level and type b
transitions out of the l,, level, since the energies of these transitions are
essentially equal. A similar labeling is also adopted for transitions out of

the 2,, and 2,, rotational levels. Since the moment of inertias Zb and I,

are almost the same for H,CO (H2CO+), the rotationally resolved
ZEKE-PFI spectra are very congested. Unlike the spectra for H,O, type
b transitions, which arise from odd waves, cannot be distinguished from
type c transitions, which arise from even waves.

   Figure 29 shows the calculated threshold PE spectra for the individual
type c [Fig. 29(u)] and type b [Fig. 29(b)] transitions of Fig. 28 for
single-photon ionization of the 2b, orbital of the ground state of H,CO.
Furthermore, our calculated spectrum shows a total intensity for type b
transitions about twice as large as that for type c transitions. This large
intensity of the type c transitions cannot be accounted for on the basis of
atomic-like propensity rules since the 2b, orbital of the H,CO has 4.8%

p , 80.0% d , 3.7% f,9.1% g (to= 4), and 1.5% h (to= 5) character. The

strong even-wave character of the 2b, orbital would be expected to lead
to dominant odd partial wave contributions to the PE matrix elements
and, hence, to dominant type b transitions. This unexpected contribution
from even partial waves of the PE matrix element is quite molecular in
origin and arises from strong &-mixingdue to the nonspherical molecular
ion potentials. Such comparisons between measured and calculated
spectra can be helpful in unraveling severely congested PE spectra. Note
that a shape resonance is predicted in the ka, photoelectron continuum at
kinetic energies of about 5 eV [139]. However, this shape resonance
60     K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

    h

       I  I  1                    I  I

       90 87.810 87.830 87 150

       Photon Energy (cm-lj

   Figure 29. Calculated PE spectra for the (a) type c acd (6) type 6 transitions of Fig.
28(6) for single-photon ionization of the 26, orbital of the X ' A ground state of jet-cooled
H,CO. The type 6 to type c intensity ratio is about 1.9. (Reproduced from [139] with
permission.)

should have very little effect on the threshold photoionization ZEKE-
PFI spectrum.

                      3. Single-Photon Ionization of CH,

Figure 30 shows the (a) measured [89] and ( b ) calculated rotationally

resolved ZEKE-PFI spectra of CH, (22 Ai) for single-photon ionization

of the la; orbital by coherent VUV radiation leading to the x l A i
ground state of the ion. The calculated spectrum assumes a rotational
temperature of 250 K and a PE kinetic energy of 50 meV. This spectrum is
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY   61

                    ..              measured

                P                  -S

   IIIIIIIIII                      0123
     108 6 4 2

                                      calculated

I       I  I       I  I  I         I  I  I

79,ioo     79,200     79,300 79,400      79,500

                   Energy (crn-')

    Figure 30. (a) measured and ( b ) calculated ion rotational distributions for single-
photon ionization of the la; orbital of the X 'A';ground state of jet-cooled CH, leading to
the X ' A ground state of the ion. The calculated spectrum is for 250 K and has an fwhm of
2.5 cm-'. (Reproduced from [139] with permission.)

convoluted with a Gaussian detection function that has a fwhm of
2.5 cm-'. The CH, and CH: are oblate symmetric tops, belonging to the
D,, point group. For the D,, group, the total wave function of CH,
should have either A ; or A'; symmetry to obey the Pauli principle. The

i) wave functions for ortho and para species have A ( I = $) and E' ( I =

symmetries, respectively. Since rspinr,,, 3 rtotathle, rotational wave

function must have A ; , A';, E ' , or E" symmetry. Therefore, the
rotational levels belonging to A and A'; symmetries are not initially
populated, that is, levels with J = even, K = 0 and the A , ( K = 3n) level
of the A , - A , pair are forbidden. Due to the spin statistical weight of
62  K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

4:2 between ortho and para species, the K = 3n levels ( A or A ';) have a

+ statistical weight twice that of the K = 3n 1 levels (E' or E").

   Agreement between the calculated and measured spectra is very
encouraging in spite of some discrepancies resulting from rotational
autoionization at negative AN transitions [1401. Our calculations reveal
that AK = 0 are the dominant transitions (up to 95%) and the AK = +-2
(not labelled) transitions are much weaker. Even though the AK = odd
transitions are also dipole allowed, their intensities are very weak and
they do not appear in the spectrum. Note that AK = odd transitions are

+ associated with p h = odd partial waves of the PE, which, in turn, must

originate from the f(f0 = 3 ) component of the la; orbital of the ground
state. Since the la; orbital is essentially an out-of-plane 2p orbital
localized on the central carbon atom, its f wave is negligible. This result
leads to a AK = even selection rule.

    V. DEVIATIONS OF ZEKE INTENSITIES FROM THE
            PREDICTIONS OF DIRECT IONIZATION

The understanding of ZEKE intensities has been an issue of keen interest
since the first rotational structure was resolved for NO. A fundamental
distinction between ZEKE band strengths and those derived from
conventional PES can be clearly made and firmly grounded in differences
long recognized between PES and TPES. The relation between ZEKE
spectroscopy and TPES is more subtle. The determination of transition
moments in both cases is a multichannel problem. Threshold scans
invariably encounter intervals in which discrete-discrete interactions
(autoionization in the case of TPES) distribute oscillator strength. The
ZEKE methods, however, operate on bound states and incorporate delay
as an essential element of threshold discrimination. This introduces the
possibility for radiationless decay and raises the issue of intramolecular
dynamics and the effect of relaxation processes on ZEKE observables.

   Intramolecular coupling effects can be divided into two categories
based on the nature of the interaction and its likely effect on intensities
observed in high-resolution threshold photoionization. Discrete-discrete
coupling distributes oscillator strength and lifetime over a band of
isoenergetic ZEKE Rydberg states and lower principal quantum number
higher core energy Rydberg states. The result generally leads to increased
intensity, as lower thresholds, often ones forbidden by simple rotational
angular momentum selection rules, borrcw intensity from allowed transi-
tions to interloping Rydberg states converging to higher limits. Alter-
natively and equivalently, the ZEKE spectrometer records allowed
transitions to lower n Rydberg states that, because of their location with
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  63

respect to an ionization threshold, acquire sufficient lifetime to survive
the discrimination delay. Examples of such effects include discrete-
discrete intensity-sharing interactions assignable to specific interlopers in
the sparse threshold photoionization spectra of H, and N, [19,25], as
well as evidence for multichannel coupling identified in the ZEKE
spectrum of NO [2, 101. Generalization of such interactions explain
asymmetries in rotational branch intensities found in early VUV studies of
N,O and HCl [30,140], as well as anomalous transitions with seemingly
forbidden large negative changes in rotational angular momentum in such
systems as NO, [29], and specific rotational branch anomalies in (HC1)
[141]. Results for the latter two systems will be discussed below.

   Discrete-continuum interactions form a second category that until
recently has not been fully appreciated. Such coupling confers continuum
character on ZEKE Rydbergs. Regardless of its effect on the transition
moment, such coupling reduces ZEKE intensity because of the delay
required for threshold-electron (high-Rydberg) discrimination. In this
respect, observable ZEKE intensities can differ substantially from con-
ventional TPES band strengths. The most definitive example identified so
far is that of HC1, where spin-orbit branching ratios in conventional PE
spectroscopy are in accord with theoretical expectation, but are reversed
in the ZEKE spectrum, as signal from the higher cross-section upper
2Ill,, threshold is depleted by spin-orbit autoionization [141, 1421. As
detailed below, vibrational autoionizing continua have similar but mode-
specific effect on threshold intensities for the production of vibrationally
excited NO,.

   The study of intramolecular coupling on ZEKE intensities is compli-
cated by the ability of external factors to influence both discrete-discrete
and discrete-continuum coupling. External fields can assist coupling that
facilitates intensity transfer by Stark mixing within 4? manifolds converg-
ing to various core-rotational limits [143]. Stark mixing can also open
continuum channels. Collisions have been implicated both in lifetime-
lengthening (-scrambling interactions [36], as well as detachment-type
lifetime-shortening processes [35]. Complete understanding will come
only with careful systematic study of suitable systems.

   Hydrogen chloride is instructive, but because of its open-shell cation
core, rotational effects are bound up with spin-orbit coupling. Nitrogen
dioxide is in many respects more ideal for detailing intramolecular effects
in threshold photoionization spectroscopy. Like NO, this molecule
presents an electronic structure that is well suited for an examination of
the intramolecular dynamics of threshold photoionization. It forms a
closed-shell cation, leaving only vibrational-rotational interactions to
play a primary role in threshold intramolecular coupling. Also like NO,
64  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

NO, is a system for which a great deal of spectroscopic information has
been accumulated. It is less characterized theoretically, but efforts along
those lines are in progress [144]. Among its advantages over NO for
studies of coupling patterns near threshold is a smaller rotational
constant, which places rotational thresholds nearer one another ener-
getically and thus able to sample interactions with greater regularity from
a denser manifold of interloping series. In addition, triatomic NO, has
more than one vibrational mode, so discrete continuum effects that
involve different pathways for vibrational relaxation can be compared in
the same molecule. The following sections compare theory with experi-
ment for HC1. Suggestive results are then taken as a guide of effects to
expect in NO,.

+ A. Effects of Spin-Orbit Relaxation and Rotational Coupling in the
              (2 1) Threshold Photoionization of HCI and DCI

                          1. Rotational Line Intensities

Figure 31 shows threshold photoionization scans over 2113,, and '111,,
thresholds taken from the J' = 2( +) intermediate level in the F 'A state
of deuterium chloride (DC1). Observed rotational intensities are for the
most part comparable. Overall, transitions to the lower spin-orbit state
of the cation show somewhat greater signal than those to the upper
component, and in most cases the lowest accessible rotational state for
each component displays the largest delayed pulsed-field ionization
signal. However, resonances to the higher rotational levels (Jf = and

i)of the 'II,,, component are noticeably enhanced for DC1 compared

with their intensity in HCl [145].
   The lowest frames of Fig. 31 compare these experimental threshold

photoionization spectra to theoretical ones, calculated using the methods
discussed above. Spin-orbit branching ratios implied in the calculated
spectra shown here are arbitrary, a point to which we will return below.
In other respects, experimental and theoretical spectra correspond
reasonably, with the exception of higher rotational levels of the 211312
substrate in DCl, which are noticeably enhanced compared to theoretical
predictions, and to corresponding intensities in HCl. We suggest that
these particular intensity anomalies for DC1 arise from discrete-discrete
intensity-sharing interactions with underlying Rydberg states converging
to the upper spin-orbit component. When they are isoenergetic with
threshold high Rydbergs, such states can form long-lived complex
resonances with absorption cross sections that are enhanced by the low
principal quantum number of the interloper. With a larger rotational
constant, and thus sparse distribution of interlopers, such effects are
                                                        t'

                                                                                                                                                           -

                                                                                                           0-

2

-mx -

naJ -2-

    II                                                  -4 -

-6  i-  .  .  .  .  !  .  .  .  .  !  .  .  .  , I....                                                         . . . l . . . . I . . . . I .

    I                                          102,950                                                                                        I . . . ,I

                 102,850           102,900              103,450                                                103,500 103,550  103,600 103,650

                             Frequency (cm-l)                                                                  Frequency (cm-')

                     Figure 31. Delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization spectra of DC1 obtained via inter-
                 mediate resonance with rotational levels J' = 0, 1, and 2 of the F 'A, u = 0 state. Sticks show ab initio
                 calculated relative intensities for transitions to rotationally excited states, normalized in each case to
                 the first such transition. (Reproduced from [141b] with permission.)
66  K. MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

expected to be less important for HCl. Discrete-discrete intensity sharing
interactions across spin-orbit manifolds are obviously not possible for
transitions to the upper 211,,, substrate. In accounting for such complex
resonance effects just mentioned in transitions to the 2113,2threshold in
HCl, and in DCl, we see a slight but systematic disagreement between

5 , experiment and calculation for the lowest, J' = rotational state. This

level is special in that the high-Rydberg states sampled there by the
ZEKE experiment have no accessible ionization continuum channels, and
thus perhaps it is not surprising that delayed threshold-field ionization
records a higher signal. The extent of this effect appears to depend on the
distribution of Rydberg orbital angular momentum sampled by absorp-
tion, as evidenced by an apparent variation with the initial state selected
for the photoionizing transition.

   Figure 32 presents a set of spectra showing structure associated with
2113,2and 2111/2states of HC1' obtained by delayed pulsed-field threshold
photoionization from the J' = 0, 1, and 2 levels of the E 'C' intermediate

t . state. For ionization at the ?I3,, threshold from J ' = 2, the strongest

transition terminates on the lowest rotational state, J + = Much weaker

:. structure appears in transitions to cation levels J + = % and Weak
5 resonances to J + = and 1 are also seen from J ' = 1 and to $ from

J' J' = 0, but in both cases =; still dominates. The lowest rotational

state also yields the strongest resonance for threshold photoionization in
the 'IIl manifold, but transitions terminating on higher rotational states
are much more evident. Trends in rotational intensities from the J ' = 0,
1, and 2 levels of the g 3 C - state parallel those found for the E state. As

seen in Fig. 33, J + = $ dominates in the spectrum of the lower spin-orbit

component of the ion, while rotational intensities are more broadly
distributed for transitions to 2111,2.

   Comparison of the calculated intensities with measured ones for the

E 'C' and g 3 C - states, shows that the signal measured for the lowest

rotational state in each spin-orbit component is disproportionally large.
This finding is particularly evident for the lower 2113,2state of HC1'. The
magnitude of this effect compared with the comparatively small de-
partures from predictions based on direct ionization out of the F state is
particularly striking. Perturbative interactions of these E 'C' and g 3 C -
states with the valence V 'C' state certainly contribute to this behavior.

   Thus, we have a pattern of intensities in which first rotational levels
appear enhanced, particularly for the lower spin-orbit substate, while
higher thresholds appear to agree at least qualitatively with simple
theoretical line strength expectations (apart from specific perturbations).
This finding fits with a general picture of the effect of rapid decay
channels on intensities in delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization
1'1'1'I'I'I'I.I'                                                                                                             1

                                       2.0

                                       1.5

                                       1.o

                                       0.5

* L I             I

                                       0.0

                                       -0.5

102,780  102,820     102,860  102,900        103,400  103,500  103,600                                              103,700

         Frequency (cm-l)                             Frequency (cm-l)

             Figure 32. Delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization spectra of HCI obtained via inter-
         mediate resonance with rotational levels J' = 0, 1, and 2 of the E ' Z + , u = 0 state. Sticks show ab
         initio calculated relative intensities for transitions to rotationally excited states, normalized in each
         case to the first such transition. (Reproduced from [141b] with permission.)
                                                        II

                                                    II

                                                 0.2 -

L                                                0.0 -

                                                 . . - 0 . 2 1 , , 1 , I , 1
                                                                   1 ,I,1 ,I

102,780 102,800 102,850 102,900 102,950 103,000  103,400  103,440  103,480  103,520

Frequency (cm-l)                                          Frequency (cm-')

    Figure 33. Delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization spectra of HCI obtained via inter-
mediate resonance with rotational levels J' = 0, 1,and 2 of the g 'C-, u = 0 state. Sticks show ab initio
calculated relative intensities for transitions to rotationally excited states, normalized in each case to
the first such transition. (Reproduced from [141b] with permission.)
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  69

spectroscopy, which can best be seen by looking at the comparative
intensities of spin-orbit components.

    2. Intensities of Transitions to the Spin-Orbit Substates of HCl'

The intensities of threshold photoionizing resonances to the two cation
substates convey information on the electronic character of the inter-
mediate state. Theoretically, if the intermediate state is of pure singlet (or
triplet) character and the ion core is treated in pure Hund's case (a), the

total intensities for the '111,, and 'II,,, thresholds will be equal. Conven-

tional photoelectron spectra out of the X 'C+ ground states of HC1 and
HF show a slightly larger intensity for the 'PI,,, component [142, 1461.
Recent calculations [1411, assuming an intermediate coupling scheme

between Hund's case (a) and (b) for the 'II ion, reproduce well the

measured intensity ratio of 1.20 for the spin-orbit components of the ion
observed in photoionization of HF. The calculated intensity ratio of 1.06
is also in excellent agreement with the measured value of 1.06 5 0.05 for
HC1. This is the pattern observed, for example, in conventional PE
spectra starting from the X '2' ground state of HC1 [142, 1461. The initial
states for the present photoionization spectra are Rydberg states, for
which it is well known that singlet and triplet states with the same
Rydberg orbital configuration are strongly mixed by the spin-orbit
interaction (see, e.g., [147]). If this mixing is complete, only one substate
is accessible by photoionization. This is the case for the above described
experiments on HBr [148], where the intermediate state, F 'A, can be
described purely in terms of Hund's case (c) as a complete mixture of 'A,
and ,A2 with the 5pn- Rydberg configuration. In the state assigned F 'Az,

the core has the spin-orbit configuration zIIl,z.Photoionization from this

state populates only the '111,, component of the cation. In HC1, the
spin-orbit singlet-triplet mixing of the 4 p a configuration is not complete.
Starting from F 'A,, the conventional PE spectra of de Beer et al. [142]
show a ratio for the two components 211112/2113,2of about 6.5 [9,15],
which corresponds well to a singlet-triplet mixing of 22% as estimated
recently [149]. Further experiments in the study by de Beer et al. [142]
also confirm that this ratio is insensitive to the energy of ionization.

   This value of spin-orbit branching ratio is not found in rotationally
resolved threshold photoionization spectra of HCl recorded in transitions
from the F 'A state by delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization.
For example, in the case of F ' A J ' = 2 in HCl, which is typical, the
experimental ratio summed over rotational lines is Z(zIIl,z)/Z(zI13,2=)
0.56. This result is opposite to the trend observed in the conventional PE
spectrum. This discrepancy, together with anomalous rotational inten-
70  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

sities, can be explained when we consider effects of rotational coupling
and spin-orbit autoionization.

   Delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization spectroscopy relies on
the long lifetimes of high Rydberg states that lie just below the conver-
gence limit corresponding to each internal state of the ion. Any factor
that shortens the lifetime of such high-Rydberg states will affect the
spectrum by reducing the population of neutrals available to field ionize
after a given delay, and thereby diminish intensities. All high Rydbergs
converging to the ,HI,, limit of HC1' can autoionize by spin-orbit

coupling to the *H3,, continuum. Series of different t ' s can be expected

to have different rates of autoionization, and, indeed, we have found
evidence for very long-lived series of near-zero quantum defect [1451,
Nevertheless, the accessibility of channels for decay by autoionization can
do nothing but shorten the lifetimes of these near threshold states, and
apparently do so by enough to account for a systematically diminished
intensity for threshold photoionization from the F 'A state to the upper
spin-orbit component.

   Rydberg states converging to rotational limits of the lower spin-orbit

t . component can rotationally autoionize, except for those built on the

lowest such state J + = Indeed, as noted above, in every case this
lowest ionization limit gives rise to the most intense threshold transition
in the ?I3,, substate, often despite theoretical predictions of rotational
propensities favoring higher rotational levels of the cation. Interestingly,
for the upper spin-orbit component, where all levels can autoionize by
spin-orbit coupling, the lowest rotational level is not so favored in
delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization, and experimental inten-
sities approach theoretically predicted values. This finding suggests a
zero-order model that recognizes the special character of the lowest
rotational state of the cation, and then it groups levels with open
autoionization channels as having diminished intensity in proportion to
their absorption cross-sections. Refinements to this picture will dis-
tinguish between rotational and spin-orbit autoionization, recognize
possible J + dependences, and include neutral continua (predissociation).

    VI. THREE-COLOR TRIPLE-RESONANT THRESHOLD
                      PHOTOIONIZATION OF NO,

Threshold photoionization of NO, shows distinctively how relaxation
pathways that couple Rydberg electronic motion with core vibrational
and rotational degrees of freedom can effect ZEKE intensities. This
molecule is ideal for probing such issues. Its electronic structure becomes
separable at higher energies and offers convenient pathways for state-
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  71

specific excitation. Hierarchies in Rydberg core-internuclear coupling give
rise to vibrational mode selectivity in ZEKE intensity envelopes. Factors
governing these effects also determine rotational details in threshold
photoionization spectra.

                  A. Electronic Structure and Photoselection

The electronic structure of NO, naturally focuses attention on pure
Rydberg rovibrational pathways for state mixing and intramolecular

decay. Its 17-electron . , . ( 1 ~ , ) ~ ( 3 b , ) ~ ( 4 uo,r)b~ital configuration sup-

ports a bent , A , ground state and low-lying Renner and Jahn-Teller
coupled ,B1, 2 B 2 , and , A , excited states.15' These give way with
increasing excitation to an extensive system of Rydberg states that are
well described in terms of a 16-electron closed-shell cation core and single
extravalent electron [151-1551. Resonant transitions through the vibroni-
cally coupled and distorted valence intermediate states then conveniently
bridge the Franck-Condon gap between the ground state and linear
low-lying Rydberg states [151,1561. Such optically prepared Rydberg
states in turn provide a convenient gateway for final vertical steps of
threshold photoionization.

   Unfavorable Franck-Condon factors for direct transitions from the
bent ground state of NO, to low-lying vibrational levels of the cation
obscure the adiabatic ionization threshold and prevent the determination
of cation fundamental frequencies by conventional VUV photoelectron
spectroscopy [1571. Photoionization from intermediate Rydberg states
solves this problem, and, with rotational selection provided by an initial
step of double resonance, three-color stepwise excitation resolves in-
dividual rotational thresholds in the photoionization of NO, to successive
final vibrational states beginning with the cation ground state [29, 1581.
The results establish the ionization potential of this important molecule
and provide a first view of its cation vibrational frequencies.

  I? Figure 34 shows an energy level diagram. First-photon absor tion in

the visible selects a rotational state in the vibronically mixed B , I 2 B ,
valence system of NO,. A second step of UV excitation elevates

population to a chosen rovibrational level of the 3 p u 'Z; state. Broad

Franck-Condon envelopes for transitions from the vibronically mixed
intermediate state to the linear excited state make a large number of
vibrational levels in this long-lived Rydberg state accessible. Double
resonance provides baseline separation of rotational levels. Figure 35
shows a double resonance spectrum obtained for an intermediate (val-
ence) level that bridges ground-state N" = 2 with 3 p u 2Z:(100) N' = 1 , 3 .
Experiments confirm such assignments by scanning the first-photon
frequency while fixing the second on the transition from the valence
72  K. MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

    n/                        0-N-0' (v)

    Figure 34. Level diagram showing intermediate states and excitation schemes for
multiresonant threshold photoionization of NO,. Two-color preparation of the 3 p u 'Ci
Rydberg state of NO, proceeds through bound states of the ' B , - *B, visible absorption
system. Excitation to selected vibrational thresholds from two-color prepared 3pu levels is
achieved by tunable third-color absorption.

intermediate to the Rydberg final rotational state. The ionization de-
tected absorption spectrum shows resonance enhancement whenever the
first photon frequency connects a ground rotational level to that valence
intermediate. Thus, the first-photon scan recovers ground-state spacings
unambiguously establishing the identity of the double-resonantly selected
Rydberg rotational level.

            B. State-to-State Threshold Photoionization of NO,:
                           Vibrational Structure of NO:

From individual rotational levels selected in this way, tunable third-
photon absorption promotes transitions to state-resolved thresholds for
photoionization. The linear cation-like structure of the 'C state together
with its long lifetime suggests a well-developed Rydberg character, which
in turn implies highly vertical photoionizing transitions. Such expectations
are confirmed by experiment. Figure 36 shows a sequence of threshold
photoionization bands observed in transitions from single rotational levels
   ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY         73

3

1

     I      I      I      I                           I

   35285  35290  35295  35300                       35305

          Second Laser Frequency (cm-')

    Figure 35. Ionization-detected double-resonance spectrum of the (100) level of 3pa
2 Z u+ Rydberg state of NO, obtained by setting the first photon frequency to resonance with
an intermediate level that optically connects the N" = 2 ground state with N' = 1and 3 in the

excited state.

prepared by double resonance in the corresponding sequence of 3 p u 'E;
vibrational states.

   Note that the rotational structure in each case confirms the vibrational
assignment. Nuclear spin statistics for NO: with terminal l6O nuclei
allow only levels that are totally symmetric. For (000) and (100) levels in

the 'Xi electronic ground state, this restriction excludes odd rotational

levels. Totally symmetric components exist for each rotational level of the

vibronic Il, (010) state, and transitions are observed to all quantum

numbers starting with N + = 1. Odd vibronic symmetry of the C, (001)
vibrational state confers even symmetry only on levels of odd rotational

quantum number, and the sequence observed is N + = 1 , 3 , . . . .

   The structure pictured for each of these bands can be extrapolated to
corresponding rotational origins. The relative energies of these origins
determine the positions of the vibrationally excited states of NO:.
Results are summarized in Table 111. Frequencies obtained in recent
4                                 P                                          h~ii.;

                                                                             2v 0

Threshold Electron Signal (arb.)

                                                                                0  44 mW0

                                     c h.
                                         0
                                              v

Threshold Electron Signal (arb.)                 -                                     \o 4 .-      l....l....l....l~
                                                                                               '
                                                       d....l....l....l....

                                                                                             w 0 4

Threshold Electron Signal (arb.)

    Figure 36. Rotationally resolved threshold photoionizing scans from selected rovibra-nT cn.
tional levels in the 3 p u 'C: state to corresponding vibrational states of NO;. (Reproduced
from [158a] with permission.)
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY            75

                               TABLE I11
Fundamental Frequencies of the Cation and 3pa 'C: Rydberg

           State of NO, Compared with Those of CO,"

                            v1       vz            v3
                                   Bend
                Symmetric Stretch        Asymmetric
                                    636     Stretch
3pa 'C:              1410           639      2361
                                    625
Rydberg Stateb                      667      2362

NO;X 'Cg'            1397                    2344

Experiment'                                  2349

NO;X 'Cg'            1384

Theoryd
C0,X 'c:
                     1388

"Allvalues in cm-'.
bRef. 151.
"Ref. 158a.
dRef. 159.

high-level ab initio calculations [159], which show good agreement, are
listed for comparison. The frequencies of the cation are also quite close in
magnitude to the vibrational frequencies observed in the 3pu Rydberg
state. This match confirms that potential surfaces in the Rydberg state
and the cation are substantially parallel, reflecting the fact that the
presence of a Rydberg electron bound by 20,000 cm-' has little effect on
the vibrational frequencies within the NO: core. The one mode that
shows a measurable difference in frequency is that of symmetric stretch,
which separate experiments have characterized as a motion in the core
that strongly promotes the vibrational autoionization of higher Rydberg
states.

                              1. Rotational Structure

Application of photoselection methods to reach higher rotational states in
the 3 p u (000) band extends the reach of threshold photoionization to
higher rotational states of the cation. Figure 37 shows a series of
threshold photoionization spectra originating from NO, 3pu ' C : (000)
rotational states N ' = 1, 9, 11, and 13. Cation rotational positions
obtained from such spectra can be readily fit to the rotational Hamilto-
nian for a vibrational ground state linear triatomic with centrifugal
distortion:

             E N += B o N + ( N ++ 1)- D o [ N + ( N ++ 1)12

Figure 38 gives a Fortrat parabola of observed positions. Constants are
summarized in Table IV. The zero-point bond distance obtained theoret-
76         K. MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

           1

           N'=02 4 6 8  10  12  14      16

    77250  77300                77350       77400

           Three-Photon Energy [crn-')

    Figure 37. Threshold photoionization spectra originating from NO, 3pu 'Z; (000)
rotational states: N' = 1, 9, 11, and 13. (Reproduced from [158b] with permission.)

ically is 1.123& which is in good agreement with that determined from
the experimental rotational constant.

    2. Rotational Intensities : Complex Resonances and the Effects of
                             Intramolecular Relaxation

Rotational intensities for (000) threshold photoionization form a con-
sistent pattern for the highest accessible states. In all cases intensities tail

off to a highest observed level at N + = N' + 3. Transitions to lower N + ,

however, do not appear to be bound by a rule limiting the change from
3pu N' to cation N + . The profile of rotational transitions instead exhibits
an asymmetry about AN' = 0 that favors increasingly negative values of
AN' with higher initial rotational state. As discussed above, selection
rules for good initial and final rotational and Rydberg orbital angular

momentum quantum numbers require N + - N' = &(C + 2). For an initial

p orbital, the upper limit observed for N + agrees with this prediction. To
the extent of its asymmetry, the lower one half of the rotational envelope
does not.
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY             77

                                               N+

    Figure 38. Fortrat parabola of rotational positions observed in transitions from selected
levels of 3pa 'C: (000) to the ground vibrational state of NO:.

                                               TABLE IV
                Rotational Constants Derived from the High-Resolution Thres-

                                   hold Photoionization of NO,".b

NOiX'C'  0.4167  6.7 x lo-'  1.125
         0.3902  1.4x lo-'   1.162
c0,x'C

    "From Ref. [158b].
    bRotational constants and bond length of CO, shown for
comparison.

   Upon closer examination of the threshold photoionization spectrum
one observes that these lower rotational components show reproducible
fine structure. This structure holds the key to understanding the source of
anomalous rotational intensity. Figure 39 compares a section of the
ZEKE spectrum obtained for N ` = 17 with the accompanying prompt-
electron photoionization spectrum. The prompt-electron spectrum shows
the structure of rotationally autoionizing Rydberg series converging to
accessible higher rotational limits. Over most of this spectrum, discrete
states populated by resonant absorption are short lived and decay by
78                            K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

                          39                          ,              N*=14
         45                                                                     I
    r

    1...,....1....,,,..,.,,.1....1.

    77,240                    77,250  77,260  77,270         77,280  77,290

                              Three Photon Frequency (cm-')

    Figure 39. Scans comparing a section of the delayed pulsed-field threshold photoioniza-
tion spectrum observed for N ' = 17 with the spectrum of the prompt-electron signal
obtained at the same time.

rotational autoionization to form free electrons and lower rotational state
cations. Thus, in general, these Rydberg states to not survive to supply
electrons for delayed pulsed extraction and the spectrum appears in the
prompt-electron channel. However, the same interaction that drives
autoionization couples these discrete states to the manifold of very high
ZEKE Rydberg states lying just below each ionization threshold. These
high Rydberg states have long lifetimes and, when they mix with the
strongly absorbing lower principal quantum number (higher core rota-
tion) Rydberg states, they form a long-lived complex resonance. Evi-
dence for this mixing can be seen in the interference profiles present in
the prompt spectrum just below successive ionization thresholds [1591.
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  79

When the pulsed field is applied, mixed neutral states of total energy just
below the N' threshold can autoionize.

   The intensity of the discrete components in the delayed pulsed-field
threshold photoionization signal varies with the difference between the
rotational quantum number of the threshold and that of the interloping
discrete state. At the highest forbidden threshold, structure due to
interloping Rydberg states converging to the fully allowed next higher
rotational limit is relatively weak. The contributions to the threshold
complex resonance from discrete states converging one threshold further
are stronger. Thus, the ZEKE resonance for photoionizing transitions
from N' = 17 to the forbidden N + = 12 state shows only weak structure
due to interloping resonances converging to allowed N' = 14, while
contributions from discrete states converging to N + = 16 appear with
large intensity.

   This apparent hierarchy in coupling can be understood when one
recognizes the delay inherent in ZEKE discrimination of threshold
electrons and considers the pathways for intramolecular relaxation.
Figure 40 shows a coupling diagram. High Rydberg states in the ZEKE
manifold converging to N + = 12 couple with discrete states having N' =
14 and the N + = 10 continuum by AN' = 2, A& = 2 interactions, and to
N + = 16 and the N' = 8 continuum by AN' = 4, A& = 4 interactions. The

    Figure 40. Diagram illustrating the discrete-discrete interactions that appear as
structure in the spectrum shown in Fig. 33. Also shown are discrete continuum pathways
that, when present, reduce the intensity increasing effect of discrete interlopers on the
delayed pulsed-field threshold photoionization spectrum. (Reproduced from [158b] with
permission.)
80  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

Nf= 12 component of the resulting complex resonance lends lifetime

with respect to all pathways for radiationless decay, while discrete states
converging to N + = 14 and 16, which are allowed in transitions from
N ' = 17, lend intensity. While surely dominating the actual composition of
the complex resonance, the contributions of N + = 14 states to the delayed
electron signal is evidently moderated by the relative efficiency with
which it is coupled by AN' = 4 matrix elements to the N + = 10 con-
tinuum. Resonance contributions from N + = 16 states, on the other hand,
are more isolated from loss on the timescale of the ZEKE measurement
by the weakness of A N + = 6 coupling to the nearest continuum. Thus,
with delay as an essential element of the threshold discrimination process,
N + = 16 features dominate the detectable component of ZEKE absorp-
tion. Efficient paths for intramolecular relaxation (in this case, rotational
autoionization) diminishes the importance of nearer rotational com-
ponents of the threshold complex resonance.

C. Intensities at Vibrationally Excited Thresholds: Effects of Vibrational
                                       Relaxation

Examination of ZEKE spectra at vibrationally excited thresholds shows
how the opening of different vibrationally autoionizing continua can
affect rotational intensity patterns. The results are mode selective in a
manner that reflects the dynamics of Rydberg core coupling resolved for
individual autoionizing resonances observed further below vertical thres-
holds [2,30, 1401.

   Figure 41 shows a spectrum of threshold photoionizing transitions from
N' = 5 in 3pu (010) to the (010) state of NO:. Separate studies of
autoionization dynamics show that Rydberg electrons are poorly coupled
to the (000) continuum by relaxation in bending. The distribution of
rotational intensities in this threshold photoionization spectrum appears
much like that for (000) observed from the same rotational level, except
for the presence in (010) of even and odd rotational states, allowed for a

state of II vibronic symmetry.

   Autoionization spectra establish that bound Rydberg electrons are also
relatively weakly coupled to the cation ground-state continuum by
relaxation of the highest frequency fundamental, asymmetric stretch.
Figure 42 shows a ZEKE spectrum of transitions from 3pu (001) N' = 6
to the (001) threshold of NO:. Like the (010) threshold the envelope of
rotational intensities resembles that of the cation ground state, favoring
transitions to lower values of AN with significant intensity in nominally
forbidden AN = - 5 .

   The spectrum of threshold transitions to rotational states of NO: (100)
differs fundamentally from that of other excited vibrations and the cation
         ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY     81

                         I0101

- 1.6 -  Nt =    123 4   5       6           7            8

da
v
                 It

                                                                                                         i

                                                                                                         i

                                                                                                         i

         77,940  77,950  77,960     77,970      77,980

                 Three-Photon Energy (cm-l)

       Figure 41. Rotationally resolved threshold photoionization to (010) cation states N + =
   1, 2 , 3 , 4, 5 , 6, 7 , and 8 observed in a one-photon transition from the N ' = 5 rotational state
   of 3 p a 'C: (010). (Reproduced from [158b] with permission.)

   ground state. Though cation-detected vibrational autoionization spectra
   recorded from 3 p a (100) are the strongest of the three modes, the ZEKE
   spectrum of this threshold is by far the weakest. Figure 43 shows a set of
   (100) threshold scans from 3pa (100) N ' = 1,5,7 and 9. The ZEKE
   intensity is low and rotational asymmetry is barely evident. As mentioned
   above, symmetric stretch has been characterized as a mode that efficiently
   promotes vibrational autoionization. The facility of such a pathway for
   radiationless decay accounts reasonably for the weakness of the spectrum
   of this state in threshold photoionization. Just as efficient rotational
   autoionization diminishes the importance of adjacent rotational states in
   forming long-lived complex resonances that give rise to threshold photo-
   ionization structure for (000), fast vibrational autoionization depletes the
   high-Rydberg states that form the basis for the primary threshold signal
82                K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

    Nt =          13  5       7                9

                         I                                                                 1
                      Ill                                                                  i

0

                                 I                .  .  ,  ,       .

          79,660      79,680     79,700                    79,720

                  Three-Photon Energy (crn-')

   Figure 42. Rotationally resolved threshold photoionization to (001) cation states N' =
1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 observed in a one-photon transition from the N'= 6 rotational state of

3pa 'C: (001). (Reproduced from [158b] with permission.)

observed in delayed pulsed-field photoionization. Also apparent from the
absence of a pronounced asymmetry in the AN distribution, vibrational
autoionization of lower n Rydberg states responsible for complex reso-
nance formation at nominally forbidden rotational thresholds markedly
reduces the effect of these states on the observed rotational intensity
profile. In terms of the interactions illustrated in Fig. 40, strong vi-
brational autoionization opens a loss channel for all coupled levels, which
diminishes the delayed signal contribution of every component of the
ZEKE threshold complex resonance, but is particularly severe for more
distant higher core rotational states with lower principal quantum num-
bers.
        ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY     83

,                                            I           I                                    I

        N'=O2 4 6       8          to           12

78,680  78,700  78,720     78,740      78,760       78,780  78,800

                Three-Photon Energy (crn-l)

    Figure 43. A sequence of spectra of the NO: (100) threshold obtained from 3pa 'C:
(100) initial rotational states: N ' = 1, 5 , 7> and 9. (Reproduced from [158b] with permis-
sion.)

      VII. VIBRATIONALLY RESOLVED STRUCTURE OF THE
                     PARA-DIFLUOROBENZENE CATION

The resolution of the vibrational structure of larger molecular ions is also
an important application of ZEKE spectroscopy in chemistry. The
considerable gain in resolution makes it possible to measure low-fre-
quency vibrations and to resolve combination bands that are congested in
the PE spectrum (see Fig. 4).

   The p-DFB cation, like most of the larger molecular ions, does not
fluoresce, and hence most methods of fluorescence spectroscopy are not
applicable. Ab initio calculations by von Niessen et al. [160] give an
electronic configuration for the outer-molecular orbitals of p-DFB of
84  K. MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

 * * (b2,)2(b3,)2(b3,)z(blg)2(bZg)z(uu)o(b3~)owithin the D,, symmetry

group. From He(1) and He(I1) photoelectron spectra [52, 94, 161, 1621 it
follows that the symmetry species for the electronic ground state for the
P-DFB cation is 2 ~ 2 g .

                                  A. ZEKE Spectra

For the ZEKE measurements presented here, p-DFB is prepared in
selected vibrational states in S, by absorption of a first photon, and then
ionized from these vibrationally selected states in S, by the second
photon. The S, t So excitation spectra and the precise pump energies of
the S, vibrational intermediate resonances were obtained by measuring

+ the mass-selected ion currents (mle = 114) in one-color (1 1) REMPI

experiments. In these experiments the first dye laser was tuned through
the region of 530-550 nm and the laser output was frequency doubled in a
KDP crystal.

   ZEKE spectra have been obtained for different S, t So transitions:
the O:, 3:, 6:, 9:, 17:, 27:, and 30; (the vibrations are denoted according
to the Mulliken notation [163]).

   B. ZEKE Spectra via Different Vibrational Intermediate S, States

                       1. ZEKE Spectrum from the SIOo

The ZEKE spectrum from the vibrationless S, state is reproduced in Fig.
44. The scanning region ranges from the ionization energy to approxi-
mately 3000cm-' above. The width of the ZEKE signal peaks is below
6cm-' (fwhm). The majority of the bands observed in this ZEKE
spectrum can be assigned to vibrational states of the p-DFB cation.
Besides the vertical transition into the vibrationless state of the cation,
the spectrum is dominated by transitions into totally symmetric modes
and combination bands of these. The strongest transitions are the 6l, 5 ' ,
4l, and 2', and various combinations of two quanta of these. However,
the nontotally symmetric modes y o ,v17, and v, also appear. These modes
are also observed in combination with ug modes. Some transitions
observed in the ZEKE spectrum could not be unambiguously identified
within the present analysis. The most probable assignments, supported by
an ub initio calculation, are given in Table IV.

                       2. ZEKE Spectrum from the $6'

Figure 45 shows the ZEKE spectrum with S161 as the resonant inter-
mediate state. For the v, modc a progression with four quanta is observed
with the maximum intensity for the 6 2 level. This shift of the Franck-
Condon (FC) maximum towards higher vibrational excitation in the v,
       - ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY HIGH-RESOLUTIONSPECTROSCOPY          85
                           p-DFB: Do S,0'
                                                     6"
-.Y-                                                      5n
aC

Y $-
m
cC n                   2l                    2' 5'
iij
                       \

W
Y
W
N

       74,000  75,000                76,000             77,000

               Total Energy [ cm" 1

   Figure 44. Vibrationally resolved ZEKE spectrum of p-difluorobenzene with the
vibrationless S, as intermediate resonance. The assignments are given above the peaks.
(Reproduced from [61] with permission.)

               - p-DFB: Do S,6'

A .Y-

ac

n

ia

zY

cn

iij
W
Y
W
N

       74,000  75,000                        76,000

               Total Energy [ cm" ]

   Figure 45. Vibrationally resolved ZEKE spectrum of p-difluorobenzene with the S,6'
vibration as intermediate resonance. The assignments are given above the peaks. (Re-
produced from [61] with permission.)
86              K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

was also observed in the corresponding TOF photoelectron spectrum
[59]. The spectrum in Fig. 45 also shows mainly transitions into symmetric
modes. The most probable assignments, taking into account the combina-
tion bands, is also given in Table V.

   The most prominent feature of the ZEKE spectra observed is the
strong activity of the ug modes v, to u, (the ug vibration v, has not been
seen in conventional PE spectra and is, with the exception of the ZEKE
spectrum from the S,Oo, outside the scanning range employed in the

                                               TABLE V
      Measured and Calculated Frequencies of p-DFB Normal Modes (in cm-I)"

Mode  Symmetry          Sd'A,)       Sl(lB2,)                           1 Do (ZB2,
                Experimental SCF  Experimental
                                                                  Experimental SCF

1               3088  3044                                        3098'     3047

2               1617  1615                                        1640      1647

3               1257  1295        1251                            1375      1362

4               1140  1152        1116                            1148      1167

5               860   833         818                             836       794

6               450   452         410                             439       434

7               945   1050        583                                       1078

8               422   421         179                             359       395

9               800   881         588                             726       846

10              3073  3029                                                  3034

11              1514  1394        1335                                      1470

12              1228  1155        1015                                      1292

13              1014  1043        937                                       943

14              740   752         666                                       683

15              928   1007        670                                       1067

16              692   724         528                                       750

17              374   392         274                             303       326

18              3073  3042                                                  3045

19              1633  1525                                                  1470

20              1306  1235        1591                                      1235

21              1085  1078        1100                                      1096

22              348   318         352                                       333

23              3085  3030                                                  3034

24              1617  1578        1516                                      1371

25              1285  1259        933                                       1203

26              635   648         558                                       576

27              446   448         403                             430       416

28              838   910         619                             859'      924

29              505   538         438                             508'      526

30              158   164         120                             127       132

    "The SCF values are scaled by a factor of 0.89. (From [61].)
    bAssignment uncertain.
    'From [59].
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  87

experiments reported here). In particular, the v, vibration is the most
prominent mode observed in the ZEKE spectra. On the basis of the FC
principle it is expected that the modes excited indicate a geometry change
on ionization. (However, Duschinsky rotation [164] of the normal
coordinates within the molecular symmetry group D,, may have to be
taken into account.)

   The restricted validity of the Av = 0 propensity rule for p-DFB should
be noted here. This propensity has previously been observed for ioniza-
tion of aromatic molecules from their S, states [165]. The failure of the
rule is not so surprising though, as it is only expected to hold when the
geometries of the S, and the ionic states are similar (as they are, e.g. for
Rydberg states and their corresponding ions). For the different vi-
brational excitations in the S, state there are some bands in combination
with a quantum of mode 6 of similar strength as the dominant Av = 0
transitions (D030161t S,301, D,9'6' t S,9', Dn17161t S,17'). For
the S161 intermediate state the FC maximum is observed for the 6,
vibration in the cation. This result is in agreement with the previously

! published PE spectrum [59] (the stronger ap earance of the 2' band in

the ZEKE spectrum when pumping the S,O is due to the dye tuning
curve). This observation, the shift of the FC maximum towards 6,,
implies that the geometry of the S, state and the ionic state differ along
this mode so that maximum overlap is achieved for the first overtone in
the ion, rather than the fundamental.

   Within the FC approximation (and in the absence of any other
coupling), no transitions should be observed for which the symmetry

species of the vibrational wave function in the S, state is different from

that of the ion. The most prominent transitions that violate this symmetry
restriction correspond to the vibrations v8,v17, and v30.The reasons for
observation of such symmetry forbidden vibrations is still not perfectly
clear. Vibronic coupling (to an excited electronic state) in the cation
cannot explain the occurrence of these three vibrations of different
symmetry species. A possible mechanism could be the final state inter-
action as described in Section V.

  C. Self-consistent Field ab initio Computations of the p-DFB Cation

To aid in the assignment of the observed vibrations in the p-DFB cation
and to check the experimentally observed vibrational frequencies, ab
initio calculations were performed. The program CADPAC [166] was
employed at the restricted (open-shell) Hartree-Fock level, using the
standard 3-21G basis set. For the electronic ground states of the neutral
and of the cation, geometry optimization leads to D,, symmetry (even
88  K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

with geometry restrictions such that only the planarity of the ring is
enforced).

   Table V shows the experimentally determined vibrational frequencies
for the p-DFB cation along with the computed values. The computed
values were multiplied by a scaling factor of 0.89, which is typically
applied to vibrational frequencies at the SCF level.

   The accuracy of the (scaled) computed frequencies is typically of the
order of 5%. For modes where data is available, the observed increase or
decrease of the frequency of the cationic vibration is predicted correctly
by the computed values. (The direct comparison of modes between So
and the ion must be treated with some caution though as the ionic
vibrational motions may be affected significantly by Duschinsky mixing).
Also, a 3-21G/UHF calculation of the vibrational frequencies of the
neutral benzyl radical [167] (also scaled by a factor of 0.89) gave good
agreement with known experimental values.

   In summary, the calculations support the experimental assignments for
the ionic frequencies and lead to a D,, structure for the So and the
ground ionic state. For the S, state deviations from the D,, symmetry,
mainly along the vs coordinate are indicated.

VIII. VIBRATIONALLY RESOLVED STRUCTURE OF THE
                           PHENOL-WATER CATION

In recent years the investigation of van der Waals and hydrogen-bonded
complexes has attracted considerable attention. Molecular complexes are
an important bridge between the isolated molecule and the solid or liquid
phase. In particular, it is of interest how chemical and physical properties
vary with increasing complex size. For hydrogen-bonded species, the
microsolvation process, that is, the successive attachment of solvent
molecules to the solute molecule, is of particular interest. Hydrogen-
bonded solvents play an important role in all areas of chemistry. Of
chemical importance is the proton-transfer reaction which, for instance, is
observed in the case of 1:n phenol-(ammonia), complexes (n > 3) [168]
and for the solvation of ions in water. Hydrogen bonds similar to those
observed in molecular complexes also strongly influence the structure of
biomolecules (DNA double helix) as well as the properties of important
solvents such as ammonia, water, and ice. The processes leading to
solvation or relaxation processes in condensed phases are not yet properly
understood on the molecular level. However, it is the properties of the
system at the molecular level that define the macroscopic appearance,
structure, and dynamics. Information on the intermolecular potential can,
in principle, be obtained by measuring the usually low-frequency inter-
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  89

molecular vibrations. Also of interest are dynamical processes such as
charge (proton or electron) and energy transfer (e.g., "intracomplex"
vibrational redistribution). Experiments on small hydrogen-bonded com-
plexes are well suited for investigating these and similar questions.

   Many gas-phase studies on small neutral hydrogen-bonded complexes
using various spectroscopic techniques have been carried out in molecular
beams to investigate the intermolecular interactions under unperturbed
conditions. In contrast to neutral complexes, the amount of work on
weakly bound ionic complexes is rather sparse. Ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopy [169,170], due to its limited resolution, has mainly provided
information on the electronic structure of such complexes. With re-
sonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization PES [1711 (REMPI-PES) and
molecular beam techniques, somewhat better resolution and mass selec-
tivity could be obtained. However, the low-frequency intermolecular
vibrations of ionic complexes (typically 10-400 cm-') have still not been
resolved using this technique.

   In order to record two-photon, two-color ZEKE spectra via a resonant
intermediate state, an analysis of the intermediate state spectrum is
required. In the case of PhOH-(H,O), complexes (n = 1-4), where Ph is
phenol, the S , t S,(T* t n-) transition in the gas phase under super-
sonic molecular beam conditions is very well understood (for a discussion
of the problem and references see [172]). Until very recently, only two
out of a possible six intermolecular modes in the S, state were identified
[173,174], namely, the stretch (156 cm-') and in-plane wag vibrations
(121 cm-'). Very recently, Leutwyler and co-workers [175] recorded
high-quality, two-color REMPI spectra of the h , and d, complexes. By
comparing those spectra with detailed high-level ab initio calculations
[175], they confirmed the assignment of the stretch and the in-plane wag.
However, more peaks in the low-energy region of the S , state were
identified and assignments for some of these were suggested.

   In contrast to the neutral states of the 1:l phenol-water complex,
information about the low-frequency intermolecular vibrations of the
ionic complex is difficult to obtain, and hence rather sparse. The first
experiments resolving intermolecular vibrations were ZEKE experiments

".

                                  A. ZEKE Spectra

ZEKE spectra of the fully protonated 1 : l phenol-water complex (h,)
(shown in Fig. 46) were obtained via three different intermediate states
S,Oo (35,996 cm-'), S,al (36,153 cm-I), and S l y " (36,117.5 cm-I). The
ZEKE spectrum via the vibrationless S , state (36,004,5crn-') of the
threefold deuterated 1:l complex ( d 3 )is shown in Fig. 5. The observed
90  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

                                               IE a1

                                                      ylt"/  y't20

    Figure 46. ZEKE spectra of the h, 1:l      0      500           1000
phenol-water complex via different inter-
mediate S, levels: S,0' (top), S,a' (middle),  Ion Internal Energy [cm-ll
and Sly" (bottom). The spectra have been
corrected for the dye laser output intensity
variation of the ionizing laser. (Reproduced
from [64] with permission.)

line width is about 5cm-I (fwhm) and is mainly due to unresolved
rotational structure.

                               1. Ionization Energy

For the phenol-water complex, Fuke et al. [171] deduced an adiabatic
ionization energy (IE) of 8.09 eV (-65250 cm-') from one-color REMPI-
PES spectra via the S,O' state. A much more precise value for the IE was
reported by Lipert and Colson [1761 who used two-color photoionization
efficiency (REMPI-PIE) spectroscopy via the S, 0' state as the inter-
mediate resonance. In that work, the PIE curves were recorded for
variable extraction fields E of 27-500 V cm-'. The field-free ionization
energy was calculated by extrapolation to zero field according to the

* formula for the field shift 6 : S [cm-']= c (E[V cm- 1) . 1 112 A field-free IE

value of 64,035 10cm-' was derived from the obtained value of c = 4.5.
This ionization energy was about 1215cm-' lower than the value given by
Fuke et al. [171].

   From the ZEKE spectra shown in Fig. 46 ionization energies of
64,024 t 4 cm-' (via S, O'), 64,023 f4 cm-' (via S , a'), and 64,025 f
4cm-' (via Sly") are obtained, respectively. These values are not yet
corrected for the effect of the pulsed extraction field ( E = 0.7 V cm-')
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  91

employed. The quoted error is due to the width of the IE peaks and the
error in the laser calibration. As in the case of the other hydrogen-
bonded complexes [177-1791 a shift of 3cm-' is used for the required
correction of the ionization energy due to the pulsed extraction field.
Thus, a value of 64,027 & 4 cm-' is derived for the field-free (averaged)
adiabatic ionization energy. It should be emphasized that the same value
for the ionization energy is obtained (within experimental error) for all
three resonant intermediate states. This is a very strong argument for the
assumption that the observed ionization energy is indeed the adiabatic
ionization energy. For the threefold deuterated complex (d,) an un-
corrected ionization energy of 64,017 2 4 cm-' is measured, and hence a
field-corrected value of 64,020 2 4 cm-' is obtained.

   The IE of the 1 : l phenol-water complex (h,) is lowered by 4601 k
8cm-' compared to the IE of PhOH [180] (68,628-C4cm-'). The
corresponding decrease of the d, complex on complexation is calculated
to be 459028cm-' (IE value of PhOD: [180] 68,61024cm-I). The

! decrease of the IE on com lexation is much larger than the corresponding

decrease of the S, t So0 transition of 352.5 (h,) and 341.9 cm-' ( d 3 ) ,

and is mainly due to the additional electrostatic interaction between the
charge (localized in the phenol ring) and the dipole moment of the water
molecule. This "charge interaction" leads to a very strong increase of the
binding energy of the hydrogen bond. In this case, the increase in binding
energy (-4600cm-'), going from the So state to the ground state of the
cation, is about twice the total binding energy of the neutral complex,
which is roughly estimated to be about 2000cm-l. Hence, for the ionic
complex the total stabilization energy of the hydrogen bond is of the
order of about 6600cm-' (800meV), which is comparable to binding
energies of weak chemical bonds (=1 eV). This increase in binding energy
is responsible for the decrease in the hydrogen-bond length in the ionic
complex.

                           2. Intermolecular Vibrations

The different intermolecular vibrational fundamentals are now extracted
from the ZEKE spectra, while the assignment of those vibrations to the
corresponding normal coordinates will be discussed in the following
section (together with the ab initio results [65]). The dominant feature of
the ZEKE spectra of the h, and d, complexes (Figs. 5 and 46) are
progressions of the totally symmetric intermolecular stretch vibration ( a )
in combination with different inter- and intramolecular vibrational
origins. The stretch frequency is measured as 240 and 221 cm-I for the h,
and d, complex, respectively. The strong stretch progression reflects the
change of intermolecular bond length upon ionization: ab initio calcula-
92                 K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

                                                 TABLE VI
Comparison of Experimental and Calculated (Harmonic) Frequencies (in cm-') of the

                     Intermolecular Vibrations of the Phenol-Water Cation

Vibration          Experiment                   ab initiob
                   from Ref. 64               from Ref. 65

Out-of-plane bend  67164(?)                     87182
                     (1.05)                    (1.06)
        P"            841-                    1241117
                                               (1.06)
  In-plane bend      (-1                      2751259
                                               (1.06)
        P'          240 1221                  2021163
                     (1.09)                    (1.24)
       Stretch     =130I 100                  4511330
                    (= 1.30)                   (1.37)
               5                              3581259d
                       -1-                     (1.38)
      Torsion'
                      (-)
               7    3281264
                     (1.24)
Out-of-plane wag

          Y"
   In-plane wag

           Y'

    "Shown are the values for the PhOH-H,O and PhOD-D,O complex, as well as the
corresponding ratio (in brackets).

   b[ROHF13-21G*(0)].
    "The torsion is observed as overtone 27 at 257 (h,) and 197 cm-I (d3).
    dOne-dimensional anharmonic approach (see text and [65] for details).

tions [65] predict a value of 0.03 nm (on going from the So to the ion).
The full assignment of all vibrational features is discussed in Refs. 64 and
65. The results are given in Table VI and compared to the ab initio
results.

   The ZEKE spectra recorded via the different S , levels clearly show
remarkably different Franck-Condon factors for the transitions from the
intermediate resonances into the ionic vibrational levels (Fig. 46). In
summary, there are now five intermolecular and one intramolecular
vibrations of the 1:1 phenol-water complex determined from the experi-
ment with frequencies for the h 3 ( d 3 )complex of 240 (221), 257 (197), 328
(264), 84, and 67 (64?) cm-' for the intermolecular fundamentals and
450 cm-I for the strong intramolecular 18b vibration (see also Table VI).
The d, frequency corresponding to the 84-cm-' vibration is not iden-
tified.

                      B. Comparison with ab inih'o Results

The assignment of these intermolecular vibrations to the corresponding
normal coordinates is carried out by comparison with the ab initio results
[65]. The results of these calculations [65] for the ionic frequencies of the
h, and d, complex are summarized in Table VI. The assignment of the
experimental frequencies to the corresponding normal coordinates (see
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  93

[65] for a diagram of these motions) is straightforward only for the
stretch. For the other intermolecular vibrations the comparison with the
ab initio results makes an assignment possible (see Table VI).

                           1. Intramolecular Vibrations

The ZEKE spectra of the 1:l complex also show a few peaks that are
assigned to intramolecular (phenol-localized) vibrations. In the ZEKE
spectrum of the h, complex via the S , origin (see Figs. 5 and 46), a strong
feature at 450cm-I is observed. In the earlier ZEKE study [181] this
band was tentatively assigned to a combination band of one quantum of
the stretch with a vibrational origin at 203cm-l. The latter band,
however, has now been reassigned to the third quantum of the 67-cm-l
fundamental (see above). Hence, the 450-cm-' band is now attributed to
a fundamental, which was also a possible suggestion discussed in the
previous work [181]. In that work this band was possibly assigned to an
intermolecular vibration since no (similarly strong) intramolecular phenol
mode is seen in that frequency region and it was assumed that the
frequency shifts on complexation should be small (however, see later).
Searching for the corresponding d, band in the spectrum (shown in Fig.
5 ) leads to a peak at 435 cm-' (in the low-energy shoulder of the second
quantum of the stretch at 441 cm-I). Since no high-frequency inter-
molecular mode with a small isotopic shift is predicted [65] from the ab
initio calculation (see Table VI), this fundamental is now attributed to an
intermolecular mode. It has also been found that for the combination
bands of this particular vibration with the stretch progression the stretch
frequency is noticeably reduced from 240 to 230 cm-' in the case of the h,
complex and correspondingly from 221 to 214cm-' in the d, complex,
thus suggesting some interaction between these two vibrations. The only
intramolecular vibration in that frequency region, which has the same
symmetry as the intermolecular stretch, namely a ' (in plane), is the 18b
mode with a frequency of 411cm-' for the phenol cation itself [180].
Hence, an assignment of the 450cm-' band to the 18b vibration would
imply a large frequency shift of +39 cm-' on complexation. However, the
18b mode is the C-0 bending motion, and hence a significant change in
frequency on complexation as well as on deuteration is expected. Indeed,
the ab initio calculations [65] for this vibration predict a strong increase in
frequency of about 70cm-' as well as a strong deuteration shift of
-25 cm-'. These shifts are consistent with the experimentally observed
shifts of +39 and -15cm-l. (According to ab initio results, the 18b
vibration also shows a significant complexation shift of about +20 cm-' in
the neutral complex [1751.) Furthermore, by comparison with the normal
mode pictures [65] of the 18b vibration, it can be seen that the water
94  K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

molecule is noticeably involved in that motion thus explaining the strong
complexation and deuteration shifts. By comparing the normal mode
pictures [65] of the 18b vibration and the intermolecular stretch, evidence
for the coupling of these two vibrations is also found: In the hydrogen-
bond region the elongations are very similar, while in the phenol moiety
the elongations are 180" phase shifted. The fact that the 450 cm-' band is
quite intense in the ZEKE spectrum of the complex (compared to the
monomer ZEKE spectrum [180]), and that an intense overtone (at
895 cm-l) is seen, suggests there is a large change in the geometry along
this particular normal coordinate upon ionization. This finding can again
be rationalized by the noticeable influence of the intermolecular hydrogen
bond on that normal coordinate since the intermolecular bond length is
strongly reduced on ionization. Hence, in summary, the assignment of the
450 ( h 3 )and 435cm-I ( d 3 ) band to the intramolecular 18b vibration is
supported by the ab initio results [65, 1751 and is at present the favored
assignment.

                          2. Intermolecular Vibrations

Assuming C, symmetry for both the neutral and the ionic states, only the
three totally symmetric vibrations or even-numbered overtones of the
antisymmetric vibrations are expected to be seen in the ZEKE spectra
since all pumped intermediate levels are totally symmetric. However,
according to the assignments given in Table VI there is one antisymmetric
intermolecular fundamental (the out-of-plane bending vibration) assigned
to the 67cm-I band. The intensity of this band could be derived from
weak Herzberg-Teller coupling. It is well known from the P E [59] and
also ZEKE spectra of aromatic molecules [22, 62, 631 that Franck-
Condon forbidden vibrations can be observed. However, a complete
explanation for the observation of antisymmetric (a" in C,) intermolecular
fundamentals still has to be given.

    IX. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

ZEKE spectroscopy can be expected to lead to more and more applica-
tions in chemistry and molecular physics. In this chapter we have
presented a few typical examples, mainly focusing on the high-resolution
spectra of molecular cations that can be obtained by ZEKE spectroscopy.
The extension to radicals, anions, and hence neutrals is still an emerging
field. Many laboratories across the world are contributing to the rapid
emergence of this spectroscopy. This trend was very evident in the two
international conferences at Kreuth in 1991 and Giens in 1993. The future
will no doubt help to further clarify the nature of ZEKE Rydberg states
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  95

leading to these interesting spectra and to extend applications to anion
spectra and neutrals. The technique also lends itself to the study of
transient species, such as radicals or complexes including the direct
measurements of transition states in chemical reactions [24]. All these
early examples will no doubt be followed, as in any emerging spec-
troscopy, by a rich body of examples, which firmly establishes this new
spectroscopy.

   One chemical implication of ZEKE detection arises from the particular
feature of ZEKE Rydberg states: Their longevity caused by the negligible
interaction between the ZEKE electron and the ion core [182,183]. The
question then arises as to what happens to the ZEKE electron if the ionic
core is highly excited vibrationally or electronically, or if the ion core
dissociates into a fragment ion (core) and a neutral? For complete
decoupling of the ZEKE electron from the dynamics of the core, one
might expect the ZEKE electron to follow the positive charge of the
fragment ion core thus forming a fragment ZEKE Rydberg state; the
neutral fragment carries no charge and its interaction with the ZEKE
electron due to its multipole moments and polarizability should be
negligible. The two-photon nonresonant ZEKE spectra of ammonia
showed that the (long) lifetime of the ZEKE Rydberg states is not
shortened significantly for very high vibrational excitation up to u + = 9
(corresponding to -1 eV internal energy of the ion core) and it was
postulated in that work that ZEKE Rydberg states can survive fragmenta-
tion of the core to form fragment ZEKE Rydberg states [182]. For van
der Waals clusters some experimental evidence for the formation of a
fragment ZEKE Rydberg state from the parent ZEKE Rydberg state was

found in the picosecond pump-probe ZEKE spectra of anilline . . . argon

[22]. Also, it was demonstrated that electronic excitation and subsequent
fluorescence of the ion core leads to the formation of a ZEKE Rydberg
state with an ion core in the electronic ground state that can then be
pulsed-field ionized [47]. Direct experimental evidence for the survival of
ZEKE Rydberg states with ion core dissociation came from experiments
using a variant of the ZEKE detection scheme: Instead of detecting the
electron, the ion originating from pulsed-field ionization of the ZEKE
Rydberg states is detected in the experiment (this has also been termed
mass analyzed threshold ionization, MAT1 [41,42]). This ionization has
been carried out by applying a dc field (already present at the time of
photoexcitation) to spatially separate the ions from the ZEKE Rydberg
state molecules. A high-voltage pulse is then used for PFI and to extract
the ions so produced into a TOF mass spectrometer. For the benzene-
argon (C,H,-Ar) van der Waals cluster, the ZEKE spectra reproduced in
Fig. 47 were obtained in different mass-resolved channels. [43]. The mass
96  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

    Figure 47. Mass resolved ZEKE spectra in three different mass channels. Bottom:
Benzene ions produced from pulsed-field ionization of ZEKE Rydberg states of benzene.
Middle: Benzene-argon ions produced from pulsed-field ionization of ZEKE Rydberg
states of benzene-argon. Top: Benzene ions produced from pulsed-field ionization of
fragment ZEKE Rydberg states of benzene originating from fragmentation of the benzene-
argon core. (Reproduced from [43] with permission.)

- resolved ZEKE signals recorded were C,Hl (bottom), C H + ' Ar

(middle), and C,H: coming from the dissociation of the C;H$ Ar
core in a ZEKE Rydberg state. Hence, the lower frequency intramolecu-

lar vibrations (in the region of the 6l (kt)state, see Section 1I.B) seen

in the C,H,-Ar ZEKE spectrum do not lead to dissociation of the ion
complex, whereas the higher ones (around the 6' (++)) do; the signal
loss in the C,H; * Ar mass channel corresponds to signal appearing in
the C,H; mass channel. A similar result was found recently for mass-
selected ZEKE spectra of C,H,: Fragmentation of the ion core led to
fragment ZEKE Rydberg states that were then detected by PFI [182]. A
very recent development for MATI is the use of pulsed separation fields
to spatially separate the directly formed ions from the ZEKE Rydberg
states. This detection scheme has been demonstrated to yield MATI
spectra fully equivalent, in signal strength and resolution, to ZEKE
spectra obtained from electron detection [184, 1851.

   Another important aspect for chemistry concerns the dynamics of
hydrogen-bonded clusters, Attempts have been made to probe proton

transfer in such systems, as shown in Fig. 48 for PhOH. . .(NH3)n,by

short-pulse lasers in the femto-to-picosecond regime [1861. The combina-
tion of this pump-probe technique with ZEKE detection should be
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  97

 !\v

PhOH'B

                               + PhO HB' ,

         PhO'-+ H'B,

PhOH'B"

                         r ( PhO: ....... . ..+HaBn

    Figure 48. Schematic of pump-probe diagnostics of proton transfer in excited state of
phenol-(ammonia), clusters. (Reproduced from [184] with permission.)

particularly well suited to project out the proton-transfer coordinate from
the excited S, state into the ion. Combined with mass-selected ZEKE
detection, the proton transfer and fragmentation channel in the ion can
also be monitored.

   In conclusion one can say that we are now at the threshold of a rich
new spectroscopy capable of providing new insights into cations, anions,
and neutrals in a mass-selective fashion. Therefore, these techniques also
provide information about metastable species present in reactive mix-
tures, clusters, van der Waals systems, and free radicals to mention only a
few.

                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and the Commission
of the European Union is gratefully acknowledged by KMD. Contribu-
tions of ERG were supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation (CHE-9307131) and a U.S. Senior Scientist Award from the
98  K. MULLER-DETHLEFSET AL.

Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. The work of KW and VMK was
supported by grants from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research and
the Office of Health and Environmental Research of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy. The authors KW and VMK also acknowledge use of the
resources of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of Tech-
nology CRAY Y-MP2E/ 116 Supercomputer.

                                   REFERENCES

 1. K. Miiller-Dethlefs, M. Sander, and E. W. Schlag, Z . Nuturforsch. A , 39, 1089 (1984).
 2. K. Miiller-Dethlefs, M. Sander, and E. W. Schlag, Chem. Phys. Lett., 112, 291 (1984).
 3. G. Reiser, W. Habenicht, K. Miiller-Dethlefs, and E. W. Schlag, Chem. Phys. Lett.,

     152, 119 (1988).
 4. K. Miiller-Dethlefs and E. W. Schlag, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 42, 109 (1991).
 5. W. Habenicht, G. Reiser, and K. Miiller-Dethlefs, J . Chem. Phys., 95, 4809 (1991).
 6. K. Miiller-Dethlefs, J . Chem. Phys., 95, 4821 (1991).
 7. G. Reiser and K. Miiller-Dethlefs, J . Phys. Chem.,96, 9 (1992).
 8. R. Lindner, B. Beyl, H. Sekiya, and K. Miiller-Dethlefs, Angew. Chem., 105, 631

     (1993); Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 32, 603 (1993).
 9. R. Lindner, H. Sekiya, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, Angew. Chem., 105, 1384 (1993);

     Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 32, 1364 (1993).
10. S. Fredin, D. Gauyacq, M. Horani, Ch. Jungen, G. Lefevre, and F. Masnou-Seeuws,

     Mol. Phys., 60, 825 (1987).
11. M. Sander, L. A. Chewter, K. Miiller-Dethlefs, and E. W. Schlag, Phys. Rev. A , 36,

     4543 (1987).
12. H. Rudolph, V. McKoy, and S. N. Dixit, J . Chem. Phys., 90, 2570 (1989).
13. R. G. Tonkyn, J. W. Winniczek, and M. G . White, Chem. Phys. Lett., 164, 137 (1989).
14. T. N. Kitsopoulos, I. M. Waller, J. G. Loeser, and D. M. Neumark, Chem. Phys.

     Lett., 159, 300 (1989).
15. I. M. Waller, T. N. Kitsopulos, and D. M. Neumark, J . Phys. Chern., 94, 2240 (1990).
16. J. M. Smith, C. Lakshiminarayan, and J. L. Knee, J . Chem. Phys., 93, 4475 (1990).
17. G. Gantefor, D. M. Cox, and A. Kaldor, J . Chem. Phys., 93, 8395 (1990).
18. G . Reiser, 0.Dopfer, R. Lindner, G . Henri, K. Miiller-Dethlefs, E. W. Schlag, and S.

     D. Colson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 181, 1 (1991).
19. F. Merkt and T. P. Softley, Phys. Rev. A , 46, 302 (1992).
20. E. R. Grant and M. G. White, Nature (London), 354, 249 (1991).
21. I. Fischer, A. Strobel, J. Staecker, G . Niedner-Schatteburg, K. Miiller-Dethlefs, and

     V. E. Bondybey, J . Chem. Phys., 96, 7171 (1992).
22. X. Zhang, J. M. Smith, and J. L. Knee, J . Chem. Phys., 97, 2843 (1992).
23. I. Fischer, A . Lochschmidt, A . Strobel, G . Niedner-Schatteburg, K. Miiller-Dethlefs,

     and V. E. Bondybey, J . Chem. Phys., 98, 3592 (1993).
24. D. M. Neumark, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 43, 153 (1992); R. B. Metz, S. E.
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  99

     Bradforth, and D. M. Neumark, A d v . Chem. Phys., 81 (1992); D. M. Neumark, ACC.
     Chem. Res., 26, 33 (1993).
25. F. Merkt and T. P. Softley, J . Chem. Phys., 96, 4149 (1992).
26. F. Merkt and T. P. Softley, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 12, 205 (1993).
27. J. Harrington and J. C. Weisshaar, J . Chem. Phys., 97, 2809 (1992).
28. A. Strobel, I. Fischer, J. Staecker, G . Niedner-Schatteburg, K. Miiller-Dethlefs, and
     V. E. Bondybey, J . Chem. Phys., 97, 2332 (1992).
29. G. P. Bryant, Y. Jiang, M. Martin, and E . R. Grant, J . Chem. Phys., 96, 6875 (1992).
30. R. G . Tonkyn, R. T. Wiedmann, and M. G . White, J . Chem. Phys., 96, 3696 (1992).
31. R. G . Tonkyn, R. T. Wiedmann, E. R. Grant, and M. G. White, J . Chem. Phys., 95,
     7033 (1991).
32. M.-T. Lee, K. Wang, V. McKoy, R. G. Tonkyn, R. T. Wiedmann, E. R. Grant, and
     M. G . White, J . Chem. Phys., 96, 7848 (1992).
33. G. F. Gantefor, D. M. Cox, A. J. Kaldor, J . Chem. Phys., 96, 4102 (1992).
34. S. T. Pratt, J . Chem. Phys., 98, 9241 (1993).
35. X. Zhang, J. M. Smith, and J. L. Knee, J . Chem. Phys., 99, 3133 (1993).
36. W. A . Chupka, J . Chem. Phys., 98, 4520 (1993); 99, 580 (1993).
37. F. Merkt, H. H. Fielding, and T. P. Softley, Chem. Phys. Lett., 202, 153 (1993).
38. U. Even, M. Ben-Nun, and R. D. Levine, Chem. Phys. Lett., 210, 416 (1993).
39. M. C. R. Cockett and K. Kimura, J . Chem. Phys., 100, 3429 (1994).
40. S. Hillenbrand, L. Zhu, and P. Johnson, J . Chem. Phys., 95, 2237 (1991).
41. L. Zhu and P. Johnson, J . Chem. Phys., 94, 5769 (1991).
42. C. Jouvet, C. Dedonder-Lardeux, S. Martrenchard-Barra, and D. Soldagi, Chem.
     Phys. Lett., 198, 419 (1992).
43. H. Krause and H. J. Neusser, J . Chem. Phys., 97, 5923 (1992).
44. K. Wang, J. A. Stephens, and V. McKoy, J . Phys. Chem., 98, 460 (1994).
45. F. Merkt, J . Chem. Phys., 100, 2623 (1994).
46. F. Merkt and R. N. Zare, J . Chem. Phys., 101, 3495 (1994).
47. W. Kong, D. Rodgers, and J. W. Hepburn, Chem. Phys. Lett., 203, 497 (1993).
48. M. J. Seaton, Rep. Prog. Phys., 46, 167 (1983).
49. Ch. Jungen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 53, 2394 (1984).
50. A. Giusti-Suzor and Ch. Jungen, J . Chem. Phys., SO, 986 (1984).
51. S. N. Dixit, D. L. Lynch,V. McKoy, and W. M. Huo, Phys. Rev. A , 32, 1267 (1985).
52. D. W. Turner, C. Baker, A. D. Baker, and C. R . Brundle, Molecular Photoelectron
     Spectroscopy, Wiley, London, 1970.
53. G. Herzberg, Electronic Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules, Van Nostrand, New York,
     1966.
54. H. A . Jahn and E. Teller, Proc. R . SOC.London A , 161, 220 (1937).
5 5 . I. B. Bersuker, The Jahn-Teller Effect and Vibronic Interactions in Modern Chemistry,
     Plenum Press, New York, 1984.
56. K. Raghavachari, R. C. Haddon, T. A . Miller, and V. E. Bondybev, J . Chem. Phys.,
     79, 1387 (1983).
57. M. Iwasaki, K. Toriyama, and K. Nunime, J . Chem. SOC.Chem. Comrnun., 1983,320.
58. T. Oka, Rev. Mod. Phys., 64, 1141 (1992).
59. E. Sekreta, K. S. Visvanathan, and J. P. Reilly, J . Chem. Phys., 90, 5349 (1989).
100  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

60. D. Rieger, G . Reiser, K. Muller-Dethlefs, and E. W. Schlag, J . Phys. Chem., 96, 12
     ( 1992).

61. G. Reiser, D. Rieger, T. G. Wright, K. Muller-Dethlefs, and E. W. Schlag, J . Phys.
     Chem., 97, 4335 (1993).

62. M. C. R. Cockett, K. Okuyama, and K. Kimura, J . Chem. Phys., 97, 4679 (1992).
63. J. M. Dyke, H. Ozeki, M. Takahashi, M. C. R. Cockett, and K. Kimura, K., J .

     Chem. Phys., 97, 8926 (1992).
64. 0. Dopfer, G . Reiser, K. Muller-Dethlefs, E . W. Schlag, and S. D. Colson, J . Chem.

     Phys., 101, 974 (1994).
65. P. Hobza, R. Burcl, V. Spirko, 0. Dopfer, K. Muller-Dethlefs, and E. W. Schlag, J .

     Chem. Phys., 101, 990 (1994).
66. M. I. Al-Joboury and D. W. Turner, J . Chem. Soc., 1963, 5141; J . Chem. Phys., 37,

     3007 (1962).
67. F. I.Vilesov, B. C. Kurbatov, and A. N. Terenin, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR,138, 1329

     (1961), Engl. transl.: Sov. Phys. Dokl., 6 , 490 (1961).
68. K. Siegbahn, Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis, Uppsala University,

     Institute of Physics Report 670, Nov. 1969.
69. K. Siegbahn, C. Nordling, G. Johansson, J. Hedman, P. F. Heden, K. Gelius, T.

     Bergmark, L. 0.Werme, T. Manne, and Y. Baer, E S C A Applied To Free Molecules,
     North Holland, Amsterdam, London 1969; K. Siegbahn, Some Current Problems in
     Electron Spectroscopy, Report Uppsala University Institute of Physics 1074, Uppsala,
     1982.

70. L. Asbrink, Chem. Phys. Lett., 7, 549 (1970).
71. A. Niehaus and M. W. Ruf, Chem. Phys. Lett., 11, 55 (1971).

72. S. Southworth, C. M. Truesdale, P. H. Kobrin, D. W. Lindle, W. D. Brewer, and D.
     A. Shirley, J . Chem. Phys., 76, 143 (1982).

73. S. T. Pratt, P. M. Dehmer, and J. L. Dehmer, J . Chem. Phys., 87, 3288 (1987).
74. W. G. Wilson, K. S.Viswanathan, E. Sekreta, and J. P. Reilly, J . Phys. Chem.,88, 672

     (1984).
75. K. S. Viswanathan, E. Sekreta, E. R. Davidson, and J. P. Reilly, J . Chem. Phys., 90,

     5078 (1986).
76. X . Song, E. Sekreta, J. P. Reilly, H. Rudolph, and V. McKoy, J . Chem. Phys., 91,

     6062 (1989).
77. S. W. Allendorf, D. J. Leahy, D. C. Jacobs, and R. N. Zare, J . Chem. Phys., 91, 2216

     (1989).

78. T. Baer, A d v . Chem. Phys., 64, 111 (1986).

79. R. Spohr, P. M. Guyon, W. A . Chupka, and J. Berkowitz, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 42,1872
     (1971).

80. W. B. Peatman, G. B. Kasting, and D. J. Wilson, J . Electron. Spectrosc. Relat.
     Phenom., 7, 233 (1975).

81. T. Baer, State Selection by Photoion-Photoelectron Coincidence. In Gas Phase Ion
     Chemistry, M. T. Bowers, Ed. Academic, New York, 1979.

82. P. M. Guyon, T. Baer, and I. Nenner, J . Chem. Phys., 78, 3665 (1983).
83. W. P. Peatman, T. B. Borne, and E . W. Schlag, Chem. Phys. Lett., 3, 492 (1969);

     Peatman, W. P. Ph. D. Thesis, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, 1969.
84. T. Baer, W. B. Peatman, and E. W. Schlag, Chem. Phys. Lett., 4, 243 (1969).

85. H. Sekiya, R. Lindner, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, Chem. Lett., 1993, 485.
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  101

 86. R. Lindner et al. J . Chem. Phys., to be submitted.

 87. I. Fischer, R. Lindner and K. Muller-Dethlefs, J . Chem. SOC.Faraday Trans., Faraday
      Research Article, 90, 2425 (1994).

 88. H. Rudolph, V. McKoy, and S. N. Dixit, Chem. Phys. Lett., 90, 2570 (1988).
 89. J. A. Blush, P. Chen, R. T. Wiedmann, and M. G . White, J . Chem. Phys., 98, 3557.
 90. J. H. Callomon, T. M. Dunn, and I. M. Mills, Philos. Trans. R. SOC.London A , 259,

      499 (1966).
 91. M. Oldani, R. Widmer, G . Grassi, and A . Bauder, J . Mol. Struct., 190, 31 (1988).
 92. E. Riedle, T. Knittel, T. Weber, and H . J. Neusser, J . Chem. Phys., 91, 4555 (1989).
 93. E. Riedle and J. Pliva, Chem. Phys., 152, 375 (1991).
 94. A. W. Potts, W. C. Price, D. G. Streets, and T. A. Williams, Faraday Discuss. Chem.

      SOC.,54, 168 (1972).
 95. S. R. Long, J. T. Meek, and J. P. Reilly, J . Chem. Phys., 79, 3206 (1983).
 96. P. R. Bunker, Molecular Symmetry and Spectroscopy, Academic, New York, 1979.
 97. M.-L. Junttila, J. L. Domenech, G . T. Fraser, and A. S. Pine, J . Mol. Spectrosc., 147,

      513, 1991; E. Riedle, to be published, used these So constants to improve the S,
      constants from [92].

 98. H. C. Longuet-Higgins, U. Opik, M. H . L. Pryce, F. R. S. Sack, and R. A. Sack,
      Proc. R . SOC.London A , 244, 1 (1958).

 99. T. A. Miller and V. E. Bondybey, Molecular Ions: Spectroscopy, Structure and
      Chemistry, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1983 and references cited therein.

100. R. L. Whetten, K. S. Haber, and E. R. Grant, J . Chem. Phys., 84, 1270 (1986).
101. J. Eiding, R. Schneider, W. Domcke, H . Koppel, and W. von Niessen, Chem. Phys.

      Lett., 177, 345 (1992).
102. J . Eiding and W. Domcke, Chem. Phys., 163, 133 (1992).
103. S. L. Anderson, G . D. Kubiak, and R. N. Zare, Chem. Phys. Lett., 105, 22 (1984).
104. K. S . Viswanathan, E. Sekreta, and J. P. Reilly, J . Phys. Chem., 90, 5658 (1986).
105. S. T. Pratt, P. M. Dehmer, and J. L. Dehmer, Chem. Phys. Lett., 105, 28 (1984).
106. M. A. O'Halloran, S. T. Pratt, P. M. Dehmer, and J. L. Dehmer, J . Chem. Phys., 87,

      3288 (1987).
107. A. Fujii, T. Ebata, and M. Ito, J . Chem. Phys., 88, 5307 (1988).
108. S. T. Pratt, E. F. McCormack, J. L. Dehmer, and P. M. Dehmer, J . Chem. Phys., 92,

      1831 (1990).
109. S . T. Pratt, P. M. Dehmer, and J. L. Dehmer, J . Chem. Phys., 92, 262 (1990).
110. E . F. McCormack, S. T. Pratt, J. L. Dehmer, and P. M. Dehmer, J . Chem. Phys., 92,

      4734 (1990).
111. E. de Beer, M. Born, C. A. de Lange, and N. P. C. Westwood, Chem. Phys. Lett.,

      186, 40 (1991).
112. K. Wang, J. A. Stephens, V. McKoy, E. de Beer, C. A. de Lange, and N. P. C.

      Westwood, J . Chem. Phys., 97, 211 (1992).
113. E. de Beer, C. A. de Lange, J. A. Stephens, K. Wang, and V. McKoy, J . Chem.

      Phys., 95, 714 (1991).
114. M. Braunstein, V. McKoy, S . N. Dixit, R. G. Tonkyn, and M. G . White, J . Chem.

      Phys., 93, 5345 (1990).
115. S. N. Dixit and V. McKoy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 128, 49 (1986).
116. K. Wang and V. McKoy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 95, 4977 (1991).
102  K. MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

117. K. Wang and V. McKoy, to be published.
118. M.-T. Lee, K. Wang,V. McKoy, and L. E. Machado, J . Chem. Phys., 97,3905 (1992).
119. M. Dubs, U. Bruhlmann, and J. R. Huber, J . Chem. Phys., 84, 3106 (1986).
120. J. B. Halpern, H. Zacharias, and R. Wallenstein, J . Mol. Spectrosc., 79, 1 (1980).
121. A. R. Edmonds, Angular Momentum in Quantum Mechanics, Princeton University,

      New Jersey, 1974.
122. R. R. Lucchese, G . Raseev, and V. McKoy, Phys. Rev. A , 25, 2572 (1982).
123. J. M. Brown, J. T. Hougen, K. P. Huber, J. W. C. Johns, I. Kopps, H. Lefebvre-

      Brion, A. J. Merer, D. A. Ramsay, J. Rostas, and R. N. Zare, J . Mol. Spectrosc., 55,
      500 (1975).

124. J. Xie and R. N. Zare, J . Chem. Phys., 93, 3033 (1990).

125. G. Raseev and N. Cherepkov, Phys. Rev. A , 42, 3948 (1990).
126. R. S. Mulliken, Phys. Rev., 59, 873 (1941).
127. P. G. Burke, N . Chandra, and F. A. Gianturco, J . Phys. B , 5 , 2212 (1972).
128. W. J. Hunt and W. A. Goddard, Chem. Phys. Lett., 3, 414 (1969).

129. R . T. Wiedmann, M. G . White, K. Wang, and V. McKoy, J . Chem. Phys., 98, 7673
      (1993).

130. R. T. Wiedmann, R. G. Tonkyn, M. G. White, K. Wang, and V. McKoy, J . Chem.
      Phys., 97, 768 (1992).

131. M. Takahashi, H. Ozeki, and K. Kimura, Chem. Phys. Lett., 181, 255 (1991).
132. W. Kong, D. Rodgers, J . W. Hepburn, K. Wang, and V. McKoy, J . Chem. Phys., 99,

      3159 (1993).
133. K. Wang and V. McKoy, J . Chem. Phys., 95, 7872 (1991).

134. H. Lefebvre-Brion, Chem. Phys. Lett., 171, 377 (1990).
135. K. Wang, J. A. Stephens, and V. McKoy, J . Chem. Phys., 95, 6456 (1991).
136. M.-T. Lee, K. Wang, and V. McKoy, J . Chem. Phys., 97, 3108 (1992).
137. M. S. Child and Ch. Jungen, J . Chem. Phys., 93, 7756 (1990).
138. R. D. Gilbert and M. S. Child, Chem. Phys. Lett., 187, 153 (1991).

139. R. T. Wiedmann, M. G . White, K. Wang, and V. McKoy, J . Chem. Phys., 100, 4738
      (1994).

140. R. T. Wiedmann, E. R. Grant, R. G . Tonkyn, and M. G. White, J . Chem. Phys., 95,
      746 (1991).

141. a. Y.-F. Zhu, E. R. Grant, K. Wang, V. McKoy, and H. Lefebvre-Brion, J . Chem.
      Phys., 100, 8633 (1994);
      b. Y. F. Zhu, E. R. Grant and H. Lefebvre-Brion, J . Chem. Phys., 99, 2287 (1993).

142. E. de Beer, W. J. Buma, and C. A. de Lange, J . Chem. Phys., 99, 3252 (1993).
143. C. R. Mahon, G . R. Janik, and T. F. Gallagher, Phys. Rev. A , 41, 3746 (1990).
144. E. R. Grant and Ch. Jungen, unpublished results.
145. K. S. Haber, G. Bryant, Y. Jiang, E. R. Grant, and H . Lefebvre-Bnon, Phys. Rev. A ,

      44,R5331 (1991).
146. E. de Beer, B. G. Koenders, M. P. Koopmans, and C. A. de Lange, J . Chem. SOC.

      Faraday Trans., 86, 2038 (1990).
147. H. Lefebvre-Brion, A. Giusti-Suzor, and G . Raseev, J . Chem. Phys., 83, 1557 (1986).
ZEKE SPECTROSCOPY: HIGH-RESOLUTION SPECTROSCOPY  103

148. J. Xie and R. N. Zare, Chem. Phys. Lett., 159, 399 (1989) and private communication.

149. Y. Xie, P. T. A. Reilly, S . Chilukuri, and R. J. Gordon, J. Chem. Phys., 95, 854

      (1991).
150. D. K. Hsu, D. L. Monts, and R. N. Zare, Spectral Atlas of Nitrogen Dioxide,

      Academic, New York, 1978.

151. R. S . Tapper, R. L. Whetten, and E. R. Grant, J . Phys. Chem., 88, 1273 (1984).

152. M. B. Knickelbein, K. S. Haber, L. Bigio, and E. R. Grant, Chem. Phys. Left.,131,

      51 (1986).
153. F. X. Campos, Y. Jiang, and Edward R. Grant, J. Chem. Phys., 93, 2308 (1990).

154. F. X. Campos, Y. Jiang, and Edward R. Grant, J. Chem. Phys., 93, 7731 (1990).
155. G. P. Bryant, Y. Jiang, and E. R. Grant, J . Chem. Phys., 96, 4827 (1992).

156. L. Bigio and E. R. Grant, J. Chem. Phys., 83, 5361 (1985); ibid., 83, 5369 (1985).
157. J. Berkowitz, Photoabsorption, Photoionization and Photoelectron Spectroscopy,

      Academic, New York, 1979.

158. a. G. P. Bryant, Y. Jiang, and E. R. Grant, Chem. Phys. Lett., 200, 495 (1992);
      b. G. P. Bryant, Y. Jiang, M. Martin, and E. R. Grant, J . Chem. Phys., 101, 7199
      (1944).

159. T. J. Lee, Chem. Phys. Lett., 188, 154 (1992).

160. W. von Niessen, G. H. F. Diercksen, and L. S. Cederbaum, Chem. Phys. Lett., 45,
      295 (1977).

161. M. H. Palmer, W. Moyes, M. Spiers, and J. N. A. Ridyard, J . Mol. Struct., 49, 105
      (1978).

162. G . Bieri, L. Asbrink, and W. von Niessen, J. Electron Specfrosc. Relat. Phenom., 23,
      281 (1981).

163. R. S. Mulliken, J . Chem. Phys., 23, 1997 (1955).

164. (a) F. Duschinsky, Acta Physiochem. U.R.S.S., 1, 551 (1937); (b) see also: G. J.
      Small, J . Chem. Phys., 54, 3300 (1971).

165. X. Song, C. W. Wilkerson, J. Lucia, S . Pauls, and J. P. Reilly, Chem. Phys. Lett., 174,
      377 (1990).

166. R. D. Amos and J. E . Rice, Cambridge Analytic Derivatives Package ( C A D P A C )4.0,
      Cambridge, 1987.

167. G . C. Eiden, F. Weinhold, and J. C. Weisshaar, J. Chem. Phys., 95, 8665 (1991).
168. D. Solgadi, C. Jouvet, and A. Tramer, J. Phys. Chem., 92, 3313 (1988).
169. C. N. R. Rao and T. Pradeep, Chem. SOC.Rev., 20, 477 (1991).
170. S. Tomoda and K. Kimura, in Vacuum Ultraviolet Photoionization and Photodissocia- '

      tion of Molecules and Clusters, C. Y. Ng, E d . , World Scientific, London, 1991.
171. K. Fuke, H. Yoshiuchi, K. Kaya, Y. Achiba, K. Sato, and K. Kimura, Chem. Phys.

      Lett., 108, 179 (1984).
172. K. Muller-Dethlefs, 0. Dopfer, and T. G . Wright, Chem. Rev., 94, 1845 (1994).
173. R. J. Lipert and S. D. Colson, J. Chem. Phys., 89, 4579 (1988).
174. R. J. Lipert and S . D. Colson, J. Chem. Phys., 93, 135 (1989).
175. M. Schutz, T. Burgi, S . Leutwyler, and T. Fischer, J . Chem. Phys., 98, 3763 (1993).
176. R. J. Lipert and S. D. Colson, J. Chem. Phys., 92, 3240 (1990).
104  K . MULLER-DETHLEFS ET AL.

177. T. G. Wright, E. Cordes, 0. Dopfer, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, K., J. Chern. SOC.
      Faraday Trans., 89, 1609 (1993).

178. E. Cordes, 0. Dopfer, T. G . Wright, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, J . Phys. Chern., 97,
      7471 (1993).

179. 0. Dopfer, G. Lembach, T. G. Wright, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, J . Chern. Phys., 98,
      1933 (1993).

180. 0. Dopfer et al., J . Chern. Phys., to be submitted; 0. Dopfer, Dissertation,
      Technische Universitat Munchen, 1944.

181. 0. Dopfer, G. Reiser, R. Lindner, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys.
      Chern., 96, 1259 (1992).

182. G . Reiser, W. Habenicht, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, J. Chern. Phys., 98, 8462 (1993).

183. W. G. Scherzer, H. L. Selzle, and E. W. Schlag, Z . Naturforsch., 48a, 1256 (1993).

184. H.-J. Dietrich, R. Lindner, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, J . Chern. Phys., 101, 3399 (1994).
185. R. Lindner, H.-J. Dietrich, and K. Muller-Dethlefs, Chern. Phys. Lett., 228, 417

      (1994).
186. J. A. Syage and J. Steadman, J . Chern. Phys., 95, 2497 (1991); J. A. Syage, J . Phys.

      Chern., 97, 12523 (1993).
         NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING
         SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION

          P. GASPARD, D. ALONSO, AND I. BURGHARDT

 Service de Chimie Physique and Centre for Nonlinear Phenomena and
ComplexSystems, Universite`Libre de Bruxelles, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium

                                    CONTENTS

  I. Introduction
      A. General Introduction
      B. Brief Historical Introduction and General Background

 11. Quantum Time Evolution, Path Integrals, and Semiclassical Limit
      A. Propagator and Green Operator
      B. Trace and Level Density
       C. Observable Quantities
             1. Interaction with Light
             2. Scattering between Atomic Particles
      D. Weyl-Wigner Representation and the Quasiclassical Method
      E. Short-Wavelength Asyrnptotics of Schrodinger's Equation
             1. From Schrodinger's to Hamilton's Equation
             2. Classical Probability Conservation and the Van Vleck-Morette Matrix
            3. Jacobi-Hill Equation and Linear Stability
             4. Semiclassical Propagator
       F. Feynman Path Integrals and the Semiclassical Method
            1. Propagator as a Path Integral
             2. Stationary-Phase Integration
            3. Second Variation of the Action and Jacobi-Hill Equation
             4. Classical Green Function as Resolvent of the Jacobi-Hill Operator
             5 . 6-Expansion of the Propagator

111. Classical Dynamics
       A. Linear Stability in Phase Space
       B. Examples of Mechanical Systems
             1. Hamiltonian Systems
             2. Hamiltonian Mappings
             3. Billiards
       C. Smale Horseshoe and Symbolic Dynamics
             1. Horseshoe Map

Advances in Chemical Physics, VolumeX C , Edited by I. Prigogine and Stuart A. Rice.

ISBN 0-471-04234-X 01995 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

                                                                                      105
106  P. GASPARD ET AL.

              2. Symbolic Dynamics
              3. Examples
              4. Generalizations
        D. Thermodynamic Formalism
  IV. Time Domain: Trace of the Propagator
        A. Regularizations
        B. Short-Time Behavior
        C. Path Integral
        D. Contribution of Equilibrium Points
        E. Contribution of Periodic Orbits
               1. Real, Unstable, Isolated Periodic Orbit
              2. Other Types of Periodic Orbits
        F. Simple Examples
               1. Harmonic Oscillator
              2. Morse Oscillator
  V. Energy Domain: Equilibrium-Point Quantization
        A. Evaluation of the Integral
        B. Discussion
 VI. Energy Domain: Periodic-Orbit Quantization
        A. Contribution of the Paths of Zero Length
        B. Contribution of Unstable and Isolated Periodic Orbits
               1. Stationary-Phase Integration
              2. The Maslov Index
        C. Dynamical Zeta Functions
               1. Level Density and Staircase Function
               2. Selberg and Ruelle Zeta Functions
              3. Convergence and the Topological Pressure
               4. Approximating the Zeta Functions
               5 . Bounded Systems
              6. Inclusion of the &Corrections
         D. Complex Periodic Orbits
              1. Tunneling in 1F Systems
              2 . Tunneling in 2F Systems
              3. Partition Functions of Statistical Mechanics and Thermal Reaction Rates
        E. Nonisolated Periodic Orbits
         F. Periodic Orbits Close to Bifurcations
 VII. Semiclassical Averages of Quantum Observables
         A. Diagonal Matrix Elements
         B. Semiclassical Photoabsorption Cross-Section
VIII. Quantum Billiards
         A . Wave Equation and Generalities
         B. Multiple Scattering Expansion
         C. Stationary Phase Method and Periodic Orbits
         D. Contribution of the Regular Periodic Orbits
        E. Contribution of the Degenerate Periodic Orbits
         F. Resummation
         G . Application to the Disk Scatterers
               1. Three-Disk Scatterer
               2. Two-Disk Scatterer
  IX. Matrix Hamiltonians
         A . Diagonalization of Matrix Hamiltonians
         B. Two-Surface 1F Model and Surface Hopping
         C. Conical Intersection and Geometric Phase
       NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 107

               1. Isotropic Conical Intersection
              2. Anisotropic Conical Intersection
  X. Atomic and Molecular Hamiltonians
        A. Coulomb Hamiltonian
        B. Atomic Systems
        C. Molecular Systems
               1. Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian
              2. Rotational-Vibrational Hamiltonian
        D. Coulomb and BO Potentials: Comparison of Their Semiclassical Properties
 XI. Molecular Vibrograms: Spectroscopy in the Time Domain
        A. The Principle of Vibrograms
         B. Bounded Molecular Systems
              1. Morse-Type Model for I,(X'C)
             2. CS,(X 'Ed): Fermi Resonance
        C . Unbounded Molecular Systems

          1. co,

               2. H,S and D,S
              3. Remarks
XII. The Molecular Transition State and Its Resonances
         A. The HgI, System
        B. Classical Dynamics and a Hamiltonian Mapping for the HgI, System
               1. From the Flow to the Mapping
              2. Properties of the Mapping
              3. Back to the Flow
         C. Equilibrium Point Quantization of the Transition State
         D. Periodic-Orbit Quantization of the Transition State
               1. The Low-Energy Regime
              2. The Intermediate Regime
              3. The High-Energy Regime
         E. Wavepacket Propagation
         F. Discussion of the Transition State Dynamics of HgI,
         G. Comparison of the Classical Repellers of ABA and ABC Molecules
         H. Inclusion of Bending and Extension to Larger Molecules: Equilibrium Point
               Quantization
         I. Inclusion of Rotational Motion: Equilibrium Point Quantization
        J. Resonances in Nonseparable and Statistical Regimes
         K. General Discussion
XIII. Semiclassical Electronic Regimes in Atomic and Solid-state Systems
         A. Highly Excited Electronic States
         B. Hydrogen Negative Ion
               1. Classical Dynamics of H-
               2. Semiclassical Quantization of H -
         C. Mesoscopic Semiconducting Devices
XIV. Discussion and Conclusions
         A. Classical Chaos, Periodic Orbits, and Quantum Spectra
         B. Scattering Systems and Applications to Chemical Reaction Dynamics
         C . Periodic-Orbit Quantization versus Equilibrium Point Quantization
         D. h-Expansion and the Implications of Anharmonicities
         E. Other Problems Related to the Semiclassical Limit
Acknowledgements
Note Added in Proof
References
108  P. GASPARD ET AL.

     I. INTRODUCTION

                              A. General Introduction

Thanks to laser spectroscopy, rapid progress is underway in our under-
standing of atoms and molecules. Modern studies have emphasized the
dynamical aspects of atomic and molecular systems [l]. In this context,
the relation between quantum and classical mechanics has to be reinvesti-
gated, especially, in the light of the recent works on classical chaos [2-71.

   The quantum mechanical ground state of atoms or molecules is
characterized by a wave function that rapidly decays for large separations
between the constituent particles, and thus lends a stability to the system
that is at the basis of most material structures, such as stable molecular
and supramolecular assemblies as well as solids. In the ground state, the
dynamics is frozen for the internal degrees of freedom of atomic systems.
This stability cannot be accounted for by classical mechanics, which has
been one of the main reasons for which classical mechanics was superse-
ded by quantum mechanics in the description of microscopic systems
[8-91.

   However, highly excited regimes of such systems are often character-
ized by physical actions that are much larger than the Planck constant
and, in these semiclassical regimes, classical mechanics is a very useful
guide to reach an understanding of the physicochemical processes.
Indeed, the importance of quantum coherence is often decreasing upon
excitation to higher energies. At low-energy excitations, the system still
manifests coherent quantum beats between its discrete energy levels,
which are only damped by spontaneous emission. At higher energies,
however, the system becomes the stage of kinetic processes like ioniza-
tion, unimolecular dissociation, bimolecular reaction, or photon absorp-
tion followed by intramolecular vibrational redistribution or isomerization
and, eventually, photon emissi0n.l The purpose of semiclassical methods
is to find a systematic description of such phenomena at the border
between classical and quantum mechanics.

      Most of these processes can be viewed as scattering processes of few-body systems with
electrons, nuclei, and photons. However, these processes may also take place in many-body
systems; for instance, in gas or liquid phases where the atom or molecule is exposed to the
effects of a fluctuating environment due to collisions with other particles or with phonons.
The process may then be described as a quantum stochastic process, which achieves the
irreversible localization of the wave function in one of the final states with certain
probabilities [lo]. The description of such stochastic processes falls outside the scope of this
chapter.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 109

   Since semiclassical methods carry out the quantization on the basis of
our knowledge of the classical motion, they are susceptible to the
difficulties caused by the nonlinearities of Hamilton's equations of
classical mechanics. Over the last decades, consequences of these non-
linearities have been thoroughly studied thanks to fast modern com-
puters, which led to the widespread recognition that trajectories (solu-
tions of nonlinear equations) may be as irregular in time as was
previously known for random processes. This phenomenon, nowadays
known as chaos, has been discovered and studied in every field of natural
sciences where the time evolution is governed by nonlinear equations
[2-41. Chaos turns out to be a typical behavior in classical mechanics. In
this way, chaos was found in classical models of atomic and molecular
systems, in particular in microscopic models of unimolecular or bi-
molecular chemical reactions. The inapplicability of standard WKB
semiclassical methods to classically chaotic systems urged the develop-
ment of new semiclassical methods that would be applicable to the typical
and common chaotic dynamical regimes.

   In the early 1970s, Gutzwiller [ l l ] as well as Balian and Bloch [12,13]
derived a semiclassical expression for the trace of the resolvent of the
quantum Hamiltonian operator. Through this trace formula, the quantum
operator is directly related to classical periodic orbits. In 1980, Gutzwiller
showed that the trace formula can be used to obtain approximate values
for the quantum energy eigenvalues of classically chaotic systems that are
not separable [14, 151. In this sense, the periodic-orbit quantization
method appears to be more general than the WKB method. Since then,
periodic-orbit quantization has been applied to a large variety of systems,
among others by the authors [16-211. Moreover, the method provides a
new way to analyze complex experimental spectra by Fourier transform

(FT)from the energy domain to the time domain.

   However, the trace formula derived by Gutzwiller only contains the
leading term of the semiclassical expansion, and the form of the next-to-
leading terms remained a challenge for a long time. Recently, Alonso and
Gaspard [19,20] derived a systematic expansion of the trace formula in
powers of the Planck constant. This fi-expansion allows us to consider the
semiclassical method on the same footing as the other perturbation
methods of quantum mechanics. The fi-expansion and the recognition
that the trace formula contains different terms, which depend on the
nature and on the stability of the periodic orbits, provide the semiclassical
description of new phenomena, such as diffraction effects, as well as
nonlinear stability effects or bifurcation of periodic orbits besides the
simple improvement of the accuracy of the quantities calculated with the
semiclassical method.
110  P. GASPARD ET AL.

    The purpose of this chapter is to present some of the recent develop-
ments in the periodic-orbit quantization, particularly of classically chaotic
systems, and some of its applications to atomic and molecular processes.

   The plan of this chapter is the following. In section I.B, we briefly
describe the history and the modern context of the development of
semiclassical methods. In this way, we give several potential applications
of these methods in the field of chemical physics and in related fields.
Section I1 gives a presentation of the general formalism of time evolution
in quantum mechanics and its formulation in terms of path integrals. The
semiclassical limit is considered in its principle. The equations of classical
mechanics and the related variational principles are derived, as well as
the second variation of the action. The method by Maslov and Fedoriuk
[22] for the semiclassical solution of the time-dependent initial condition
Cauchy problem is summarized. We then describe the Feynman path
integral and the principle of the integration method by stationary phase.
Section I11 is devoted to a description of the phase-space structures of
classical mechanics. In particular, we describe the properties associated
with the stability of classical orbits and we show how chaotic behavior
may appear when the classical motion becomes unstable. The relevant
phase-space structures are the stable and unstable manifolds, the homo-
clinic tangle, the Smale horseshoe, and the related fractal repeller.
Section IV describes the theory of the h-expansion in the time domain. In
the energy domain, the resummation of the h-expansion on equilibrium
points (to be compared with resummation on periodic orbits, see below)
is carried out as described in Section V, where we show that the h-
expansion is essentially equivalent to standard perturbation theory by Van
Vleck contact transformations. We also discuss its relationship with the
semiclassical quantization of the Birkhoff normal form around equilib-
rium points. The limitation of this method to effectively separable
systems without chaotic behavior is discussed. The resummation of the
semiclassical expansion on periodic orbits is performed in Section VI,
which contains the completion of the program set up by Gutzwiller for
the periodic-orbit quantization of classically chaotic systems. Section VII
shows how average quantities can be calculated by the periodic-orbit
quantization method, particularly in view of photoabsorption cross-sec-
tions. The case of quantum billiards is described in Section VIII. An
extension of the h-expansion to matrix Hamiltonians is contained in
Section IX. A comparison of the atomic and molecular Hamiltonians and
their semiclassical properties is discussed in Section X. Molecular vib-
rograms are introduced in Section XI as a tool for the semiclassical
analysis of molecular photoabsorption cross-sections that opens the way
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 111

to a spectroscopy in the time domain. The theory of the molecular
transition state is developed in Section XII. The periodic-orbit quantiza-
tion for the hydrogen negative ion (H-) is described in section XIII,
together with a discussion of semiclassical electronic excitation in other
atomic and solid-state systems. This chapter ends with Section XIV,
where the main results are summarized and conclusions are drawn.

         B. Brief Historical Introduction and General Background

Because of their ability to relate the quantum level of description to the
classical one, semiclassical methods play a privileged role in our general

                                                                                                                      `

understanding of atomic and molecular processes.
   Semiclassical methods have been developed since the beginning of

quantum mechanics because of the importance of the models based on
classical particles and fields in the historical advent of Heisenberg's matrix
mechanics in 1925 and of Schrodinger's wave mechanics in 1926. Let us
recall that the wave theory of electrons by de Broglie and others owes
much to the relation between geometric and wave optics known at that
time. Earlier, the atomic model of Bohr and Rutherford led to the
Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization conditions, which first appeared in an
incomplete form because the Morse-Maslov indexes were unknown at
that time [23]. Let us note that works in classical mechanics (in particular,
by PoincarC, Bruns, and others 1241) had shown at the turn of the century
that most classical systems are not integrable. This known fact shed some
trouble on the methods proposed by Bohr and Sommerfeld to quantize
atomic systems, as these methods implicitly assumed separability between
the different internal degrees of freedom of the electronic motion around
the atomic nuclei. If this is the case for hydrogen, the knowledge of
divergences in the perturbation theory of the three-body problem of
celestial mechanics already suggested that the helium atom with two
electrons and a nucleus could not conform to the Bohr-Sommerfeld
quantization without implicit or explicit approximations or further as-
sumptions. This criticism came from Einstein in 1917 [25]. As a way to
partially handle these problems, adiabatic methods were developed,
particularly by Ehrenfest [26], with the concept of an effective separabili-
ty between degrees of freedom evolving on very different time scales. The
general context that already pointed to what is today called classical chaos
led young scientists like Heisenberg to propose radical changes and to
point out the necessity of founding a new quantum mechanics directly
based on strictly observational quantities. The first historical jump was
carried out for the harmonic oscillator but the proposed matrix mechanics
turned out to be extendable to arbitrary systems, separable or not [S, 91.
112  P. GASPARD ET AL.

The wave equation proposed by Schrodinger turns out to be extremely
powerful and allows a discussion of the relation to classical mechanics
along lines similar to the relation between wave optics and geometric
optics, but in the multidimensional phase space rather than in the
tridimensional physical phase space, as emphasized by Pauli [27]. The
same year Schrodinger proposed his equation, this similarity was de-
veloped by Brillouin, Wentzel, and Kramers for systems with one degree
of freedom or for larger systems that are separable and reducible to
several one-degree-of-freedom systems [28].

   Semiclassical methods also turned out to be crucial in statistical

mechanics, in particular , in the definition of elementary phase-space cells

of volume d f q d f p / ( 2 ~ f i )Ifn. this context, a fundamental contribution
was due to Wigner in 1932, who proposed his famous representation of
quantum states as real but not necessarily positive functions in the phase
space of positions and momenta [29]. Systems with many fermions were
also treated semiclassically by Thomas and Fermi [30].

   In this way, semiclassical methods are essential tools to bridge the gap
between the microscopic quantum world and the macroscopic classical
world. In the following, we would like to show that their recent
developments are tightly related to the progress of technologies in the
mesoscopic domain. Thus, we will summarize the modern experimental
context in which a rapid progress is underway in semiclassical methods.

   Laser spectroscopy, atomic or molecular beams (as well as Fourier
spectrometers) have allowed us to analyze spectra in detail with very high
resolution, which is provided by the low temperatures achieved in
supersonic jets [31]. In this way, it has been possible to study weakly
bonded molecular complexes, such as Van der Waals molecules [32].

   Furthermore, it is now possible to study the Rydberg states of atoms or
molecules where one electron is orbiting at great distances from the ion
[33]. In Rydberg states, the motion takes place at very high quantum
numbers, where the classical dynamics starts to emerge from the quantum
dynamics. In this context, Rydberg atoms in magnetic and electric fields
are being extensively investigated, to the point where very subtle
nonlinear properties typical of classical mechanics, such as bifurcations of
periodic orbits, are experimentally observed in quantum spectra [34,35].
More recently, the study of doubly excited states, where two electrons are
at great distances from the nuclei, has started to develop [36]. Rydberg
and doubly excited states are also studied in molecules, but the main
results are probably still to be awaited [37]. Semiclassical methods are
playing an essential role in this context.

   In studying these highly excited states, where the constituent particles
move at greater and greater distances from each other, it is important to
keep the atom or molecule in isolation for longer and longer times. Along
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 113

this line, several types of traps have been invented to confine neutral
particles or ions that are nearly at rest. The trap may contain one or
several particles. The study of the motion of these particles is becoming a
field in itself, where the motion is in a first approximation classical for
heavy particles, but where we must further take into account quantum
effects, as well as the random forcing by the laser beams [38]. The
condition of isolation in a trap is often closer to the astrophysical
conditions than to experiments in the gas phase or in a supersonic jet so
that they make possible the laboratory study of special reactions occur-
ring in interstellar space.

   Generally, Rydberg states are stable or metastable assemblies of the
constituent particles with very long lifetimes. In contrast, the vibrational
motion of molecules takes place on a much shorter time scale of the order
of 10-1OOOfs. The advent of femtosecond laser pulses has only recently
opened this new time domain [39]. Thus, the study of vibrational motions
and, in particular, those taking place in the course of chemical reactions
are nowadays possible. These new techniques give us the hope of
understanding the details of how chemical reactions occur. Semiclassical
methods are particularly useful in this context, since they allow the
calculation of several quantities of interest like the lifetimes of the
metastable states of the molecular transition complex, as we will show in
Section XII.

   In larger systems, such as electronic semiconductor devices, semiclassi-
cal methods are currently experiencing a special interest in the study of
electronic conductance in nanometric ultrapure semiconductor devices
[40]. With lithography and epitaxy techniques, it is possible today to build
electronic circuits of predesigned shapes where the electrons are in
ballistic motion between the walls of the device at a low temperature of a
few Kelvin [41]. In a first approximation, it may be assumed that the
potential rises so steeply at the walls that the electron moves like in a
billiard where the wave function vanishes at the walls. Irregular scattering
phenomena of the electron in such billiards have been shown to be in
relation to universal electric conductance fluctuations as well as to
Ericson fluctuations in nuclear physics [42,43]. Similar fluctuations may
exist in atomic or molecular scattering processes [44].

   At higher temperatures, there is the transition between the ballistic
motion of the electron, which is essentially a one-body phenomenon, and
the more standard Ohm's regime, which is thermal and of many-body
character [45].

   Other applications concern the electronic motion on surfaces. Electron
tunneling microscopy has reached an unprecedented capacity in manip-
ulating atoms on surfaces. On the other hand, surfaces are known to

sustain electronic motions in the form of charge density waves. By
114  P. GASPARD ET AL.

manipulating atoms it is possible to construct, out of only a few atoms, a
scatterer for the surface electronic waves [46]. The electrons undergo
S-wave scattering on the atoms that can be considered as impurities if
they are randomly distributed on the surface. This new work is opening
up the study of electronic motion on an even smaller scale than in the
layers of nanometric semiconductor circuits.

   In a similar direction, it is possible today to build nanomachines, such
as rotors, bearings, or gears, from semiconductor or diamond materials
[47]. The motion of the nanometric mechanical parts of these devices is
affected by the various possible atomic and molecular forces that cause
friction. Semiclassical methods may be relevant to consider when quan-
tum effects become nonnegligible.

   Let us also mention the application of the semiclassical methods to
electromagnetic microwave cavities that are experiencing a current rise in
interest in the field of classically chaotic systems [48], as well as to the
acoustics of sound cavities or scattering [49].

   A further domain where semiclassical methods are important is the
study of quantum systems coupled to a fluctuating environment. In these
cases, the system contains a large number of degrees of freedom. We may
cite proton- or electron-transfer reactions in liquids or at interfaces, as
well as superconducting or superfluid devices. In this context, current
research is using several methods, particularly the elimination of the
irrelevant degrees of freedom of the reservoir in the Feynman path
integral, and the use of the semiclassical approximation in certain
regimes, as proposed by several authors, such as Leggett, Chandler,
Miller, and Voth [50].

   The preceding large but partial survey of the mesoscopic domain of
chemical physics and related fields indicates the broadness of the range of
potential applications for semiclassical methods. Semiclassical methods
should not substitute wave function methods, but they turn out to be
complementary. If wave function methods can achieve high-precision
results, semiclassical methods, on the other hand, often provide a general
description of the laws underlying series and distributions of energy
levels, of lifetimes, or of other observables. Semiclassical methods are of
special interest in the study of chemical reactions, where they offer a
unifying approach for understanding several aspects of reactive and
dynamical processes, as recently emphasized by Marcus [51].

11. QUANTUM TIME EVOLUTION, PATH INTEGRALS ,AND
                         SEMICLASSICAL LIMIT

                       A. Propagator and Green Operator
Microscopic nonrelativistic systems are described by Schrodinger's equa-
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 115
tion

where the Hamiltonian operator is assumed to be time independent and
of the form

for a system with f degrees of freedom. After rescaling the position
variables * q j + q j , the masses mi can be set equal to unity.

   Since Schrodinger's equation is linear, the time evolution can be
written in terms of the evolution operator as

On the other hand, we may introduce the resolvent of the Hamiltonian
(also called the Green operator) as the Laplace transform or semisided
Fourier transform of the propagator

where the last equality holds if Im E > 0 [52].

   Reciprocally, the time evolution can be expressed as a complex
integral of the resolvent. The choice of the integration contour de-
termines whether the unitary group, the forward semigroup (corre-
sponding to forward-time propagation), or the backward semi-group will
be selected according to [53]

      T  1
k  (     )= -              d  E  exp(  -  ET) G(E)
            2Ti  c  +  +  c
116       P. GASPARD ET AL.

where O(.) denotes the Heaviside function and the different contours are
given in Fig. l(a).

   Analytic continuation in the complex energy surface may simplify the
expression of the time evolution. The analytic continuation decomposes
the integrals [Eqs. (2.5 and 2.6)] into the contribution of the different
singularities of the resolvent [54]. In many systems of interest, the
singularities are of three types:

   1. Branch points at real energies {E,} are the energy thresholds where
      the channels {c} are opened. In most cases, the branch points are
      of order two because the energy is related to the momentum by
       E = E, + p 2 / ( 2 M ) , whereas the wave function is analytic in the
       momentum variable. Accordingly, two Riemann sheets are associ-
       ated with each branch point and the complex energy surface is

                             Re E

     (0)                     *

    Figure 1. Integration contours in the Riemann surface of complex energies, which are
entering into the definitions of the propagators of the unitary group [Eq. (2.5)] and of the
forward and backward semigroups [Eq. (2.6)]: (a) Contours C, of the forward and

backward semigroups [Eq. (2.6)]; ( b ) Distortion of C, + C _ to obtain the group propagator

in the form of Eq. (2.7); (c) Distortion of C, to obtain the forward semigroup propagator in
the form of Eq. (2.8).
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 117

       therefore composed of several Riemann sheets, which are con-
       nected at the branch points E,.
   2. Poles { E b }are located on the real energy axis below the lowest
       energy threshold E,. These poles are associated with the bound
       states of the system.
   3. Poles {Ecr= E,, - iTcr/2}are located in the lower half of the second
       Riemann sheet, for a given Riemann surface composed of two
       sheets. These poles determine the scattering resonances that corre-
       spond to metastable states, as encountered, in particular, in atomic
       ionization or molecular dissociation processes. Another pole, lo-
       cated in the upper half of the same sheet, is associated with each of
       the former poles, and represents an antiresonance.

In the case of the unitary group, the cuts that are associated with the
continuous energies of the channels are chosen on the real energy axis
above each branch point E,. The contour can be distorted, as shown in
Fig. l(b), so that Eq. (2.5) is decomposed into a sum of terms for each
bound state and a sum of integrals for each channel. The energy spectrum
has both discrete and continuous components so that the evolution
operator can be written as [54]

where the quantities qb are the bound-state eigenfunctions corresponding
to the discrete energies E,. The quantities qcE are the scattering
eigenfunctions in the different channels c of energy threshold Ec.

   On the other hand, the integral in Eq. (2.6) can be distorted into a
contour extending into the second of each pair of sheets. Two different
semigroups are selected by the condition that the scattering part of the
wave function [Eq. (2.6)] vanishes for either t+ +cc or t-+ --cQ.These
two semigroups correspond, respectively, to an analytic continuation
toward either negative or positive values of Im E .

   For the analytic continuation to I m E < 0 , the cuts may be chosen
parallel to the axis Im E and extend to negative values, which uncovers
the poles located at the resonances, as shown in Fig. l(c). For the

forward semigroup ( T > O), Eq. (2.6) becomes

- G ( E , - 0 - ins)]  (2.8)
118                           P. GASPARD ET AL.

- The third term is at the origin of the long-time tails where the wave

function decays algebraically as I$(T)I' T - 3 u c v,, being the number of
fragments in the channel c. Let us remark that this power-law decay is
simply the result of the quasifree propagation of the fragments flying
away from the interaction region [55].

   By contrast, the poles contribute to exponential decays. If a resonance
is isolated either because of its large spacing with respect to neighboring
resonances or because of the initial condition of the wavepacket, the
wave function decays as I$(T)I'-exp(-r,,Tlh), so that the poles or
resonances correspond to metastable states of the system with lifetimes
T,, = h/T,,. Recently, a theory has been developed by Bohm and others
[56,57], where the complex energies of the resonances are considered as
eigenvalues of the generator of the forward semigroup. The corre-
sponding eigenstates are known as Gamow vectors. The generator of the
semigroup is no longer a Hermitian operator although it is formally equal
to the Hamiltonian. It is acting on a space of distributions that differs
from the usual Hilbert space. According to this theory of so-called rigged
Hilbert spaces, the metastable states can be interpreted as eigenvectors of
the time evolution operator. As a consequence of the non-Hermiticity of

the extended Hamiltonian, the left eigenstate ( @I, differs from the

complex conjugate of the right eigenstate (cp,,).

                          B. Trace and Level Density

Our purpose in this section is to calculate the real or complex energy

eigenvalues { E b ,Ecr} of some Hamiltonian operator &. If the energy

eigenvalues are the poles of the Green operator they are also the poles of
its trace [58].This relationship can be established by considering the level
density of a bounded system, which is given by the distribution

     c n ( E ) =33                                            1      1
                                                           --Im
                  6(E-  E  n  )  =  t  rS  (  E  -  &)  =        tr  E-&+iO  (2.9)

     n=O                                                   7T

where E is real. The level density is the derivative of the staircase
function N ( E )= Number{& < E}.

   Similarly, the resonances of a scattering system can be obtained as the
poles of a trace function such as

                                                                             (2.10)

where gasis some reference Hamiltonian whose asymptotic behavior
coincides with & but whose resonances are known. This subtraction is
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 119

necessary for the trace function to be defined; otherwise the trace is
infinite because the scattering system has an infinite extension in space
[13]. In Eq. (2.10), the energy is complex, as in Fig. 1. Because the
Green operator is related to the propagator by Eq. (2.4), it turns out that
the above traces of the Green operator can be evaluated by a Laplace or
semisided Fourier transform of the trace of the propagator. Sections 1I.D
and E will be devoted to the semiclassical estimation of these traces, but
we will first describe several relevant observable quantities.

                             C. Observable Quantities

We may distinguish two basic kinds of experiments: (1) interaction of one
or several laser beams with a molecular beam, gas, liquid, or solid; (2)
interaction of two molecular beams [l]. In the first type of experiment,
the molecules are interacting with the electromagnetic field and exchange
photons with it, in addition to their internal dynamics. In the second kind
of experiments, the molecules interact between themselves and the
interaction with the electromagnetic field is secondary.

                             1. Interaction with Light

In this case, we must add to the free-system Hamiltonian the Hamilto-
nians of the electromagnetic field and of its interaction with the system.
The treatment of such Hamiltonians can be found in several references
[59]. It is not our purpose in this chapter to enter further into such
developments.

   The absorption of monochromatic light by the system is the simplest
type of experiment. The cross-section for the absorption of one photon
h w is known to be given by [59,60]

where ( .) = tr( 6 a ) is the statistical average over a density matrix for a

canonical equilibrium ensemble of atoms or molecules at an inverse

temperature p. The operator c is the light velocity and is the vacuum

permittivity. The operator act) is the electric dipole operator at time t
given by

                                                                                       (2.12)

where % is the free-system Hamiltonian. This result is obtained by
120  P. GASPARD ET AL.

perturbation theory using the weakness of the coupling to the electro-
magnetic field.

   Works by Heller et al. [61] have shown that it is particularly enlighten-
ing to consider not only the photoabsorption cross-section in the energy
domain but also the correlation function in the time domain that appears
in the Fourier transform of the absorption spectrum. This method is
standard by now and can be extended to other observable quantities
related to the exchange of more than one photon. In this context, we
have the processes with spontaneous emission during reaction; the
scattering of light whose cross-section is given in the energy domain by
the Kramers-Heisenberg-Dirac relation and in the time-domain by
integrals of four-time correlation functions of the electric dipole; as well
as other multiphotonic processes which are typical of nonlinear optics
[59,61].

   The newly developed femtosecond laser techniques emphasize the
time-dependent description of the molecule-light interaction [39]. It is in
principle required to know the precise form of the electromagnetic pulse
that may influence the driving of the molecular motion. However, if we
assume that the time length of the pulse is much shorter than the resulting
molecular dynamics, we may assume that the pulse prepares an initial
wavepacket that will thereafter follow a time evolution under the
interaction-free molecular Hamiltonian. With such a scheme, we are
coming closer to the second type of experiments. Indeed, the dissociation
following the photoabsorption can be viewed as a half-collision that is
controlled by the interaction-free molecular Hamiltonian [62]. Thus, we
are close to a description in terms of the scattering matrix.

                    2. Scattering between Atomic Particles

The second basic class of experiments deals with collisions between atoms
or molecules, such as

                                   A+B+C+D

   The atoms and molecules possess internal degrees of freedom that may
be activated either in the reactant or the product species. For each
particular ingoing or outgoing channel, we have the Hamiltonian describ-
ing the free flight of the species, that is obtained as some limits of the
total Hamiltonian. The collision is described by the scattering matrix that
connects the ingoing wave function to the outgoing one at a certain
energy E . For large separations between the particles, the total outgoing
eigenfunction at energy E therefore has the form [63]
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 121

where pn(8 ) denotes the asymptotic wave function expressed with respect
to the internal degrees of freedom 6 of quantum numbers n. Among

them, we find the quantum numbers of rotation and vibration of the
separated atoms or molecules A , B, C, D. The parameter r is the relative
distance between the particles in free flight, while k represents the
corresponding momentum. The quantity S is the scattering matrix at the

energy E = E(n,,ki)= E(n,, kf).

Scattering Resonances. It is known that the S-matrix is related to the
Green operator, which is the resolvent of the total Hamiltonian G ( z ) =

( z - &)-'. By this relation, several of the properties of the S-matrix can

also be obtained from the properties of the Green operator [54,56].This
is the case for the scattering resonances corresponding to the metastable
states of the collisional transition complex. The scattering resonances are
determined by the poles of the S-matrix or of the Green operator in the
surface of complex energy z = E , as discussed above [54].We may
therefore obtain the scattering resonances as the poles of the trace of the
Green operator tr G(z). Because the metastable states are transient and,
thus, localized in a finite region of position space, these states are intrinsic
to the system, which explains that they are determined by the total
Hamiltonian (or its resolvent) and, consequently, appear at the level of
the S-matrix.

Cross-Sections and Product Distributions. O n the other hand, there are
other properties of the collision that cannot be determined from tr G(z),
such as the total and differential cross-sections, as well as the rotational
or vibrational distributions of the products of the collision. Those
distributions are sensitively dependent not only on the dynamics in the
region of the collisional transition complex but also on the dynamics in
the ingoing and exit channels that may produce distortions in the wave
function over a distance that is larger than the extension of the metastable
states. For those quantities, we need to calculate the elements of the
scattering matrix SnEJki,k,) explicitly. These elements can also be
related to elements of the Green operator G(z) between the initial and
final states, but not simply to its trace.

Average Time Delay. Wigner [64] was among the first to observe that the
existence of metastable states would cause a time delay in the scattering
of a wavepacket with respect to a situation without metastable states.
Wigner showed that the time delay is related to the derivative of the
phase shift due to the collision with respect to the energy. The concept of
time delay has been studied in more general cases since then, and it has
122  P . GASPARD ET AL.

been shown [58] that the average time delay at energy E is given in terms
of the scattering matrix or of the Green operator by

     = -2ii Im tr(  1  -            )  (2.14)

                    E-&+iO E-&o+iO

& is the total Hamiltonian and the average time delay is calculated with

respect to the asymptotically free Hamiltonian &o, which plays the role of
a reference Hamiltonian to calculate both the S-matrix and the time
delay. The time delay has been the object of recent interest, especially in
the context of time delay in tunneling, for instance, in electronic circuits

~41.

Reaction Rates. Rates are of special importance when we want to relate
the microscopic quantities to the time evolution of macroscopic systems,
especially during chemical reactions near or far from equilibrium [65]. It
is not our purpose to describe the kinetic processes in the condensed
phases, but the same problem of definition of the rate constants already
appears for isolated unimolecular or bimolecular reactions. At this level,
the reaction rate can be defined in terms of the scattering resonances of
the S-matrix. The scattering resonances are the poles of the S-matrix at

r, complex energies E, = E, - i r r / 2 , where the half-width determines the

lifetime 7,= hir, of the corresponding metastable state. Accordingly, a
wavepacket around the energy E, of the resonance will decay over the
lifetime 7,. This decay occurs in either the unimolecular or the bi-
molecular reaction if the former is considered as the half-collision related
to the latter.

   For nonisolated molecules or atoms, the reaction rates may be defined
in very different manners. We may start from the point of view that we
know a priori the location of the reactant and product species in
configuration space, which leads to the consideration of fluxes across
predefined hypersurfaces. On the other hand, there is the alternative
point of view that the metastable state (this time of the many-body
system) should be defined, as for an isolated system, from the intrinsic
dynamics of the many-body Hamiltonian. Reaction rate theory is appar-
ently progressing between these two points of view [66]. ~"

   This overview of different experimental situations shows how the
observational quantities are related to the Green operator, and thus to
the time evolution of the quantum system. In the following sections, we
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 123

will therefore focus on the problem of time evolution and its semiclassical
limit. We first give a short introduction to the quasiclassical method, and
then proceed to develop the semiclassical propagators.

D. Weyl-Wigner Representation and the Quasiclassical Method

The semiclassical method, which is the subject of this chapter, is a
method used to determine the quantum mechanical eigenvalues and wave
functions from information on the classical orbits. The quasiclassical
method is another method used to study the regimes intermediate
between the quantum and the classical ones. This method is complemen-
tary to the semiclassical method [29,67]. It is based on the idea of
expansion of the physical observables in a series in the Planck constant.
For this reason, the quasiclassical method is closer to classical dynamics
than to quantum dynamics and presents difficulties in problems where the
quantum mechanical phases and wave functions are important. In Section
V1.A we will use the quasiclassical method to derive the Thomas-Fermi-
Weyl-Wigner average level density.

   The quasiclassical method uses the Wigner-Weyl representation [67-
691. Operators A are transformed into functions over the position-
momentum space (9, p) according to

I $) A,(q, p) = d f xe x p ( i p .x)( q - $iA 1q +  (2.15)

Each operation on observables can be expressed in the Weyl-Wigner
representation. In particular, the trace is

IA d f                                              (2.16)

tr = ( 2 d i ) fA,(q, p)

The equation of motion for the function A, is

                        A , with A = 8,. Jq - J q . 8,

                                                                                    (2.17)

In many cases, the Weyl-Wigner representation of the Hamiltonian

operator coincides with the classical Hamiltonian function, X, = Yeci.

The generator of the evolution can be expanded in a series in the Planck
constant together with the function A , to obtain the solution of the
124                               P. GASPARD ET AL.

equation of motion in the form                             (2.18)

              + + A,(t) = AC'(t) h'A$'(t) 0(h4)

The first term Ag'(t) obeys the classical Liouville equation dtA$)=

{ A $ )X, ,}, while the next terms obey similar but inhomogeneous

equations [69]. The symbol {., .} is the classical Poisson bracket. This

series is an asymptotic series in h. Here the time dependency is

determined by the classical evolution operator exp(-t t ) with the Liou-

i ville generator  Xw = {  , a}.     Correlation functions can then be expressed

as the classical correlation functions plus corrections in powers of the

Planck constant. This quasiclassical scheme differs from the semiclassical

scheme in that it is unable to reproduce quantization effects, such as the

formation of eigenenergies, but it is very useful in thermal systems of

statistical mechanics.

     E. Short-Wavelength Asymptotics of Schrodinger's Equation

     1. From Schrodinger's to Hamilton's Equations

In this section we would like to describe semiclassical methods in general,
as they developed since the beginning of quantum mechanics. We will
focus on the semiclassical methods applied to the general problem of
solving an initial value problem of the Schrodinger equation of the form

                                                           (2.19)

+ Writing the wave function in terms of its modulus and its phase, which

are real quantities,

                                  9  =  VF  e  x   i  Y    (2.20)
                                                  Pi

where p = ($1' is the probability density, we obtain two coupled equa-

tions for the two fields

                                  1                   h2
                        d,Y + 7 ( V Y ) 2 + V = - V Z f i
                                                  2vF
                                                           (2.21)
                        d,p + v .(pVY)= 0

The second equation is the continuity equation of probability conserva-
tion, which in this case holds in position space where the velocity or
momentum is given by v = p =VY.

   In the classical limit h+O, we suppose that the quantum density and
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 125

phase tend to classical correspondent quantities

    lim Y(q, t ; h) = W(q, t )

    h-0

                                                                 (2.22)

which obey the equations                                         (2.23)

                    a,w +$(vw)2+v =0
                    + d,D V *(DVW) = 0

We see that the first equation is the Hamilton-Jacobi equation of classical
mechanics for the classical action W(q, t). The second one is the
continuity equation for the classical probability density D(q, t ) in position
space [70,71].

   The purpose of the semiclassical method is to express the quantum
wave function in terms of the classical quantities D and W. To this end,
the quantum corrections due to the right-hand side of Eq. (2.21) must be
properly taken into account in a systematic semiclassical method. Let us
make a remark about the form of those corrections. At the level of the
real quantities p and Y, the h-corrections appear as series in even powers
h2" of the Planck constant due to Eq. (2.21). If the wave function is

written as the exponential of another function, such as 9 = exp(q), we see

that the function q can be expanded in powers of h. Except for a constant
phase, each term that is odd in h is imaginary and contributes to the

phase of t+b while each term that is even in h is then real and contributes

to the modulus p.
   In terms of the classical quantities, the wave function becomes

                                                                 (2.24)

where 4 is a factor that is the ratio between the quantum wave function)I

and its semiclassical approximant fiexp(iW/h). The equation of motion

for this factor is

-d+- - dt+  +  vw*v+=    ih  2                    (  +  V  5  )  (2.25)
                       -V
dt                     2?5

+ which has to be solved along the classical trajectories. The factor can
126                     P. GASPARD ET AL.

be expanded in powers of ih as                                                 (2.26)

               + cta
                                                    =
                                                                          n=O

which reduces Eq. (2.25) to a hierarchy of coupled equations

     -d+-O  -0          n=O
      dt

     d+n - 1 V 2 ( + n - l f i )                                               (2.27)
      dt 2 f i
                                  n = 1,2,3, . .

where +o is a constant along each classical orbit as expected [22].
   The solution to these equations is based on the knowledge of the

classical problem and on the solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation.
Thus, we will now shortly comment on the classical problem, and come

back to the determination of the factor 4 in Section II.E.4.

   The characteristics of the Hamilton-Jacobi equation are given by the
classical trajectories in position space [71]. From the solution of the
classical Hamiltonian equations in phase space

the action is given by           ax                                            (2.28)
                                                                               (2.29)
                             P=-- as

                        sW = (p * dq - Ytd t )

The solution of Hamilton's equation is unique if the initial positions and
momenta are given. However, this single-valuedness is lost in position
space due to the following mechanism. The structures formed in position
space by the trajectories are projections of the phase-space structures. If
we have families of trajectories forming manifolds in phase space, their
projections may have all sorts of singularities in position space that are
known as catastrophes [73]. The most common is the fold of a manifold
that produces a caustic line in position space. Two sheets of the manifold
exist on one side of the caustic and zero on the other side. Accordingly,
there may exist several trajectories passing through the same position.
This multivaluedness is a major cause of difficulties in the semiclassical
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 127

methods, but these difficulties have been overcome today, particularly by
the works of Morse [72], Maslov [74], and others who provided the
methods to match the semiclassical wave functions on the different sides
of the caustic lines.

2. Classical Probability Conservation and the Van Vleck-Morette Matrix

After the above comments on the Hamilton-Jacobi equation, let us come
back to the classical continuity equation. One of the best ways to find the
solution to this equation, from the viewpoint of quantum mechanics, has
been given by Berry and Mount [75]. We consider the Cauchy problem

where the initial state is the state Iso)where the particle is located at the

position go. The solution to this problem is known as the propagator
K(q, qo,t ) = (qlk(t)lq,), which satisfies Eq. (2.19) as well as the initial
condition

                                                                                    (2.30)

The propagator represents the probability amplitude to propagate from
go to q in the time t. Its absolute square gives the probability density for
such a propagation

                                     (2.31)

where D is the classical density and 4 becomes a constant in the classical

limit. The semiclassical solution of this problem goes through the search
for all the classical trajectories from qo to q in time t. Several solutions to
this problem may exist, as illustrated by the case of a reflection in a
mirror that provides a second solution besides the direct solution. If the
initial state is localized at go, its wave function is given in the momentum
representation by

1  i                                 (2.32)

(Polq,) = (2.rrh)f'2exP( - Po * 40)

Accordingly, the probability for the initial momentum to take a value in

the cell (p,, pa + dp,) is uniform and given by

                                     (2.33)

Let us suppose that po is the initial momentum of one of the trajectories
joining q, to q in the time t. Then, the probability mass [Eq. (2.33)] will
be the contribution to the probability mass centered around the position q
128                          P. GASPARD ET AL.

at time t , so that we have

                                                   (2.34)

The classical density D is therefore proportional to the Jacobian deter-

minant of the transformation from the initial momentum po to the final
position q, while is given by ( 2 ~ h ) - ~ "S.ince the equation for D is
linear, the proportionality may be turned into an equality. Moreover,
since the classical action W = W(q, go,t ) defines a canonical transforma-
tion from the initial variables (qo,p o ) to the final variables (q, p ) given by

                             dW                dW  (2.35)
        p = a q Po=-%

we get

        D(q,qo,t ) = det                           (2.36)

This determinant is called the Van Vleck-Morette determinant [76,77]. It

is possible to show that D is a solution of the classical continuity equation

(2.25), which can be rewritten in the useful form

                                                                                   (2.37)

+ with the total derivative defined by d i d t = d, p.V. Indeed, if we

introduce the Jacobian matrix

                                                   (2.38)

which is known as the Van Vleck-Morette matrix, we can relate the
derivative of the determinant to a trace involving the derivative of the
matrix:

        d                    D   = tr D-`  --  dD  (2.39)
        -d1tn                                  dt

by using the well-known formula that In det A = tr In A for a matrix A.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 129

The Jacobian matrix obeys the equation

-d-D--.-  d2W                           (2.40)
          dqaq D
 dt

which can be obtained by differentiation of the Hamilton-Jacobi equa-
tion with respect to q, and q. The continuity equation (2.37) results from
Eqs. (2.39) and (2.40).

                3. Jacobi-Hill Equation and Linear Stability

The continuity equation as well as Eq. (2.40) for the Jacobian matrix D
are partial differential equations based on the knowledge of the scalar
field given by the action W. The partial differential equation (2.40) can be
transformed into an equation to be solved along a given classical
trajectory for the inverse matrix

                                        (2.41)

which relates the final position to the initial momentum. An equation for
J is easy to obtain if we refer back to Newton's equations, which govern
the trajectories q = q,,(t; q,, po)

 -z dV                                  (2.42)

q=

By differentiating Newton's equations with respect to the initial momen-
tum, we obtain

                                        (2.43)

If we refer to the motion in position space as the motion of a fluid whose
velocity field is given by v = p =VW, Eq. (2.40) is the equation of motion
of D = J-' under its Eulerian form, while Eq. (2.43) is the Lagrangian
form of this equation. Furthermore, let us remark that, contrary to the
matrix J itself, its determinant J does not obey a closed equation except
for one-degree-of-freedom systems. Indeed, the matrix coincides with its

determinant if f = 1. However, as soon as f = 2 , the second time

derivative of J involves the elements of J and J in a complicated form
that cannot be simplified to an expression involving only J and j .

   A few words are now in order about the behavior of those Jacobians
near caustics. As we mentioned above, the single-valuedness of the
solution is lost on a caustic line. Indeed, there appears a degeneracy in
130         P. GASPARD ET AL.

the initial momentum leading to a given position that is located on a
caustic line such that there exist several nearby values of 6p, corre-
sponding to the same Sq. Since both are related by J, the rank of the
Jacobian matrix decreases on the caustic line and its determinant
vanishes, J = det J = 0. As a consequence, the Van Vleck-Morette deter-
minant D = J - ' diverges on the caustic line. These points of an orbit,

where the determinant D is diverging, are called conjugate points, that is,

points that are conjugated to the initial point. The multiplicity of the
conjugate point is the number of zero eigenvalues of the matrix J = D-'
at the conjugate point. The number of conjugate points along the
trajectory from q, to q counted with their multiplicity is an integer called
the Morse index [72,74], which determines the sign of the Van Vleck-
Morette determinant

            ve = -1 [arg det Je(t) - arg det Je(0)]  (2.44)
                    7T

fit Using the first determination of the square root, we have  =

1D,1"2 exp(-ivv,/2) for that particular orbit t?. The integer ve plays

an essential role in the semiclassical method as soon as different

trajectories contribute to a given amplitude. We shall come back to this

integer below. Before proceeding, a further relationship is important to

establish.

Equation (2.43) is also the equation for any perturbation Sq(t) with

respect to the classical trajectory qcl(t)

            9a Sq(t) = 0                             (2.45)

with the real symmetric Sturm-Liouville operator

                                                                                    (2.46)

which controls the linear stability around the classical orbit. This operator
plays a very important role in the following considerations. Equation
(2.45) is known as the Jacobi-Hill equation and its solutions are known
as Jacobi fields [78]. The Jacobi-Hill equation is solved here from the

initial conditions J(0) = 0 and J(0) = 1. The operator 9 is a tensor with

two indexes in position space.
   Thus we reach the general conclusion that the amplitude of the

semiclassical wave function is related to the linear stability of the classical
trajectories. In this sense, the semiclassical method is very sensitive to
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 131

any form of dynamical instability, such as bifurcations of classical
trajectories or dynamical chaos.

                           4. Semiclassical Propagator

By gathering the preceding results, the propagator is given as the
following sum over all orbits C joining qo to q in the time t , assuming that
the initial and final points are not located on caustics

                                                                                   (2.47)

The Morse indexes v, are determined by the changes of sign of the
Jacobian determinant D along the classical orbits. Maslov [22,74]
developed an alternative method to calculate the integers ve in terms of
topological indexes of the Lagrangian manifolds supporting the wave
functions. The Lagrangian manifolds are manifolds formed by continuous
ensembles of trajectories in phase space [71]. Since these Lagrangian
manifolds are phase-space objects it turns out that the indexes can be
calculated if consistency is guaranteed between the wave functions in the
position and momentum representations. These representations are
related by a Fourier transform. The advantage of going from one
representation to the other is that the caustic lines generated by a
projection of the manifold onto position space are not related to the
caustic lines generated by projection onto momentum space. Therefore,
the singularities appearing at the caustic lines are specific to a given
representation, and we can locally avoid them by going to another
representation. In this way, the phases between the different local wave
functions associated with the different sheets of a manifold of trajectories
can be determined, and the global wave function can thus be constructed
by a matching procedure [22,74]. The topological indexes of Maslov turn
out to be identical to the Morse indexes in many cases so that these
indexes are also called Maslov indexes. We will not give further details for
the moment because Section 1I.F will present another more direct
method for the determination of the phases, which is close to the original
method used by Morse.

   In the limit where t+ 0, there is no caustic line between the initial and
final points so that the Morse index vanishes. By using the initial
132  P. GASPARD ET AL.

condition [Eq. (2.30)], we can fix the factor     (2.48)
                                               1

which is constant along each orbit. Beyond the leading term, the h-
corrections are obtained as a solution of Eqs. (2.27) along the classical
trajectories.

   A simple illustration is given by the free particle for which the classical
action and density are given by

                                                                                    (2.49)

Since the density is independent of position, Eqs. (2.27) give vanishing

h-corrections so that the semiclassical solution is the exact quantum

solution. The factor & can be determined from the initial condition [Eq.

(2.30)]. Accordingly, the free-particle propagator becomes

                                                  (2.50)

as expected.
   The preceding method is simple and allows us to derive several

important expressions. However, caustics are causing such difficulties that
the formulation has a restricted applicability. In particular, the formula-
tion gives a too important role to the determinant D, which becomes
singular each time the trajectory meets a caustic. At caustics, the method
of matching, which we mentioned above, uses quite different equations
than the preceding ones, like the Fourier transform to the momentum
representation. This method becomes difficult to apply when we want to
calculate the &corrections. For those reasons, it is advantageous to
reformulate the problem in terms of Feynman path integrals. The
expressions are perhaps heavier to manipulate but the relevant quantities
appear more explicitly.

         F. Feynman Path Integrals and the Semiclassical Method

                        1. Propagator as a Path Integral

The path integrals that were introduced by Feynman have become a
standard method in quantum mechanics [79]. This formulation is very
useful in understanding the relationship between quantum and classical
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 133

mechanics. The present section will be devoted to the description of this
connection.

   Because of the linearity of the time evolution, the propagation over a
time interval T can be decomposed into N successive propagations over
small intervals At = T / N .In the position representation, we have

where we have inserted N - 1closure relations 1dqlq) (41 = 1,and where

we identified q = q N .The propagator is thus given by a multiple integral.
We now need the expression of the propagators over At. Assuming that
the time interval is small enough we can expand using

eA+B --e Ae Be - 3 [ A , B ] . . .    (2.52)

a where the dots denote exponentials of commutators of higher degrees

than two between the operators and B . Applying this formula to a

Hamiltonian that separates into kinetic and potential energies, 2% =

c 2 / 2+ V(ij), we obtain

                                      (2.53)

in terms of the classical Lagrangian

In Eq. ( 2 . 5 3 ) , the equality is obtained up to terms of order At2 in the
exponential, which are due to the commutator in Eq. ( 2 . 5 2 ) . These terms
are of interest if the above procedure is applied to the numerical
evaluation of the propagation, in which case the precision of the
numerical integration can be improved by including the next terms.
However, those higher terms turn out to disappear as higher order
infinitesimals in the limit A t - 0 . Inserting Eq. ( 2 . 5 3 ) into the multiple

                         t
134                          P. GASPARD ET AL.

integral Eq. (2.51), we get

     =I K ( q ,q,, T ) d q , d q , . .d q N - , ( 2 d i A t ) - N f ' 2

In the continuum limit N + w , the phase becomes the classical action
along the path

                                                                                    (2.56)

The path integral formulation is very close to an explicit recipe of
numerical integration [go]. In this sensei the method is particularly useful.

   Besides the numerical evaluation of the multiple integral, there are few
systems that are integrable analytically such as the harmonic oscillator.
Numerical integration of multiple integrals is extremely time consuming.
For that reason, it is often advantageous to use a semiclassical approach
where the integrals are performed by the method of stationary phases.

                        2. Stationary-Phase Integration

The principle of this method is the following "1. The integrand is an

oscillatory kernel. The oscillations become faster and faster as the Planck
constant is formally considered to become smaller and smaller (ti+ 0).
The regions of the integration domain where the integrand is rapidly
oscillating give nearly vanishing contributions to the integral. However,
there may be some points where the oscillations slow down and whose
vicinity thus contributes to the integral. Examples of such critical points
are encountered where the phase becomes stationary when its first
derivative vanishes so that the phase is quadratic near the critical point.
The integral is then transformed into an imaginary Gaussian integral in a
first approximation. Higher order approximations can be obtained by
expansion of the phase and integrand in Taylor series around the critical
point, which allows moments of the imaginary Gaussian integral to
appear. This expansion generates a series in powers of the Planck
constant. For a one-variable integral with an arbitrary function + ( x )
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 135

having one stationary point, where a&,) = 0, we have

                                              (2.57)

with the notation 4 t ) = d:+(x,).

   A stationary point, where +(')(x,) = 0 but ~ $ ' ~ ' ( x ,#) 0, is not the only
example of a critical point, but it is certainly the most common one, as a
quadratic extremum is generic. We may also find cubic or higher order
stationary points as well as critical points where the phase is either
discontinuous or coincides with the border of the integration domain. In
this way, there is a whole zoology of critical points that require specific
integration techniques [81]. Besides the critical points in the real integra-
tion domain, the integrals may be continued into complex domains where
other critical points may be encountered. The expansion of the integral
around these complex critical points is done by the steepest descent
method. Complex critical points contribute to terms that are exponential-
ly small in the Planck constant, i.e., of the form exp(-Cst/h). Neverthe-
less, it may happen that the corresponding terms have a large numerical
value for a finite value of fi so that the complex critical points may give a
larger contribution than the real critical points. This is the case for
tunneling phenomena where no real critical point exists, but where the
tunneling amplitude is nonvanishing.

   If we apply the stationary-phase method to the multiple integral [Eq.
(2.55)], we obtain the critical points as solutions of the stationary-phase
condition dWldq, = 0, which gives a discrete version of Newton's equa-
tion (2.42). In the time-continuous limit where the time step At = T / N
vanishes, the stationary-phase condition is nothing else than Hamilton's
variational principle, which requires the vanishing of the first variation of
the action along the classical orbit with boundary conditions corre-
sponding to a propagation from q, to q in time T:

-6-W - 0  with q ( 0 ) = q o and q ( T ) = q  (2.58)
 6q

In order to perform the path integral, we also need information on the
second variation of the action functional. This second variation gives us
the quadratic form at the basis of the imaginary Gaussian integral.
Equation (2.57) then suggests that &-corrections are related to the higher
136   P. GASPARD ET AL.

order variations [82,83]                            (2.59)

        W[qc,+ Sq] = w,+,sw + s2w+ s3w+ s4w+ * * .

Section II.F.3 is concerned with the second variation of the action in the
classical context while the higher variations are treated later when we go
back to the quantum path integral.

      3. Second Variation of the Action and Jacobi-Hill Equation

The knowledge of the second variation is essential because it determines
the type of extremum for the classical orbit. We therefore give some
details about it and show how it is related to the linear stability of the
orbit and to the quantities obtained in Section 1I.E. The second variation
is given by a quadratic Lagrangian 2, which is now dependent on time,
since the quadratic form is evaluated along the periodic orbit [78]

                      T                             (2.60)

      s 2 W = 2?(Sq, 6q, t ) dt

with

                                                                                    (2.61)

where T denotes the transpose. The equation of motion for the variation
6q under this Lagrangian is nothing but the Jacobi-Hill equation (2.45)-
(2.46). With the boundary conditions 6q(O) = 6q(T) = 0, we have a
Sturm-Liouville problem for the operator $, which is given by Eq.

(2.46) over the time interval ( 0 , T ) .The operator 6 is real symmetric so

that it has real eigenvalues pn corresponding to real eigenfunctions u ,
forming a complete basis on which it is possible to expand any variation
satisfying the boundary conditions,

                                                    (2.62)

with

lT 6 * u ,= pnun u,(O) = u,(T) = 0 andu:(t). u,(t) dt = a,,

                                                    (2.63)
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 137
The second variation becomes diagonal in this new basis [78]

                                                                                    (2.64)

Therefore, the sign of the quadratic form of the second variation is

determined by the number of negative eigenvalues of the operator 6.

   Let us consider the simple one-dimensional example of the harmonic
oscillator for which the Jacobi-Hill operator is

                                                                                    (2.65)

                                                     dt'

Here the Jacobi-Hill operator is a scalar quantity. The eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions are given by

and u,(t) = sin T v n t  (2.66)

Figure 2 shows how the eigenvalues vary with the length of the time
interval T. For small values of T , all the eigenvalues are positive so that
the second variation has a minimum. There appears an unstable direction
at the time T = T / W that corresponds to the first conjugate point.
Successive conjugate points are met at each half-period of the oscillator
T,,= n v / w , where one extra eigenvalue becomes negative. Since the

                   -15
                       012345678

                                          T

    Figure 2. Eigenvalues /.cn of the Jacobi-Hill operator of linear stability versus the time
interval T of the trajectory for a harmonic oscillator as given by Eq. (2.66).
138  P . GASPARD ET AL.

equation 9 Sq = 0 admits a nontrivial solution at those particular times

( T= T,,) satisfying the boundary condition Sq(T,,)= 0, the rank of the
Jacobian matrix J, solution of Eq. (2.43), decreases at these times (T,).

-At the other times, when T # T,,, there exists no such solution and

9 Sq # 0. This reasoning shows that the conjugate points where J = 0

correspond to the times T where one eigenvalue of the Sturm-Liouville
problem crosses the line p = 0. We will see the consequence of this
change of sign on the path integral below. We also remark that the change
of sign is due to the focusing character of the harmonic potential. The
preceding reasoning shows that there is no conjugate point at short times
after the initial condition. For an inverted harmonic potential, where

+ w 2 = -A2, the eigenvalues pn= ( m / T ) ' A' always remain positive and

there is no conjugate point.
   The decrease of the eigenvalues p,, for the increasing time interval

seen in Fig. 2 is very general since we can show that the variations of the
eigenvalues are always negative or zero

                                           (2.67)

for the solutions of the Sturm-Liouville problem [Eq. (2.63)]. This last
result [Eq. (2.67)] is obtained by considering Eq. (2.64) with a, = 1 and
a, = 0 for rn # n . Both sides of Eq. (2.64) are then differentiated with
respect to T and the integral Eq. (2.60), which defines S2W,is integrated
by parts, using the equation and boundary conditions [Eq. (2.63)] for the
function Sq = u,,(t; T ) which, as a function of t , has furthermore a
parametric dependency on T. The expression is then simplified by using
the orthonormality condition [Eq. (2.63)], which is also differentiated
with respect to T. Finally, we use the fact that dru,(T; T )= -d,u,(T; T ) ,
which results from the boundary condition u,(T; T )= 0 , which holds for
all values of T.

   We can compare the preceding eigenvalue problem for the Jacobi-Hill
operator to the quantum mechanical determination of the bound states in
a potential given by the local frequencies of the physical potential along

H the classical orbit. For lar e values of the number n +CQ, the eigenvalues

increase as . p,, ( 2: m / T ) The number of negative eigenvalues will

depend not only on T but also on the number of oscillatory frequencies
around the classical orbit. We can obtain an evaluation of the number of
eigenvalues using the Thomas-Fermi-Weyl-Wigner semiclassical approx-
imation to the classical potential given by the local eigenvalues of the
second derivative of the physical potential

     det{, a2v[qCl(t)-] ~ ( ~ ) ( t=) l0}  (2.68)
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 139

where the index i labels the f different eigenvalues. We obtain the

average approximation of the staircase function N( p ) = Number{ pn < p }

for the eigenvalues of the Jacobi-Hill operator,

c I NaV(p=)      Tdt  + a'"(t)l                                 (2.69)

          i=l 0

where O ( . ) is the Heaviside function. This result only provides a crude
estimation of the number of eigenvalues below p, but it can help in cases
where the behavior is well pronounced.

 4 . Classical Green Function as Resolvent of the Jacobi-Hill Operator

Associated with each classical orbit, we have a classical Green function
corresponding to the Jacobi-Hill operator

          &3* q t , t ' ) = 1 q t - t ' )                       (2.70)

which is an f X f matrix function of the times t and t'. Here 1 is the f x f

identity matrix. Equation (2.70) can be rewritten as

                a2V                                             (2.71)
             .~aqi a q k [q,,(t)]52k,(t,t ' ) = sijt3(t- t ' )

with a summation over k . Knowing the eigenvectors and eigenvalues, the
classical Green operator is obtained as

                      m

                                                                (2.72)

For a trajectory of the harmonic oscillator between the times t = 0 and
c = T , the corresponding Green function solution of Eq. (2.71) with the
Dirichlet boundary conditions %(O, t ' ) = %(T,t ' ) = 0 is

      "1  =  sin  wt  sin w ( T -  t  '  )  (t<t ' )
                       sin wT
'(t5

,-, .~ sinw(T - t ) sinwt'                                      (2.73)

3(t,t')=          w sin wT                  ,   >  t  '  )

                                            (t

which is a scalar quantity here. For the inverted harmonic potential with
w 2 = -A2, the Green function is obtained by replacing w by &iA in Eq.
(2.73). These Green functions are shown in Fig. 3 for comparison. We

will see below that this classical Green function plays an essential role in

the calculation of the h-corrections.
140     P. GASPARD ET AL.

     0                         0

     0

        t'                 TT

    Figure 3. (a) Classical Green function (2.73) of a trajectory of a harmonic oscillator of
frequency w = 5 over a time T = 5 versus the times t and t'. ( b ) Same as (a) but for an
unstable inverted harmonic potential for which the classical Green function is given by
replacing w by iA in Eq. (2.73) with T = 5 and A = 1. In this case, we observe the
exponential damping of the Green function away from the diagonal.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 141

                      5. ii-Expansion of the Propagator

After these considerations on the second variation of the action, we
would like to return to the multiple integral [Eq. (2.55)]. As we already
mentioned in Section II.E, there may exist several classical orbits qe(t),
which are going from q, to q during the time t , and each of these
stationary solutions contributes to the propagator as already obtained in
Section I1.E. As in the simple example of Eq. (2.57), the integrand is
expanded in Taylor series around each classical orbit. We denote the

deviation of the path with respect to the classical orbit e by 5" = { qin-

q,""(nAt)}f~,'. An index such as a stands for a double index a = (i, n )
where the first index i refers to the ith component of the position q
(i = 1, . . , ,f ) while the second index n refers to the time t = nAt (n =

1, . . . ,N - 1). The propagator becomes [83,84]

                                                                                    (2.74)

where Wa,.,.ad,enotes the partial derivatives d'W/dt"l . * d t a l evaluated
at the classical solution 6" = 0, and W,, is the classical action of the orbit

8. The matrix of second derivatives Dab= (ED),, = W a sof the action is a
(N - l)f X (N - l)f matrix of the form

          A, -1  0  0  **a  0  0   0

          -1 A, -1 0        00 0

D=-1      0 -1 A, -1        0  0   0                     + O(At2)
      At            ..
                        ..                                      (2.75)
                                                                (2.76)
          0 0 0 0 * . . -1 AN-2 -1

          0  0   0  0  .**  0  -1  AN-1

where the f x f matrices A, have the elements

                                a 2v

                A,(nAt) = 2aij- At2 ~ aqi dqj [s,,(nA91
142  P. GASPARD ET AL.

with i, j = 1 , . . . ,f . The symbol 1 denotes the f X f identity matrix. In

Eq. (2.75), the corrections in At2 are negligible since we will take the

limit At+ 0 at the end of the calculation and keep only the expressions

forming standard integrals over T = NAt.We observe that the matrix D is

the discrete version of the Jacobi-Hill operator [Eq. (2.46)]according to

the correspondence & ts D/At. Since we also have the correspondence

8(t - t ' ) tsan,,,/At, we conclude that the inverse of the second derivative

matrix is given according to ( D - l ) u b= y,(mAt,nAt) [in the limit At-, 0

with a = ( i , m ) , b = ( j , n ) , i, j = 1 , . . . , f , and r n , n = l , . . . , N - l ] in

terms of the classical Green function %(t,t ' ) solution of Eq. (2.71) with

the boundary conditions [83,84]

     q j ( 0 ,t ' ) = %Iij(Tt7' ) = 0  (2.77)

The eigenvalues of the second derivative matrix D are also in corre-

spondence with those of the Jacobi-Hill operator 6.For the example of

the harmonic oscillator, we obtain the eigenvalues of the matrix D as

Fn = --'At + 2 [ 1 - cos(n.rrAt/T)]/Atwith n = 1 , 2 , . . . ,N - 1. We ob-
Fn serve that we have the approximate equality = pnAt for the low-lying

eigenvalues, which is a general result. In particular, the number of

negative eigenvalues of 6 and D will be equal in the limit where At is

small enough. As a consequence, the number of negative eigenvalues of
D is precisely given by the Morse index, which was determined in the

preceding section.
   The higher derivatives of the action are given by

and zero otherwise. With these ingredients, we can perform the integrals.
   The first term in Eq. (2.74) contains the imaginary Gaussian integral

                                                                                    (2.79)

with M = ( N - 1)f. The higher-order terms are given in terms of the

inverse of the matrix D. The odd powers of 6 give a vanishing contribu-

tion when the domain of integration extends over the real numbers. On
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 143

the other hand, the integrals containing even powers of 5 are

                                                                                    (2.80)

where all the (215- l)!!terms that are obtained by grouping the indexes
two by two appear.

   The determinant of the matrix D can be calculated by comparison with
the results of Section 1I.E as

                                       1
                                                                                    (2.81)

in the limit At-0. Therefore, the integrals (2.79) and (2.80) exist as long
as the time T does not coincide with a conjugate point along the orbit,
which guarantees det D # 0.

   Moreover, the phase is now fixed without ambiguity in the calculation
of the imaginary Gaussian integral. Indeed, the integral is given by the
first determination of the square root. Equation (2.79) is obtained by
diagonalization of the matrix D so that we are left with ( N - 1)f integrals
of the form

where the phase is fixed because the integral is convergent and its value is

known. The index Cn is equal to 1 if fin is negative and 0 otherwise. The

sum v, = CkE,N=;"f Cn is equal to the Morse index of the orbit 8 as discussed
above.

   We have thus established the relation to the previous section, but as a
byproduct of the path integral approach we can calculate the h-correc-
tions. These corrections are given by the higher integrals [Eq. (2.80)],
which involve the inverse of the matrices D, that is, the classical Green
functions %(t,t ' ) along each classical orbit. When the results are gathered
144                         P. GASPARD ET AL.

the propagator is given by

            + + x ?Irnn@ t') ', 2 q l ( t ,t')F$,(t, t')gkn(t,' ) ] O ( h 2 ) } (2.83)

Diagrams are associated with these integrals as follows [83-871. A vertex
with m legs is associated here with each -arnV(t)ldqil.* .dqim. A line is
associated with each Green function gij(t,t'), which joins two free legs
either of the same vertex or between two different vertices. Integrals are
then performed over the times of the different vertices. These diagrams
have the following properties. In the Taylor expansion [Eq. (2.83)], we
find terms with Vvertices and k` legs. The number k` of legs is always even
otherwise the term is vanishing. If there are t = 2 L legs there are
(2L- l)!!different manners to join them two by two with L lines.
Hence, many diagrams are generated but many of them are identical and,
as a consequence, have the same numerical value. The sign of the
numerical weight of a diagram with V vertices is (-)". The difference
L - V gives the power of the Planck constant to which the diagram
contributes.

   In the series, we find connected and disconnected diagrams. A very
important property is that the series in the Planck constant involving all
the diagrams can be transformed into the exponential of a series involving
only the connected diagrams. Accordingly, the propagator can be written
as

                                                                                      (2.84)
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 145
The first coefficient is given explicitly by

The diagram associated with C , is shown in Fig. 4 together with that of
the fi2-correction C,.

   The previous method and the appearance of the Feynman diagrams of
Fig. 4 are typical of h-expansions. The integrals corresponding to these
diagrams are well behaved in problems with a smooth potential V(q)
(Coulomb potentials require an extra regularization as discussed in a
following section). By contrast, the calculation of the fi-corrections may
be problematic if the Eqs. (2.27) have to be integrated, in view of the
divergence of the classical density D on caustic lines. In this regard, the
method of classical Green functions avoids a severe difficulty.

   In the following sections, we will apply the above expansion to the
calculation of the trace of the propagator and to the determination of the
eigenvalues of the Schrodinger equation. However, first we will describe
the classical structures we should expect in phase space.

48  +ik 4

    Figure 4. Feynman diagrams contributing to the coefficients C, and C, of the fi- and
h2-corrections, respectively, in the case of smooth Hamiltonians.
146         P. GASPARD ET AL.

      111. CLASSICAL DYNAMICS

The phase-space structures are the feature of the pointlike classical
dynamics of the trajectories derived from Hamilton's equations, which
can be written in the form

where X = (9, p) are the positions and momenta, X(X) is the Hamil-
tonian function, and

                                              01

                                 X = L 0)

is an antisymmetric 2f X 2f matrix at the basis of the symplectic structure
of phase space. Cauchy's theorem guarantees the uniqueness of the
solutions of Eq. (3.1) from given initial conditions: X, = Qr(X0).As a
consequence of the Hamiltonian form, we have div F = 0 so that the flow
is conservative and phase-space volumes are preserved. Moreover, energy
is conserved if the Hamiltonian is time independent: 2Y = E . Therefore,
the flow takes place in 2f- 1 dimensions. Extra constants of motion may
further reduce the dimension of the effective phase space.

                        A. Linear Stability in Phase Space

The preceding sections have shown the importance of linear stability of
the trajectories. Infinitesimal perturbations 6 X around a trajectory X, of
Eq. (3.1) are solutions of the equation [88]

               a x = L(t) * 6X             (3.3)

with

      L(t)  =  dF    (X,)  =z   d2X        (3.4)
                               .2 ( X , )
               ~ dX            dX

+ In the case of a Hamiltonian of the form X = p2/2 V(q), we have that

6 X = (6q, 6p) and
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 147
so that the equations for the infinitesimal perturbations are

                                     S q = Sp

By eliminating Sp, we recover the Jacobi-Hill equation (2.45)-(2.46),
which shows the relationship between the problems of linear stability in
position space (Section 11) and in phase space (Section 111).

   Because Eq. (3.3) is linear, its solutions are given as a linear
combination of the initial perturbations

8 X ( t ) = M(t) * SX(0)                    (3.7)

where M(t) is a 2f x 2f matrix solution of

from the initial conditions M(0) = 1. The Lyapunov exponents of the
trajectory are then defined by [89,90]

                 1                          (3.9)
A(X,; e) =lti--mtm -t ln(M(t;X,) el

where the vector e = SX/ISX[ is the direction of the initial perturbation
S X . The unit vector e belongs to the space that is tangent to the phase
space, that is, to the space of the infinitesimal perturbations 6 X . A priori,
the Lyapunov exponent depends both on the trajectory given by the
initial condition X, and on the direction of the initial perturbation, e .
After the limit t + m is taken it turns out that the Lyapunov exponent

- only takes its values in a discrete set called the Lyapunov spectrum:

A, 2 A, 2 . . 2 A,,, with multiplicities m,, m2,. . . ,m, such that CiY_, m i=

2f. The main Lyapunov exponent is obtained for unit vectors e which are
arbitrary, except that they should not belong to a linear submanifold of
the tangent space that is of dimension 2f - m , and of zero measure. Next,
one chooses a unit vector that is confined to precisely this submanifold,
and thus the second largest Lyapunov exponent A, is found. The next
Lyapunov exponents are obtained successively in the same way. In
ergodic systems, the dependency on X, disappears for almost all trajec-
tories according to the multiplicative ergodic theorem established by
Oseledec, which generalizes the Birkhoff ergodic theorem [89,90].
148  P. GASPARD ET AL.

   By differentiating the equation of motion [Eq. (3.1)] with respect to
time, we obtain

     x = - ddXF (X,) * X  (3.10)

so that the direction of the flow X is a solution of the linear system [Eq.
(3.3)] and we have X ( t ) = M(t) * X(0). If we take the initial unit vector
parallel to the direction of the flow as e = X ( O ) / l X ( O ) l , we have

If the trajectory stays away from the equilibrium points the vector field
remains nonvanishing so that the logarithm in the definition [Eq. (3.9)]
keeps a finite value and the limit vanishes. We conclude that any
trajectory different from an equilibrium point always has one vanishing
Lyapunov exponent. Because of energy conservation, another Lyapunov
exponent of such a trajectory is vanishing, which corresponds to a unit
vector pointing outside the energy shell as dX/dX.

   Because of the special Hamiltonian form [Eq. (3.1)] of the vector
field, the matrix M(t) turns out to be a symplectic matrix satisfying

171,911

     MT(t)* Z .M(t) = Z   (3.12)

- which is proved be differentiation of both sides with respect to the time

and by the use of 2 * L 2 = LT, which follows from the definition [Eq.

(3.4)] of L for the case of Hamiltonian systems. As a consequence, the
Lyapunov exponents fall in pairs {hi,-hi}{=, [71,91].

  + For Hamiltonian systems 2 = p 2 / 2 V with two degrees of freedom

( f = 2), Eckhardt and Wintgen [92] have shown how to simplify the linear
stability problem by going to a special coordinate system moving with the
trajectory. The perturbation is decomposed onto a set of four mutually
orthogonal vectors according to

     sX(t) =A(t) ~ ( t )  (3.13)

where x = (xi,x, q ,x,, x,) are the new coordinates and where the matrix
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 149
A has the form [92]

+ + with r = 1x1= (4: + 4: p : P 22 ) . 112 The first column is the vector that is

parallel to the flow while the second column is chosen to be perpendicular

to the first column without exchanging positions with momenta. The third

column is a vector that points outside the energy shell and is proportional

to the matrix 2 applied to the first column. Similarly, the fourth column is
proportional to 2 applied to the second column. At time t, the perturba-

tion in the new coordinates is given by

~ ( t=)A-'(t) * M ( t ) .A(0). ~ ( 0 )          (3.15)

Accordingly, the new variables are governed by the equation x = L ' x

with a matrix of the form
(: ") -," L' =A-'. (L .A - A)=
                           0000                 (3.16)

                           0 -c d -a

where the elements are obtained by a symbolic manipulation program
according to

a = [41Pl(VII - 1) + 42@2(V22- 1) - ( 4 1 P 2 + 42P1)V121/r2 (3.17)

b = " 4 : + P W l l + 1) + (4: + Ij:><v22 + 1)  (3.18)

    + 2(4142 - P1P2)V121/r2

c = K4: + 4 m 1 + V22) + 2(P: + P:>l/r2         (3.19)
                                                (3.20)
 d = (qIp2- Q21jl)(V11+ V22- 2)/r3'2

e = " 4 : - P:)(1 - VlI) + (4: - P m - V22)     (3.21)

    + 2(PlEj2 - 4142)V121/r2

f = ~ 4 + P~ ~ P4 ~-~)v2(,) ~- (~4 : ~+ PI - 4: - P : ) V , ~ I / ~(~3.'2~2)
150                     P. GASPARD ET AL.

using the definition of A and q i= -V,,q, with = d2V/dqidqj.
   The form of the matrix [Eq. (3.16)] implies that, if the initial

perturbation is within the energy shell, that is, x , ( O ) = 0, then it remains
there for all times, x , ( t ) = O . Moreover, the components xq and xp
formed a closed system. The component xll is driven by the three others
so that it remains constant if the three other components are initially set
to zero, as expected for the direction parallel to the flow. The nontrivial
Lyapunov exponents are therefore determined by the behavior of the two
components xq and xp so that the linear stability problem is reduced to
the integration of the 2 x 2 matrix system

                        m=l.m                     (3.23)

with

                                                  (3.24)

along the orbit.
   We now describe several types of trajectories and their linear stability:

   1. The Equilibrium Points. For these special trajectories, the vari-
       ables stay constant: X ( t ) = X,. Hence, they correspond to the zeros
      of the vector field where F(X,) = 0. For a Hamiltonian of the form

    + 2t = p2/2 V(q), the equilibrium points satisfy p, = 0 and

       dV/dq(q,) = 0. They occur at special energy values E, = V(q,). The
       linear stability is controlled by the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
       the gradient of the vector field at the equilibrium point

                                                  (3.25)

      which reduces to

                        d e t [ g (9,) - v1] = 0  (3.26)
                              dq

      ', for our particular Hamiltonians with (+ = -6 As a consequence of

      the symmetry of the second derivative matrix of the potential, the

      eigenvalues 6 are either pure real or imaginary: 5 = *A or kiw. The

      imaginary eigenvalues correspond to the directions where the

      motion is oscillatory, and the real eigenvalues to the unstable

      directions. In this latter case, which occurs at saddle equilibrium

      points, the eigenvalues 6 = & A are the Lyapunov exponents associ-
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 151

   ated with the unstable direction of the orbit, while the two other
   Lyapunov exponents are vanishing. In general, the Lyapunov

  exponents are related to the stability eigenvalues by hi= Re ti.

2. The Periodic Orbits. For periodic orbits, there exist real numbers

   called periods, for which the trajectory comes back to its initial

  condition X(t + T) = X ( t ) . The smallest among those periods is the

   prime period T, of the periodic orbit p . The other periods are then

  given as multiples of the prime period T = rTp, with Y = 1 , 2 , . . . .

   The linear stability is determined by the matrix [Eq. (3.7)] over one
   prime period

det[M(T,) - A11 = 0           (3.27)

According to Eq. (3.12), the matrix M is symplectic so that its
eigenvalues fall in quadruplets as A, A*, A-', and K1*.By the
same reasoning we gave in the context of Eq. (3.11), and by energy
conservation, two among the eigenvalues are necessarily equal to 1,
A = 1, which correspond to the directions parallel to the flow and
perpendicular to the energy shell. For two-degree-of-freedom
systems, we have three kinds of periodic orbits: (1) hyperbolic
without reflection if the two nontrivial eigenvalues are real and

positive, A > 1> A-' >0; (2) hyperbolic with reflection if they are
real but negative, A < -1 < A-' <0; (3) elliptic if they are complex

on the unit circle, A = exp(?%.rrip), where p defines the rotation
or winding number. In higher-degree-of-freedom systems, there
appears the fourth possibility that the eigenvalues are forming a
genuine quadruplet of complex numbers outside the unit circle
[71,91].

   The nontrivial eigenvalues are also given by the eigenvalues of
the monodromy matrix, which is the linearized return map in a
PoincarC surface of section that is transverse to the periodic orbit
[93]. If the surface of section is defined by the equation S(X) = 0,
the full return map is governing the successive intersections X, =
X ( t , ) of a trajectory with the surface of section. For a general flow,
the successive times t, when the crossings occur are not necessarily
multiples of a constant as in periodically forced systems so that we
have

X n i l= +(X,) = *,"'"n'(X,)  (3.28)

tn+l= tn + T(Xn>              (3.29)

where T(X) is called the ceiling function. At the fixed point
152  P. GASPARD ET AL.

     corresponding to the intersection of the periodic orbit with the

     surface of section, the matrix &$/axadmits the same eigenvalues as

     the matrix M(T,). In two-degree-of-freedom systems, we may
     construct the Poincar6 return map in some two-dimensional surface
     of section. In some intrinsic coordinates of this surface, the return
     map can be written as y n + l = cp(y,), and the linearized map near
     the fixed point of the periodic orbit is then given by the monodromy
     matrix ~3cp(y,)/dy = mp = m ( T p ) ,which is solution of Eq. (3.23). A
     similar monodromy matrix mp exists in higher-degree-of-freedom
     systems.

        For periodic orbits, the Lyapunov exponents are given by

                        (3.30)

       in terms of the eigenvalues of M(Tp)or, for the non-zero Lyapunov
       exponents, of m(T,).

   The preceding considerations form the phase-space version of the
problem of linear stability, which we already described in position space
in Section 11. As we showed at the beginning of this section both
formulations are equivalent and give the same results.

   When the stability eigenvalues cross the unit circle, the periodic orbit
changes its stability and, in general, undergoes a bifurcation where other
orbits may emerge or disappear. The different types of bifurcations that
an equilibrium point or a periodic orbit may undergo have been classified
elsewhere [94]. At these bifurcations, the topology of the phase-space
structures is changing. In particular, it is through bifurcations that the
flow can become chaotic with an infinite number of periodic orbits if the
original flow was not chaotic. We will now turn to these topological
aspects.

   Energy is the principal bifurcation parameter in a time-independent
Hamiltonian system. Topology changes with energy. Among the quan-
tities of particular interest &re the periods of the periodic orbits.
Therefore, we will compare different systems by their period-energy
diagram, which is important for semiclassical quantization.

   One of the main tools used to study dynamical systems is the PoincarC
surface of section where the flow induces a return mapping (see above). If
the surface of section is transverse to the flow, a typical trajectory will
have successive crossings that will form a sequence of points in the
PoincarC surface. The dimensional reduction provided by the PoincarC
section simplifies the analysis of the geometry of the flow.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 153

   Among the manifolds that can be formed in the phase space, a special
role is played by the stable and unstable manifolds associated with the
stable or unstable directions of either equilibrium points or periodic orbits
[95]. They are invariant manifolds that are separating the trajectories with
different behaviors forward or backward in time so that these manifolds
can be used to classify the trajectories. The stable manifold is formed by
all the trajectories that are converging to the periodic orbit for f-+ +a.
On the other hand, the unstable manifold is the set of trajectories
converging to the periodic orbit for l + --co. Therefore, they are neces-
sarily tangent to the corresponding eigenvectors of the linear stability
matrix.

   The trajectories that are at the intersections between the stable and
unstable manifolds of a periodic orbit of saddle type are the so-called
homoclinic orbits [2,95]. The importance of homoclinic orbits for chaotic
behavior was pointed out in the works by PoincarC and by Birkhoff
[2,24]. According to a theorem established by Birkhoff, the presence of a
homoclinic orbit associated with an unstable periodic orbit implies the
existence of an uncountable set of nonperiodic trajectories which contains
a dense and countable set of periodic orbits of arbitrarily long periods.
This topological property is the signature of what is today called chaos.
Homoclinic orbits of the Birkhoff type have been discovered and studied
in a number of conservative and dissipative systems, particularly in
celestial mechanics. We refer the reader to the vast literature on the
subject [2,3,95].

                      B. Examples of Mechanical Systems

Classical mechanics concerns not only the smooth Hamiltonian systems
whose time evolution is ruled by the first-order differential equations
(3.1) but also a variety of more general systems in which the particles
encounter hard walls where they undergo elastic collisions. It is natural to
refer to these general systems as mechanical systems. Between the elastic
collisions, the particles may be exposed to electric or magnetic forces.
Billiards are special cases of these mechanical systems where the motion
is free between the collisions [96]. During elastic collisions, energy is
conserved and the reflected ray is related to the incident ray according to
the laws of geometrical optics.

   Let us remark that the concept of hard walls is an idealization of a very
steep potential, such as occurs in elastic collisions of ultracold neutrons
on solid surfaces. In microscopic and mesoscopic systems, where the
dimensions of the system become comparable to the atomic dimensions,
this idealization may turn out to be too crude an approximation.
154      P. GASPARD ET AL.

Nevertheless, we will see that a number of important properties are
already captured by the billiard approximation [97].

   We may also distinguish between bounded and open systems. In
bounded systems, the phase space is compact and the trajectories remain
forever at finite distances. On the other hand, the trajectories may escape
to large distances in open systems of scattering type, which are of special
importance for the modeling of ionization, dissociation, or reaction
processes [97]. In spite of the fact that a large portion of the trajectories
are escaping to large distances in scattering systems, the pointlike
character of classical dynamics allows for the existence of trajectories that
remain forever at finite distances. These trapped trajectories may be
stationary, periodic, quasiperiodic, or nonperiodic with both types of
stability. The trapped trajectories correspond to the formation of a
complex. Due to quantum mechanical tunneling, this complex is always
metastable although classically there may exist trapped orbits that are
absolutely stable in positive measure phase-space regions of one- and
two-degree-of-freedom systems. The phenomenon called Arnold diffu-
sion prevents the existence of such absolutely stable trapped orbits in
higher-degree-of-freedom systems [2]. Nevertheless, in this latter case,
there may still exist marginally stable or unstable trapped orbits.

   Let us give a few examples of mechanical systems.

         1. Hamiltonian Systems

1. Harmonic Oscillator. For the Hamiltonian X = (1/2)p2+ (w /2)

   q 2 ,there exists a unique fixed point at q = 0 and energy E, = 0. The
   periods, T = rTp = 2 m / w , are independent of the energy in this
   special case. The period-energy diagram is shown in Fig. 5 . All the
   orbits of phase space are actually periodic orbits that are multiples
   of a single prime periodic orbit. Therefore, the number of periods
   below T grows linearly with T.

2. Quartic Oscillator. Fig. 6 depicts the period-energy diagram for the

  Hamiltonian X = (1/2)p2- (a/2)q2+ (b/4)q4. When a, b > 0 , this

   potential has three equilibrium points, two of which are stable, at

     q=  and E, = -a2/(4b), while the other is unstable at q = 0

     and El = 0. The periods of the orbits are doubly degenerate for

     E, <E < E l . Due to the anharmonicity of the potential, the periods

     increase with energy below El but decrease with energy above E l .

     A bifurcation occurs at E l . With increasing energy, there is an

     infinite number of periodic orbits that correspond to a fixed value T

     of the period. However, the periods are transverse to the period

     axis near E, in agreement with our expectation that the harmonic

     approximation is valid at low energy.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 155

           1

           42nn/loo

               o~"""""'""""~                     0.8
                 0  0.2   0.4        0.6                 1

                                  E

Figure 5.  + Period-energy diagram for the harmonic oscillator X = ( 1 / 2 ) p z ( w 2 / 2 ) q 2 .

           30

           20

           10

           0        1,1,11,,/111111

             -1     -0.5       0          0.5         1

                                                       E

  Figure 6. Period-energy diagram for the quartic oscillator 2 = (112)~'- ( a / 2 ) q z+

(b14)q4 with a = 2 and b = 1.

3. Morse Oscillator. For the Morse Hamiltonian [98]

                    x = 2P 2 + D[I - exp(-aq)12             (3.31)

the system is bounded below the dissociation energy E = D but is

unbounded for positive energies. The system is exactly solvable in
classical and quantum mechanics. The bounded and periodic
156            P. GASPARD ET AL.

     trajectories are given by

                  + 1 1

                 q ( t )= - l n { r [ l - cos28cos(w,t sin 8 +)I} (3.32)
                         a sin 8

     + for cos28=E I D < l , where w,=aV% is the frequency of the

     harmonic vibrations near the equilibrium point q = 0, while is an
     arbitrary phase. The energy-dependent periods are

                                    2rrr           (3.33)

                                =w        ,     ~                                           ~

   where r is the number of repetitions of the prime period. The
   corresponding period-energy diagram is plotted in Fig. 7, where we
   see the divergence of the period near the dissociation energy E = D.

   Moreover, above the dissociation energy ( E >D ) , there exist

   unbounded trajectories of scattering type, which are obtained by
   replacing 8 by i8 in Eq. (3.32).

       In the preceding one-degree-of-freedom systems, all the orbits
   are stable and there is no chaos. However, this situation changes as
   soon as we go to systems with two degrees of freedom.

4. The Two-Electron Atomic Systems. These systems are composed of
   two electrons orbiting around a nucleus of charge 2 and are
   therefore isoelectronic with Helium [99-1011. In a classical model
   of the dynamics, we may imagine different configurations for the

                                             D

           50                                4

           40                                i

           30

     b

           20

           10

     0

    Figure 7. Period-energy diagram [Eq. (3.33)] for the Morse potential [Eq. (3.31)] with
wo= 1 and D = 50.
 NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 157

motion of the electrons. The configuration where both electrons
move collinearly on opposite sides of the proton seems to play a
particular role in the sector of zero total angular momentum,
especially in the hydrogen negative ion for which 2 = 1. The
Hamiltonian of this two-degree-of-freedom system is

                              (3.34)

   As in pure Coulomb systems, the periods scale as T,(E) =
   0.5(-E)-3'22pwith energy, where the constants j P are the reduced
   actions of the periodic orbits at energy E = -1 in atomic units. The
   period-energy diagram of the hydrogen negative ion (H-) is given
   in Fig. 8. This system is known to be classically chaotic and there
   exists a symbolic coding of its periodic orbits, as described in
   Section XIII. Contrary to the previous examples, there is no energy
   value for which the phase space of H- is compact so that most
   trajectories escape to infinity, which corresponds to autoionization.
   As a consequence, there exists a fractal repeller containing all the
   trajectories that remain bounded in phase space.

5. The Hdnon-Heiles Hamiltonian. This abstract model has been
   studied as a prototype of nonlinear coupling between two oscillators
   with chaotic behavior resulting from the coupling [102]. The model
   was first proposed in the context of celestial mechanics but its

40

30

t- 20

10

0

-0.2   -0.15  -0.1  -0.05  0

              E

    Figure 8. Period-energy diagram for the H- ion in the collinear eZe configuration (in
atomic units).
158  P. GASPARD ET AL.

     quantization has been carried out later. The Hamiltonian is

     %=--P--f-+f -P ; x 2 + y 2 + x 2 y - 71jy 3                  (3.35)
     2  2

     The potential is represented in Fig. 9. The potential has a threefold
     symmetry under the group C3".At the energy E = 0, there is one
     stable equilibrium point at the origin, x =y = 0, with eigenvalues

     4, o1= w2 = 1. At the energy E = there are three saddle equilib-

     k rium points at (x,y ) = 0, l ) , ( + 6 / 2 , -1/2), and ( - 6 / 2 , -1/2),

     with eigenvalues o = 3 and h = 1. The nonlinearity is cubic in the
     potential that is therefore unbounded. As a consequence, all

     quantum states below E = 3 are metastable with a lifetime de-

     termined by tunneling. However, the motion in the bounded part of
     the potential is classically absolutely stable, without the possibility

                        Y

                                                         V

                                 X
     Figure 9. The Henon-Heiles potential [Eq. (3.35)].
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 159

       of escaping to large distances. This model has been intensely
       studied numerically and phase portraits can be found elsewhere [2].
       Let us mention that the bounded motion appears to be regular (i.e.,
       quasiperiodic) up to an energy E ~ 0 . 1 1 w, here a global chaotic
       zone emerges after very complex bifurcations of the periodic and
       quasiperiodic motions. The area of the chaotic zone rapidly in-
      creases beyond E ~ 0 . 1 1 F. inally, at E = 0.1666, , . . , the motion
       becomes unbounded and most trajectories escape to infinity
       through the saddle points. Above this dissociation energy, the
       trapped motion remains chaotic with quasiperiodic islands pro-
       gressively disappearing as the energy increases [1021. This scenario
       is typical of a transition to chaos followed by a transition to chaotic
       dissociation in classical systems with two degrees of freedom or
       more. We will encounter this scenario under different forms in the
       following sections.

   Many other classically chaotic Hamiltonians have been studied in the
literature [1031,

                             2. Hamiltonian Mappings

Hamiltonian or symplectic mappings are generated by successive cross-
ings of the trajectories in the PoincarC surface of section. Such mappings
are in general given by a nonlinear symplectic transformation of the
intrinsic variables of the surface of section onto themselves, that is, a
transformation whose gradient satisfies Eq. (3.12). Such a nonlinear
transformation should be obtained by integration of the flow. However,
we may also proceed by modelization and assume a certain form for the
mapping. In the same context, there exist simple periodically driven
Hamiltonian systems that admit an analytic PoincarC mapping. This
applies in particular to the periodically kicked systems with Hamiltonians
of the form [lo41

where Rois the Hamiltonian of a known or integrable system and V is a
potential controlling the amplitudes of the kicks given to the particle at
each period T. We consider the PoincarC mapping from the variables

(qn,p,) before the nth kick to the variables before the (n + 1)th kick. At

the nth kick, the momentum is modified by Ap, = - T W d q , . If we
denote the generating function of the motion between two kicks under

the free Hamiltonian R,,by Fo(qn,q , + l , T), then the generating function .-
160  P. GASPARD ET AL.

of the PoincarC mapping is equal to

                                                                                    (3.37)

so that the action of a trajectory over N kicks is W = CyIi F(qn, q n + l )

and the classical motion results from its variation 6 W. In the special case
of a particle in free flight between the kicks ( X o= p 2 / 2 ) , the PoincarC
mapping becomes

                                                                                    (3.38)

+ In the limit T+O, the mapping converges to the flow corresponding to

the Hamiltonian X = p 2 / 2 V(q), which is often referred to as the
integrable limit if X is integrable. The linearized mapping is given by

                        (3.39)

which satisfies Eq. (3.12) so that it is symplectic.
   Let us give several examples of such mappings:

   1. Kicked Morse Oscillator. For this system, which was considered by
      Tersigni et al., [lOS], Xois the Morse Hamiltonian [Eq. (3.31)] and
       V = f [ l - exp(-aq)]*. The mapping shows a large variety of fea-
       tures from elliptic islands to chaotic behavior. Since the Morse
       oscillator may lead to unbounded motion, the mapping is of
       scattering type with the possibility of escape at 'large distances.

   2. Standard Map. This archetype of chaos is generated by Xo= p 2 / 2
      and V = K cos q with q E [0,27r) [106]. The motion of this system
       remains bounded along the angle variable q but the momentum
       may become unbounded above the threshold at K =0.97 for global
       chaos. Its properties have been reviewed elsewhere [2].

   3. Hinon Map. This other archetype of chaos is generated by R0=
      p 2 / 2 and V = d ( q 3 / 3 - q ) with q real [107]. The motion may
       become unbounded in position. The particle is continuously acceler-
       ated at large distances so that this map is not convenient to study
       chaotic scattering processes. To avoid this inconvenience, Gaspard
       and Rice [lo81 introduced the following mappings.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 161

   4 . One-Channel Scattering Map with a Minimum. This mapping is
      generated by Xo= p 2 / 2 and V =d [ l - exp(-q)12 with q real. The
       motion may become unbounded in position but the particle reaches
       a free flight when q+ +a.The behavior of the trapped orbits is
       very similar to the one in the HCnon map with qualitatively the
       same sequence of bifurcations as the parameter d increases.

   5. One-Channel Scattering Map with a Minimum and a

    + Maximum. This mapping is generated by 2To=p2/2 and V =

    d exp(-q)(q2 q + 1) with q real. The behavior of this map is

       similar to the one of Example 4 except that here there is an extra
       maximum point at finite distance. Phase portraits, as well as
       homoclinic tangles of the stable and unstable manifolds, have been
       numerically constructed elsewhere [93,97].

   6. Two-Channel Scattering Map. This mapping is generated by R0=

    p 2 / 2 and V =exp(-q2/2)(a + pq + yq2/2) with q real. Contrary to

       the two preceding examples, the particle can escape in free motion
       either for q+ +m or for q+ --co. This model has been introduced
       by Rurghardt and Gaspard [21] in the study of direct dissociation of
       triatomic molecules, where two channels of dissociation exist in a
       collinear configuration; the model will be discussed in detail in

      Section XII.

                                     3. Billiards

Besides Hamiltonian flows and maps, billiards have been the subject of
many recent works [96,109,110]. There exist billiards in the plane, such
as the Bunimovich stadium, the Sinai billiard, or the Lorentz gas, as well
as in higher dimensions, such as three-dimensional Lorentz billiards or
the gases composed of hard spheres or ellipsoids. A billiard may be
integrable like the circular and elliptic ones. We speak of a hyperbolic
billiard if all its periodic orbits are unstable. Billiards may be bounded or
open. In the latter case, the billiard is a scattering system and its area is
infinite. As we mentioned earlier, two-dimensional billiards are also
models of ballistic electronic circuits at low temperatures and of nanomet-
ric sizes [40-431.

   Because the motion is free between the bounces, the trajectories are
generated by the following action function, which is similar to the case of
mappings

                                                                                   N-1

                                                                                   (3.40)

where s, denotes the length of perimeter along the border of the billiard
162  P. GASPARD ET AL.

where the nth bounce happened. The quantity &(s,, s,,~) is the length of

the path between the bounces at s, and s , + ~ . The variable that is

+, canonically conjugate to s, is the velocity parallel to the wall of the

billiard, p , = sin where ~ /I24, I3n-12 is the angle between the

incident ray and the normal to the wall that points toward the exterior of

the walls. The coordinates (s, ,sin 4,) are called the Birkhoff coordinates

of the billiard [110]. All the billiards share the same dependency of the
periods on the energy. Indeed, the periods { T r p }are determined by the
total lengths {L,} of the prime periodic orbits and by the velocity
according to

                                                                                    (3.41)

where M is the mass of the particle and r = 1 , 2 , . . is the integer counting

the repetitions of the prime orbit p .
   In the following list, we give several examples of billiards.

   1. Circle Billiard. Even in the absence of chaos, the spectrum of the
       periodic orbits may present peculiarities as in the simple case of the
      circle billiard [ill]. A periodic orbit of this billiard will close onto
       itself after n bounces off the wall and after m turns around the
      center. The number m may differ from m = 1 in the case of orbits
       forming stars. Accordingly, the periodic orbits are labeled by two
       integers m and n , such that n z 2 m . Their lengths are L,, =
       2n sin(.irmln) for a circle of unit radius. Because of the rotational
       symmetry, the periodic orbits form continuous families so that each
       of the preceding lengths has the degeneracy of the one-dimensional
       continuum. Another peculiarity comes from the accumulation of
       series of periodic orbits at the multiples m of the perimeter when

      n+m , a phenomenon referred to as the whispering gallery.

       Moreover, as in the disk scatterers, every point inside the billiard is
       an equilibrium point of marginal stability that forms a (two-dimen-
       sional) continuum. The period-energy diagram is plotted in Fig. 10.
   2. Stadium Billiard. This famous billiard is known to be chaotic as
       proved by Bunimovich [112]. The origin of chaos in the stadium is
       interesting because its walls are focusing rather than defocusing.
       Dynamical instability and positive Lyapunov exponents finally arise
       because of an excess of focusing due to the fact that the two
       focusing semicircles have been separated with respect to each other.
       On the other hand, the system is mixed if the two semicircles are
       put closer to each other, as in the lemon billiard [61]. As mentioned
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 163

            20
             15
      b 10

5

o 0~ ~ " 0."2 " ' "0.4" " ' 0".6 ~ " 0.8  1

   E

Figure 10. Period-energy diagram for the circle billiard with a unit mass.

   above, the stadium is chaotic but not hyperbolic since bouncing
   between the parallel rectilinear walls generates a continuous family
   of periodic orbits they are not unstable. As in the circle billiard, the
   periodic orbits of the stadium billiard accumulate on multiples of
   the whispering gallery orbit. However, this particular orbit is
   infinitely unstable due to the discontinuity of the curvature of the
   wall at the matching points between the semicircles and the
   rectilinear walls. The bounded stadium may be transformed into a
   scattering system if the two rectilinear walls are replaced by two
   semiinfinite channels.

3. Disk Scatterers. These billiards are used as models of unimolecular
   dissociations as well as of diffusion [113-1151. For these billiards, a
   point particle undergoes elastic collisions with hard disks that are
   fixed in the plane. The defocusing character of the collisions on
   disks induces a dynamical instability so that all the trapped orbits
   are unstable and these systems are hyperbolic. Since these billiards
   are of the scattering type, their trapped orbits form a repeller of
   zero measure in phase space. We may consider a scatterer formed
   by a varying number of disks from the one-disk scatterer to the
   many-disk scatterer, which is equivalent to a Lorentz gas if the disks
   form a regular lattice. Increasing the number of disks is interesting
   because we observe the transition to chaos between the two- and
   the three-disk scatterers (we suppose that the disks form an

   equilateral triangle in the three-disk scatterer). Indeed, the two-disk

   scatterer is nonchaotic since its repeller contains a single prime
   periodic orbit, whereas the three-disk scatterer is chaotic and its
   repeller is fractal. Figure 11 shows several examples of disk
164  P. GASPARD ET AL.

    Figure 11. Different configurations of disk scatterers: (a) one-disk scatterer; ( b ) two-
disk scatterer; (c) three-disk scatterer; ( d ) four-disk scatterer; (e) Lorentz-type disk cluster.

       scatterers. The period-energy diagrams of the two- and three-disk
       scatterers are depicted in Fig. 12. For many geometric configura-
       tions of the N-disk scatterers, where each disk is "visible" from the
       others, the trapped orbits are in 1 : l correspondence with a
       symbolic dynamics whose alphabet is formed with the N labels of
       the disks. The only constraint on the succession of the symbols (0,)
       is then given by the rule w , + ~# q,.In this case, the number of
       periodic orbits in the repeller increases as (N - 1)"with the number
       n of bounces. However, when some disks are hiding others, which
       is the case when they are close to each other, extra constraints may
       appear and we talk about "pruning" of periodic orbits [115]. In this
       other case, the number of periodic orbits grows more slowly with
       the number of bounces. In both cases, we have an exponential
       proliferation of periodic orbits that is at the origin of the difficulties
       to quantize chaos.

          In the following sections, we present the symbolic dynamics and
       the Smale horseshoe as well as the thermodynamic formalism whose
       purpose is to understand and characterize this exponential prolifer-
       ation and its geometric and probabilistic implications.

                C. Smale Horseshoe and Symbolic Dynamics

We would like to introduce the notion of symbolic dynamics in the
context of the horseshoe map, as proposed by Smale in 1967 [116]. This
map represents a model for a hyperbolic chaotic system. The map is
constructed geometrically (see below) by a stretching and folding process,
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 165

0""""""""""J

      0  0.2  0.4     0.6  0.8  1

                   E

20

15

b 10

5

0""""""""'""

      0  0.2  0.4     0.6  0.8  1

                   E

    Figure 12. Period-energy diagram for (a) the two-disk and (b) the three-disk scatterers
with a unit mass.

which schematically represents the way in which the stable and unstable
manifolds of a hyperbolic fixed point form homoclinic intersections, thus
providing a pathway to chaos. First, we will give a short description of the
simplest horseshoe map, and then associate with it a symbolic dynamics.
The symbolic dynamics allows a classification of the trajectories belonging
to the invariant set, which will turn out to be the classification underlying
the cycle expansion method (see Section VI). We will then show how the
Smale horseshoe and some of its generalizations appear in some of the
aforementioned mechanical systems,

                                1. Horseshoe Map

The horseshoe map is illustrated in Fig. 13. By stretching and folding
process [117], regions that initially represent vertical slices within the area

D are mapped to horizontal slices, while other regions that were initially
166  P. GASPARD ET AL.

                                                           1.

                                                                 WD)

    Figure 13. Formation of a Smale horseshoe under action of the mapping @ on the
domain D and definition of the generating partition {O.,1.) at the intersections of D and of
its image @(D).The other generating partition { . O , .1} at the intersections of D and of its
preimage @-'(D) is also shown.

confined to D are mapped to the outside of the area. The cells generated
by the intersection of D with the image @ ( D )may be labeled by the
symbols 0. and 1.; analogously the cells originating from the intersection
of D with its preimage W1(D) are labeled .O and -1. The intersection of
these cells then represents the area of phase space that remains confined
to the original area D over a backward and forward iteration. The
invariant set of trajectories that remain trapped within D over an infinite
number of iterations is represented by the bi-infinite intersections of the
cells with all their forward and backward iterates. The invariant set of the
horseshoe map is hyperbolic and nonattracting. The property of hy-
perbolicity refers to the fact that all trajectories are of the saddle type,
that is, the tangent space of each point of the invariant set can be
uniquely decomposed into stable and unstable subspaces. The nonattract-
ing property is reflected in the fact that the invariant set is a Cantor set,
and is of zero Lebesgue measure (i.e., it occupies a vanishing phase-space
area). In fact, the invariant set of the horseshoe map is referred to as a
repeller, which is characterized by exponential escape dynamics [117].
Thus the horseshoe map represents a model for the chaotic dynamics in
unstable physical systems, for example, the molecular transition state that
will be discussed in detail in Section XII.

                               2. Symbolic Dynamics

The pair of cells .O and a 1 is called the generating partition. The
intersections with the nth forward or backward iterates of this partition
correspond to 2" cells labeled by strings of n symbols 0 or 1. The size of
the cells decreases rapidly as 2-n'DH,where D, is the Hausdorff

dimension (0 <D , <2 ) of the Cantor set [117]. In the limit n+ the

cells correspond to single points X, so that each point of the invariant set
is in 1: 1 correspondence with a bi-infinite sequence, with a dot denoting
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 167
the time zero:

Now this symbol sequence not only labels a point of the invariant set, but
also represents an encoding of the history of this point under the repeated
application of the horseshoe map. This history may be followed from
iteration to iteration by applying a shift operation to the symbol
sequence, that is, by shifting the decimal point to the right (corresponding

to @) or to the left (corresponding to a'-'). The application of the

horseshoe map to the invariant set can thus be represented in terms of the
shift operation on the bi-infinite symbol sequence.

   If the reference to time zero, that is, the dot in Eq. (3.42), is removed
from the symbol sequence, we have a bi-infinite sequence that is in 1 : l
correspondence with the trajectories of the invariant set

The periodic orbits are given by the repetition of the same string

(1) = [woo1. * *o,-l]p                                              (3.44)

We remark that a dotted string like [wo* . w , - ~ ] ~ - w w~2~. * ~. W , , - ~ [ W ~*.
o , _ ~ ] ~fo+r instance, which is obtained by truncating Eq. (3.44) into a
finite sequence of symbols, corresponds to a cell of phase space that
contains the corresponding periodic orbit Eq. (3.44).

   In regard to the classification of the periodic orbits, the periodic orbits
labeled with one-symbol sequences, which correspond to the fixed points
of the map, are referred to as the fundamental periodic orbits, since they
generate all the other periodic orbits of the repeller by topological
combination [118].

   Let us also mention that a symbolic dynamics is characterized by the
so-called topological entropy that is the rate of exponential proliferation
of the periodic orbits for increasing periods [119]

                                                                                    (3.45)

For the Smale horseshoe, the topological entropy per iteration is equal to
ln2. In flows, a distinction must be established between the topological
entropy per iteration and the one per unit time, since the time between
168           P. GASPARD ET AL.

two crossings in the Poincar6 surface of section may vary from one
crossing to another [see Eq. (3.29)].

                                    3. Examples

Figure 14 depicts a Smale horseshoe with a symbolic dynamics (0, l}
appearing in the one-channel scattering map with a minimum and a
maximum, corresponding to Example 5 in Section III.B.2 [93].

   A similar Smale horseshoe exists in a slightly different form in the
three-disk scatterer [115], as well as in the three-hill scatterer [120].
Figure 15 shows the set of initial conditions on the borders of the disks
that are trapped for one backward and one forward collision. The initial
conditions appear in the Birkhoff coordinates. In this set, we find 12 cells
labeled as w1 wool in terms of three symbols { a , b , c}, which are the
labels of the three disks. We find differences with respect to the Smale
horseshoe: the first one is that the folding is absent but is replaced by a
double reflection on the two opposite disks combined with an escape of
the other trajectories that are not reflected on disks. This difference is
minor since the folding or the reflection have the same effect of doubling
the number of cells at each new backward or forward collision. The
second difference concerns the symbolic dynamics that has three rather
than two symbols. In spite of the three symbols, the topological entropy
per collision is still equal to In 2. Indeed, the particle has only two
possibilities after each collision on a disk so that the symbols follow each

     2

     1

     P0

          -1

     -7
     &
              -1                                 0  1

                                              X

    Figure 14. Smale horseshoe appearing in the ( q ,p ) plane of the Hamiltonian mapping

[Eq. (3.36)] with X,,= p z / 2 and V =d exp(-q)(qz + q + l ) , when d = 8 (Example 5 of

Section III.B.2). The repeller exists at the intersections of both horseshoes, of their images,

and of their preimages. (Note that q = x . )
       NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 169

            disk a                   disk b       disk c
I
                         1

e-                       en

.c* o                    .Ew O

 v1

-1                  ni3  -1     0            xi3
  0

       ea                          eb

    Figure 15. Horseshoe-type structures in the three-disk scatterer. The parameters 6, are
the positions of the collisions along the border of the disks, while the parameters q5L are the
angles between the incident ray and the normal at the point of collision. Note that the
number of cells multiplies by a factor 2 at each new collision.

other in Eq. (3.43) with the constraint q,# wnilM. oreover, if we use the
threefold symmetry of the equilateral three-disk scatterer we can reduce
the symbolic dynamics to the one of the Smale horseshoe.

   A binary symbolic dynamics {+, -} also exists in the two-electron
atomic systems (like the hydrogen negative ion and the helium atom) in
the collinear configuration where both electrons are on opposite sides of
the nucleus [99,100]. In these cases, a generating partition can be
constructed from the structure of the trajectories issued from triple
collisions of both electrons with the nucleus (rl = r2 = 0). Triple collisions
are highly unstable, and therefore very rare, but they nevertheless control
the global behavior of these Coulomb systems.

                                4. Generalizations

The horseshoe is the simplest example of a symbolic dynamics. More
complicated symbolic dynamics arise in a variety of situations. One
generalization applies when the stretching of the domain D is followed by
a more complicated folding, for instance, into three rather than two
branches. In this case, we need three symbols { 0 , 1 , 2 } instead of two so
that the topological entropy is now equal to In 3. This situation arises in
the Hamiltonian mapping of the above Example 6, which is relevant to
the theory of the molecular transition complex in triatomic molecules, as
we will describe in Section XI1 [21].

   In the four-disk scatterer, an extra symbol is also necessary [121]. In
this case, we have the four symbols labeling the disks but a similar
170                       P. GASPARD ET AL.

constraint on two consecutive symbols exists that limits the topological
entropy per collision to In 3. Figure 16 shows the generating partition of
such a symbolic dynamics. Further comments on this point will be given
in Section XIII.

   There are other generalizations of the symbolic dynamics if more than
one constraint exists on the way the symbols follow each other. These
constraints may be understood as grammatical rules in the construction of
the symbolic sequences from the alphabet, that is, from the set of possible

symbols w E (0, 1,. . . ,M - l } [118].

   The preceding examples illustrate the ubiquity of the Smale horseshoe
and of its variants in classical scattering systems where it appears
naturally. The nonattractivity does not constitute a contradiction in
scattering systems. However, Smale horseshoes also exist in bounded
systems but as subsets of trajectories embedded in the whole phase space.
In particular, the Birkhoff homoclinic theorem asserts the existence of
Smale horseshoes in the vicinity of the homoclinic orbit as a subset of
trajectories [2,95]. Such a result may be very useful in our knowledge of
the regularity of the motion but does not provide a complete description
of all the trajectories. In contrast, in the extreme scattering situations
described above, the Smale horseshoe contains the whole set of trapped
orbits and provides a complete description of the trapped dynamics.
These situations are referred to as full or complete chaos and they are the
simplest ones to handle.

   In the following section, we will see how the symbolic dynamics can be
combined with information on the stabilities of the periodic orbits in
order to characterize the classical chaos in a quantitative way.

     D. Thermodynamic Formalism

We suppose that the trajectories of our system are in 1:1 correspondence

with bi-infinite sequences [Eq. (3.42)] of a symbolic dynamics. Moreover,

we may define an invariant measure p , which we assume to be normal-

ized. Let us denote by p u ( ~ ~ . . . w t~he- ~p)robability of the particle

belonging to one of the cells w,, * * *  These probabilities are supposed

to vanish when n+m, otherwise there is a set of orbits that are not

distinguished by the symbolic dynamics.

Now, we consider a physical observable A(X) defined over phase

space and we want to calculate its average. If we assume that the

invariant probability measure p is the natural ergodic measure, the

ergodic theorem suggests

                                             (3.46)
    Figure 16. Same as in Fig. 15 for the four-disk scatterer. Here the number of cells multiplies by a
factor 3 at each new collision.
172     P. GASPARD ET AL.

where A W o. . .W -~ = A(X) for some X belonging to the cell CWO...W(wni-tlh a

choice of the origin of time). In Eq. (3.46), the set of orbits entering the

sum wo* * * w , - ~ is composed of the orbits such that the time they take to

visit the cells successively from wo till   is contained between T and
+T AT. For chaotic systems, the constant AT disappears after the limit is

taken.

Among the different physical observables, the Lyapunov exponents

measure the exponential separation between nearby trajectories, and they

play a special role because they can be used to define the invariant

measure. Indeed, the local instability of the dynamics in each cell of

phase space determines the time spent on average in each of these cells.

The more unstable the dynamics in the cell is, the more rapidly the

particle escapes from the cell, and the smaller is the probability weight of

the cell. The definition [Eq. (3.9)] of the Lyapunov exponents suggests

the following definition for stretching factors associated with the action of

the dynamics on each cell of the partition

                                                                (3.47)

The maximum average Lyapunov exponent can then be expressed by Eq.
(3.46) in terms of the logarithms of the stretching factors.

   In mechanical systems with two degrees of freedom, the maximum
Lyapunov exponent coincides with the only positive Lyapunov exponent
when it exists. In this case, it is possible to define invariant measures in
terms of the stretching factors according to [122-1241

                                                                (3.48)

with pB(w, w n - l ) being non-zero if the transitions w o . .  are

allowed and otherwise zero. These invariant measures depend continu-

ously on the parameter p. They are similar to the Gibbs measures of

statistical mechanics if we assimilate the energies with the logarithms of

the stretching factors. This analogy is at the origin of the development of

the thermodynamic formalism [122-1241. In this way, Ruelle introduced

the topological pressure, which we define here by

where the sum extends over the allowed strings wo * * w n - l [124]. This
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 173

    Figure 17. Schematic representation of the Ruelle pressure function and several of the
characteristic quantities of chaos.

function is known to be convex and is schematically plotted in Fig. 17 for
a typical hyperbolic system. The different characteristic quantities of
chaos can be obtained by geometric construction around the pressure
function. If we define the Kolmogorov-Sinai (KS) entropy per unit time
and the average Lyapunov exponent associated with the invariant
measure pp, we have the general properties

A(Pp) = -P'(P>  (3.50)

where the prime denotes the derivative with respect to p [4, 125, 1261.
   Among the different measures pp, a special role is played in classical

mechanics by the natural measure with P = 1, where the phase-space cells

have probability weights that are inversely proportional to the stretching

factors. The standard KS entropy and average Lyapunov exponent are
174  P. GASPARD ET AL.

defined for this natural measure: h,, = h K S ( p , )h, = h ( p l ) .Moreover, if
the system is open and of the scattering type, the classical escape rate is
given by

     y = - P(1)                   (3.52)

According to Eq. (3.51), we obtain a generalization of the Pesin formula
to open systems under the form [125]

     h,, = A - y                  (3.53)

The KS entropy per unit time is the amount of information we need to
record per unit time in order to reconstruct the trajectory of the system
without ambiguity. In this regard, the KS entropy characterizes dynamical
randomness. In closed hyperbolic systems, the exponential separation of
nearby trajectories correlates entirely with randomness so that the KS
entropy is then equal to the Lyapunov exponent. On the other hand, in
open systems, the exponential separation contributes in part to the escape
of particles so that dynamical randomness is reduced, as described by Eq.
(3.53) [4].

  The topological entropy is given by the pressure at p = 0, such that the

sum in Eq. (3.49) becomes a simple counter of the number of periodic
orbits [119]

     htop = P(0)                  (3.54)

In general, the intersections of a line with the set of unstable manifolds of
the repeller is a multifractal that can be characterized by generalized
dimensions. These latter are calculated as the following root of the
pressure function [1261

     P [ q + (1- 4 ) 4 1 = qP(1)  (3.55)

with values between 0 and 1. The partial Hausdorff dimension is given
when q = 0, i.e., by the zero of the pressure

     P(d,) = 0                    (3.56)

while the partial information dimension d, = d , is obtained by differentia-
tion of Eq. (3.55) with respect to q according to Young's formula [126]

                                                                                 (3.57)
The topological pressure [Eq. (3.49)] is also known to be the leading
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 175

pole s = P ( p ) of the following Ruelle zeta function [124,127]  (3.58)

           [ I exp(-sTp) -1

               rI l p ( 4 = P 1- bPlP

where the product extends over the prime periodic orbits of period Tp

and of stability eigenvalue / A p >/ 1. Equation (3.58) provides a very

powerful method for accurate determination of the characteristic quan-

+ tities of chaos. Moreover, let us mention here that a special role is played

in semiclassical quantization by the pressure at the value p = [114].

   After this review of classical chaos, we begin the presentation of the
semiclassical theory of quantization.

IV. TIME DOMAIN: TRACE OF THE PROPAGATOR

Our objective in this section is to develop a semiclassical method to
calculate the real or complex energy eigenvalues { E b ,E c r } . Since the
trace of the Green operator is related by Eq. (2.4) to the trace of the
evolution operator, we first need to calculate tr k ( T ) .

                                 A. Regularizations

First, we consider the trace of the propagator in bounded systems with a
discrete energy spectrum where

                                                                                               N

If the Hilbert space has a finite dimension N , the trace is well defined.
   However, the Hilbert space is infinite dimensional in many systems so

that the sum may diverge, particularly along the real time axis. For this
reason, we extend the definition of the traxe to the complex plane of the

time T = ReT + iImT. In the lower half-plane ImT <0, the above sum is

convergent, This regularization is equivalent to multiplying the prop-

agator by the heat kernel at an inverse temperature p = -ImT/h. In

particular, the trace of the heat kernel, tr exp(-p%), is well defined for
every positive temperature that corresponds to the lower part of the
imaginary time axis.

   The singularities that are met on the real time axis depend on the
system but they may be everywhere dense on the real axis. To illustrate
the problems caused by the ubiquity of those singularities, we consider a
particle in a box with periodic boundary conditions for which E,, =

( h 2 / 2 m ) ( 2 ~ n / L )w2ith n = 0,1,2, . . . . After a rescaling of the time T =
176                         P. GASPARD ET AL.

           30                                                              Im `I =
           20
            10                                                             - 0.001
                                                                           - 0.01
     h
                                                                           - 0.05
     $0                                                                    - 0.1

     25 o

             0

                0      0.5  1                  1.5                      2

                            Re `I

    Figure 18. Trace of the propagator of a particle in a box with periodic boundary
conditions versus Re7 for different values of I r n =~ -0.001, -0.01, -0.05, -0.1.

T(fi/2m)(27r/L)'t,he trace of the propagator becomes

which is of period 2rr in the variable T. Figure 18 shows this function
versus Re T for different values of I ~ TW. hen ImT-0, singularities
appear everywhere on the real time axis. In spite of this high irregularity,
the function appears more regular in the vicinity of the origin, T = 0. The
behavior at the origin can be obtained by replacing the sum by an
integral,

                       +m                   = - f2i e-

     R(T) tr                exp(-iTn2)  dn              i  .  r  r  i4  1           (4.3)
                                                                    T<
                   2:

which shows that the function has a branch point at the origin where the
function diverges like 7-l". The same divergence /3-"2 appears in the
trace of the heat kernel. We may expect many such branch points on the
real time axis.

   This example shows that the trace of the propagator may be a highly
singular object to manipulate. Let us mention here that mathematicians
have proposed to cure this problem by considering tr exp(-a%), which
has a better behavior for appropriate exponents v [128,129]. In the

4 present example the appropriate exponent would be v = so that the

dense set of singularities may be transformed into a set of poles along the
real axis of a . This procedure is called a homogenization of the spectrum,
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 177

which is thereby transformed into a spectrum with a uniform distribution.
A similar procedure is to consider the staircase function not only as a
function of the energy but also of the inverse of the Planck constant
y = h-'. The quantization in energy is then equivalent to a quantization
of the inverse of the Planck constant [128]

00  m

(This quantization of the y variable will be illustrated with the
Morse oscillator in Section X.D.) A Laplace transform of the staircase
function with respect to the variable y becomes a trace, i.e.,
E~=,exp[-ay,(E)], which may be better behaved. Here we will not
continue in this direction but we believe that such a procedure may turn
out to be important.

   Another method of regularization is to consider the trace of the

A , propagator multiplied by a well-behaved observable that is, tr A& T ) .

Such a regularization is naturally carried out when physical observables,
such as the photoabsorption cross-section [Eq. (2.11)], are considered. If

the initial state is the ground state I&), the integrand of Eq. (2.11)

becomes a time-dependent oscillation plus the trace of the propagator

multiplied by A = dI&) . (+ol& This trace turns out to be well defined

because of the property of exponential damping of the ground state & at

large distances, which introduces an effective cutoff at high quantum
numbers n in Eq. (4.1). This regularization has an effect that is similar to
the analytic continuation in the complex time plane.

   In unbounded systems of the scattering type, there is another diver-
gence that appears and that is due to the infinite volume of space. Indeed,
the trace can be calculated in the position representation like

which is infinite, particularly for the propagator [Eq. (2.50)] of the free
particle, as the integration volume is infinite. This divergence is cured by
considering the difference between the propagator of the problem of
interest and the propagator that describes the asymptotic dynamics of the
particles at large separations [58]. Since both propagators have the same
behavior at large distances their difference may have a well-defined trace

This regularization has already been used in Eqs. (2.10) and (2.14),
178  P. GASPARD ET AL.

where the problem has the same origin. Physically, it is natural to
consider this difference since it amounts to comparing a property like a
time delay between the system under study and a reference system
[58,64].

                              B. Short-Time Behavior

The behavior of the trace function around the origin T = 0 is of particular
importance because it determines the Thomas-Fermi-Weyl-Wigner
average level density. This behavior is derived in a systematic way thanks
to the quasiclassical method where the heat kernel is expressed in the
Weyl-Wigner representation [29,67-691. The heat kernel obeys an
equation similar to Eq. (2.17) and can be expanded in powers of the
Planck constant as in Eq. (2.18) if the potential is smooth. This expansion
is standard and can be found elsewhere [130]. After the substitution
j3 = iTih, we obtain

where the expansion appears as a series of powers of the time T rather

than of the Planck constant. Equation (4.7) is convergent for Im T <0, as

aforementioned. The short-time behavior is essentially determined by the
classical Hamiltonian. If we assume that the potential increases in every
direction as V - lq(" at large distances, the trace of the propagator will
diverge at the origin as 1/Tf("2+1'").

                                  C. Path Integral

The trace of the propagator can be expressed as a Feynman path integral
by the same method as developed with Eqs. (2.51-2.56) as
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 179

We remark that similar integrals are encountered in the evaluation of
partition functions in statistical mechanics [79].

   Contrary to the path integral of Section 11, here the multiple integral
extends over closed paths with q,, = q,, which is a condition imposed by
the trace [19]. Therefore, the classical orbits that are selected by the
stationary-phase condition are also closed: q(0) = q ( T ) . Two kinds of
classical orbits satisfy this condition:

   1. There are the equilibrium points for which q(t) = q, at all times

      0 < t < T if d,V(q,) = 0. The fixed points occur at the critical

       energies E, = V(q,). In typical systems, they are isolated at the
       bottom of the potential well or at a saddle, but they may also be
      nonisolated in systems such as billiards, at E, = 0.

  + 2. There are the periodic orbits of period T for which q(t T ) = q(t)

      at all times 0 < t < T. The periodic orbits are multiples r of a prime

      periodic orbit p of period T,, so that T = I T p . Since the prime
      period T,, = T p ( E )generally varies with energy, we find a discrete
      set of periodic orbits at the different energies determined by T =
       YT,,( E p J .

   We already described these two kinds of orbits and their stability in
Section 111, where several examples were given, in particular in the
period-energy diagrams. These diagrams will play an important role in
the following considerations.

   For both types of classical orbits, the same methods as developed in
Section I1 for the semiclassical propagator will be applied in the following
two sections.

                     D. Contribution of Equilibrium Points

The equilibrium points are characterized by their linear and nonlinear
stabilities [71]. The linear stability is determined by the eigenvalues of the
Hessian of the potential according to Eq. (3.26). Near an equilibrium
point, the Feynman path integral [Eq. (4.8)] can be evaluated by the
stationary-phase method of Section 11. The action functional is expanded
in a Taylor series in terms of the deviations with respect to the equi-

librium point, 6" = {qi,- q i s } r l i ,as in Section I1 for the propagator, ex-

cept that here we have an extra integral, since the path is closed due to
the trace. We have a series of imaginary Gaussian integrals and their
moments, as in Eq. (2.74), with d N f [ instead of d ( N - l ) f (and W,, =
-TV(q,) = - E S T . Moreover, here the matrix of the second derivatives of
180            P. GASPARD ET AL.

the action is the following Nf X Nf matrix

         a -1 0 0 0    0                    0 -1
                                            00
         -1 a -1 0 0   0                    00

D =`- 1  0 -1  a -1 0  0                          + O(At')
     At        ... ... .. . .
                                                            (4.9)

         0 0 0 O O . . . -1 a -1
         -1 0 0 0 0 * * - 0 -1 a

where the f x f matrix a has the elements

                                                            (4.10)

The matrix [Eq. (4.9)] is similar to Eq. (2.75) except that we find
elements in the corners of the matrix [Eq. (4.9)] and the diagonal
submatrices are all identical because of the steadiness of the trajectory at
the equilibrium point. The higher derivatives are given by Eq. (2.78)
evaluated at the equilibrium point.

   The imaginary Gaussian integrals and their moments can be evaluated
by Eqs. (2.79) and (2.80) with M = N f .

   The determinant of the matrix D can be calculated as follows. Each
submatrix [Eqs. (4.10)] can be diagonalized by the orthogonal trans-
formation 0, which diagonalizes the Hessian of the potential. The

elements of the transformed matrix 0 can then be gathered in N blocks

f Xf, which have the same form as Eq. (4.9) but with scalars instead of

matrices. The determinant of each block can then be calculated by
recurrence to obtain

         n det D = - 1 f (A, + A i l - 2)[1 + O(At)]        (4.11)
                   AtNf k = i

where A, = exp(iw,T) or exp(h,T) depending on whether the direction is
stable or unstable. On the other hand, the inverse of the matrix D is given
by the classical Green function solution of Eq. (2.73) along the trajectory

qCl(t)= q, and with periodic boundary conditions 9$(t, r') = %Jr + T ,t').

   Equation (2.71) can be solved in normal coordinates Q, where the
Hessian of the potential is dingonal. The Green function is then given by
G(t,t ` )= OTg(t,t')O, where 0 is the orthogonal matrix that diagonalizes
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 181
the Hessian and g is a diagonal matrix with the diagonal elements

                    + C O S [ ~ ,-( ~t' T/2)]             (4.12)

           g k ( t , l ' ) = - 20, sin(w, T/2)  (t > t')

The frequency wk has to be replaced by +ih, for an unstable direction.
   The contribution of the equilibrium points (e.p.) to the trace Eq. (4.8)

can then be written as

                                                          (4.13)

where the first coefficient is

with the notation .fi'l.,.i, = d"V/dQil d Q i for the derivatives of the

potential in the normal coordinates. The &efficient [Eq. (4.14)] as well

-&..i as the following ones can be represented by diagrams where a vertex with
n legs is associated with each factor  and a line with each Green

function g k ( t , t ' ) . Integrals are then perfGrmed over the times of the

different vertices (see Fig. 4). Note the similarity with the case of the

propagator in Section 11. In Eq. (4.13), we used the important property

that the result of the Taylor series appearing in Eq. (2.74) can be

transformed into the exponential of a series involving only connected

diagrams.

By using the Taylor expansion in a series of x = exp(-iw,T), the

leading term of Eq. (4.13) corresponding to the equilibrium point s can
182  P. GASPARD ET AL.

be rewritten into the following form

             if

         tr@T)I $,leading = nl...n -0 exp(-$T[E,+C j=1 h w j ( n j + $ ) ] } (4.15)

                                                    f-

which is a sum of oscillators with frequencies equal to the energy
eigenvalues at the harmonic approximation, including the zero-point
energy.

   If we consider the term corresponding to the first term of the

correction C, in Eq. (4.14), we have

     T  1 + 1 e - I W k T                           + e-IwlT

     X 2iwk2iol 1 - e W i w k T 1 - e - i w                   (4.16)

We see that the imaginary exponentials appear in functions of the
following types, which can also be expanded in Taylor series as done for
the leading terms

          cm                                                  (4.17)
                                                              (4.18)
     + _ _1 _ -- (n 1)x"

     (1-x)2 n=O

                                                              (4.19)

for 1x1 < 1. Using this property, we get for k # I

            c +)I} f                                          (4.20)

     f x exp{ - T [E, + hwj(nj+
                        j=l

We observe that this correction is proportional to T ,which turns out to be
a general property. Therefore, if the corrections are again brought into
the exponential form, exp(-iTElh), corrections are added to the har-

i), monic energy eigenvalues, E = E, + C j hwj(nj+ and we obtain the
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 183

anharmonic corrections as will be shown explicitly in the following
Section V.

               E. Contribution of Periodic Orbits

Different kinds of periodic orbits are encountered whether they are real

or complex, isolated or nonisolated, stable or unstable, bifurcating or not.

Moreover, they may proliferate exponentially, as in the chaotic case, or

subexponentially in more regular systems such as the circle billiard. As

illustrated with the examples of Section I11 the spectrum of the lengths is

of special importance because it contains information on the discrete or

continuous degeneracy of the periodic orbits [1111.

The integration is similar to the case of the equilibrium points. The

integral [Eq. (4.8)] is evaluated around each periodic orbit by the

stationary-phase method, which transforms the integral into an imaginary

Gaussian integral and a series of its moments, as in Eq. (2.74). The type

of the periodic orbit turns out to be essential when we expand the path

action in Taylor series around the orbit. Indeed, the result of the

Gaussian integrals are given in terms of the determinant and the inverse
               = Tubof the second variations of the path action
of the matrix

according to Eqs. (2.79) and (2.80). The integration has a meaning

under the condition that those quantities exist so that we must require

det D # 0.

                   1. Real, Unstable, Isolated Periodic Orbit

Let us suppose that the periodic orbit is real, unstable, isolated, and far
from any bifurcation. Since it is a one-dimensional solution of Newton's
equations, one of the positions takes an arbitrary value, that is, qlo,while
all the other positions are then determined by Newton's equations and
the fixed value of T . Therefore, the separation of the path with respect to

the classical solution is a (Nf- 1)-component vector { 6 " )= { qin-

q~c"(nAt)}with the double index a = (i, n ) running over the values

n = 0, . . . ,N - 1 and i = 1, . . . , f. The component with i = 1 and t =

nAt = 0 is now vanishing.
   The trace Eq. (4.8) can then be expanded as in Eq. (2.74) except that

the integral is carried out on [19]

                                                     (4.21)

instead of Jd"-"f(. In (4.21), the sum extends over all the prime

periodic orbits p and their repetitions r = 1 , 2 , . . . . The classical action is
18.1.                     P. GASPARD ET AL.

now evaluated for the periodic orbit T = rTp

Here the second derivatives of the action form the (Nf-1)x ( N f - 1)

matrix

                  .?  0   0   0 ...             0   ,.  '

        -1                                         -1

        A1            -1  0   0   ...           00
        -1                -1  0   ...
                      A2      -1  ...           00
        0             -1  A3
                                                0          + 0(At2)
                              ..

        0 0 0 0 ... -1 AN-2 -1
        0 0 0 0 . . . 0 -1 AN-12

where the f X f matrices A,, have the elements

&, with i, j = 1, . . . ,f.The matrix is the same matrix as Eq. (4.24) but

for i, j-= 2, . . . ,f and at t = 0. Here 1 denotes the f x f identity matrix,

while 1 is the (f- 1) X f matrix formed by removing the first line from

the f X f identity matrix. The symbol T denotes the transpose. The
corrections in At2 are negligible since we will take the limit At+O at the
end of the calculation and keep only the expressions forming standard
integrals over T = N A t .

   The higher derivatives [Eq. (2.78)] are now evaluated along the
periodic orbit qc,(nAt). The imaginary Gaussian integrals and their

moments are calculated from Eqs. (2.79) and (2.80) with M = Nf-1.

   The determinant of Eq. (4.23) is nonvanishing and given by [131]

        p det 113, = - 1 q& d,T det[m(T) - 1][1 + O(At)]   (4.25)

where m(T) is the monodromy matrix obtained by linearizing the
PoincarC symplectic return map over the full period T at the prime
periodic orbit p as explained in Section 111. Introducing the stability
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 185

eigenvalues {h'k'(T)}of the periodic orbit p over time T we have

                 nf - 1                            (4.26)

         det[m(T) - 11 = [A'k'(T)+ A'k'(T)-' - 21

                                           k=l

These stability eigenvalues refer to perturbations that are transverse to
the flow and are related to the Lyapunov exponents by IA'"(T)I =

exp( 1.

   By recovering the continuous time limit, the inverse of the second
derivative matrix [Eq. (4.23)] can be expressed in terms of the classical
Green function, which is a solution of Eq. (2.71). The fact that a line and
a column are missing in Eq. (4.23) implies that the Green function must
satisfy the following particular boundary conditions [191

                      %lj(tot,' ) = glj(to+ T, t ' ) = 0
      %ij(tot,' ) = Y,(t,+ T ,t ' ) for i = 2, . . . ,f j = 1,. . . ,f (4.27)

where to is the initial time corresponding to the arbitrary coordinate ql0.
   When the results are gathered, the contribution of the periodic orbits

to the trace of the evolution operator is given by [19]

1 tr R ( T )
                P.0

= c [t T exp rwp- i +rpp + i sgn a,~, + c:=, ( i f i ) " ~ , , ( r ~ ~ ) ]
                   P
P ,r     12.irhr(a,Tp) det(mL - 1)11''

(T=rTp)

                                                   (4.28)

where W ( T )= rWp. Together with the other phase coming from
sgn(d,T,), the Maslov index p p is determined as in Section I1 by the
number of negative eigenvalues of the second derivative matrix [Eq.
(4.23)]. The index entering in Eq. (4.28) can be related to the Morse
index ve of the propagator Eq. (2.84). When we take the trace of the
propagator Eq. (2.84), we identify the initial with the final positions,
q, = q, and we perform an extra integral over q that can be evaluated
with the stationary-phase method. This last integral selects the periodic
orbits of classical dynamics. The extra stationary-phase integral intro-
duces an extra phase that has to be added to the phase exp(-i.irvel2) to

give the phase in Eq. (4.28), namely, exp[-irpp/2 + in sgn(d,Tp)/4] of

the periodic orbit. The extra index is determined as before by counting
186     P. GASPARD ET AL.

the number of negative eigenvalues of the Hessian appearing in the last
stationary-phase integral. The Maslov index will be discussed in detail in
one of the following sections.

   The corrections are given as a series in powers of 6 with coefficients
C,,, which can be calculated in terms of the classical Green functions and
the high derivatives of the potential along the periodic orbit. We have
explicitly evaluated the first of these coefficients, which is given by [19]

        4;l d t o .lYT d3V(t) d3V(t')
     +  dtdt' dqi dqj dq, d q l dq, aq,

                                                                                    (4.29)

Diagrams are associated with the integrals defining the coefficients, as in

s', Fig. 4 of Section 11, except that here there is an extra time average

T dt, over the initial time t o ,which occurs in the boundary condition
[Eq. (4.27)].

                      2. Other Types of Periodic Orbits

If the periodic orbit is nonisolated and forms a continuous family of
dimension v in the energy shell, the integration of tr k ( T ) must be
carried out by leaving out v among the integration variables:

                                                                                    (4.30)

This is the case for systems with continuous symmetries, as in the circle
billiard, as well as in systems without continuous symmetry, as the Sinai
billiard or the Bunimovich stadium, where there appear continuous
families of marginally unstable periodic orbits called bouncing ball orbits
[ 132-1331.

   Considering the order of magnitude of their contribution to the trace
of the propagator, the amplitudes of the nonisolated periodic orbits are of
the order 6-"'2 with v > l , whereas the isolated periodic orbits have
amplitudes with v = 1. We see that the nonisolated periodic orbits have
larger contributions than the isolated ones.

   At this point, let us also mention the complex periodic orbits. Those
orbits may also contribute to the path integral evaluated in the limit
6- 0. Their contribution may be necessary to guarantee the consistency
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 187

of the semiclassical asymptotic series as shown for the quartic oscillator
[129]. From the physical point of view, they are essential to explain the
metastability of quantized states in several situations dominated by
tunneling phenomena, as we will see in a following section.

                                F. Simple Examples

To illustrate the preceding technique, we consider two simple examples,
which are the harmonic and the Morse oscillators described in Section 111.

                              1 , Harmonic Oscillator

The harmonic oscillator is a singular case in several respects. The trace of
its propagator can be directly evaluated from Eq. (4.1)

                1               (4.31)

tr              = 2i sin(oT/2)

for T # 2.rrrlw. The same result can be obtained with the path integral
Eq. (4.8), which is immediately an imaginary Gaussian integral without
taking a Taylor expansion around its equilibrium point at q = 0.

   The trace [Eq. (4.31)] presents poles on the real time axis at Re T =

2rrr/w with r E H where the trace diverges as -i(-)r/(T - 2.rrr/o). The

trace has an analytic continuation in the upper half-plane of the complex
time T.

                                2. Morse Oscillator

The situation is more complicated for the Morse oscillator [Eq. (3.31)]
because of the anharmonicity, as seen in Fig. 7. The period increases near
the dissociation energy according to Eq. (3.33). The quantum eigenener-
gies are given by [98]

                                (4.32)

where wo = a m is the frequency of the harmonic oscillations near the
equilibrium point and where the quantum number n takes the values

n =O, 1,2,...,                  j'2 (4.33)

Int(-) denoting the integer part.
   At the semiclassical level, the trace of the propagator has two

contributions: the first one from the equilibrium point q = 0 and the
second one from the periodic orbits. The contribution of the equilibrium
188                           P . GASPARD ET AL.

point is of the form

                              R(T)le,p. 1                                               (4.34)
                          tr  2: 2i sin(w,T/2)

up to higher order corrections due to anharmonicities near the equilib-
rium point [see Eqs. (4.16-4.20)].

   On the other hand, the periodic orbits contribute by Eq. (4.28), but
we have det(mi - 1) = 1 for this one-degree-of-freedom system. The
action W for the single periodic orbit p repeated r times can be obtained

by W = S - ET from the reduced action S = $ p d q at the energy E

                              m) 4nr                                                    (4.35)

                          S ( E )=- D ( 1 -

                                           WO

The period [Eq. (3.33)] is obtained as T = d,S. Accordingly, we have

                                                                                        (4.36)

There exist thresholds where higher repetitions r occur at times T =
2 n - r / ~ , .A new term then enters the periodic-orbit (p.0.) contribution. In
principle, the behavior of the trace should be replaced by uniform
approximations at these thresholds. We obtain

t r k ( T ) l = ( T4n)-D      x r m a x = I n t ( w 0 T / 2 ? r )
                                        r=l
          p.0. hwoT

                          (7r) ' 4nrD 2nr D
     x exp{i [--q -                                                - D T ] - inr + i -

                                                                                        (4.37)

The semiclassical approximation to the trace of the propagator is
therefore given by

The preceding formulas reproduce the oscillations in the trace of the
propagator very well, as seen in Fig. 19 on the real time axis. The
short-time behavior is taken into account by the first pole of the
equilibrium point contribution at T = 0. Moreover, the equilibrium point
contribution is at the origin of the alternating peaks in the trace but this
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 189
             10, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

lo^"""'""''""''"'"''^
0                    20              30
      lo ReT

-5    /  ,  .  I  I      I  I  '  '  I
  35
      40 R e T 45                        50

Figure 19. Trace of the propagator of the Morse oscillator [Eq. (3.31)] with h = 0.25,

oo= 1, and D = 50 versus Re T for Im T = -0.1, and comparison with its semiclassical

approximation [Eqs. (4.34-4.38)]. (a) and ( b ) show the real and imaginary parts of the

exact trace (solid line) compared with the equilibrium-point contribution [Eq. (4.34)] to the

trace (dashed line), which indicates that the peak at the origin as well as the following peaks

are due to the equilibrium-point contribution although the extra high-frequency oscillations

are not. (c) Exact trace (solid line) compared with the semiclassical trace [Eq. (4.38)]

including both the contributions of the equilibrium point and of the periodic orbits (dashed

line with dots), which shows that the extra oscillations are due to the periodic orbits. There

is a remarkable agreement between the successive thresholds Tr= Zxrio,. In the vicinity of

the thresholds, the semiclassical trace could be improved by a uniform approximation.
190  P. GASPARD ET AL.

contribution cannot explain the oscillations on top of these peaks. These
oscillations become more and more important as T increases due to
anharmonicities in the oscillations. These anharmonicities are taken into
account by the periodic-orbit contribution [Eq. (4.37)J. We find matching
problems between the different contributions at the level of the thres-
holds. The equilibrium point produces a pole at each threshold T = 2 r r /
oowhile the rth repetition of the real periodic orbit gives a discontinuity
that, in principle, should be smoothed by uniform approximation.
Nevertheless, we have neglected the anharmonic corrections entering in
the equilibrium point contribution [Eq. (4.13)]. These corrections con-
tribute to multiple poles at each threshold with a multiplicity increasing
with the power of h of the correction. Therefore, we conclude that there
must exist a cancelation mechanism between these singularities. To our
knowledge, this problem is unsolved today in spite of the simplicity of the
Morse oscillator. A similar behavior is expected around the equilibrium
points in systems with more degrees of freedom. This example illustrates
the fact that both equilibrium points and periodic orbits contribute to the
trace of the propagator in the time domain.

   We will now turn to the energy domain since our purpose is the
calculation of the energy eigenvalues.

  V. ENERGY DOMAIN: EQUILIBRIUM-POINT QUANTIZATION

The trace of the Green operator is given by the semisided Fourier
transform [Eq. (2.4)] of the trace of the evolution operator, which we
have obtained in Section IV. First, we will evaluate the semisided Fourier
transform according to the principles of the theory of distributions in time

+ and energy. The integration of a kernel like exp[-i(E, - E ) T / h ] then

gives a distribution of the form 1/(E - En i0). According to this
method, the periodic orbits turn out to have a negligible contribution. In
this case of resummation around the equilibrium points, we will speak
about equilibrium point quantization.

                           A. Evaluation of the Integral

The semisided Fourier transform [Eq. (2.4)] is evaluated keeping the
terms that oscillate linearly in time. Such terms appear in the contribu-
tions of the equilibrium points to the trace of the propagator. We
observed for the example of the Morse oscillator in Section IV.F.2 that
the short-time behavior at T = 0 is taken into account by the equilibrium
point contribution [Eq. (4.13)]. It is true in general that the equilibrium
point quantization includes the short-time behavior of the propagator,
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 191

which can be obtained alternatively by the Weyl-Wigner method of
Section 1V.B.

   Our purpose will be to derive the contribution of the Green operator
to the trace by keeping all the &corrections in Eq. (4.13), which are due
to the anharmonicities around the equilibrium points.

   After obtaining the corrections in the form of Eq. (4.20), followed by
a regrouping of these corrections into an exponential form, exp(-iTE/h),
we turn to the energy domain and calculate the trace of the Green
operator [Eq. (2.4)]. The leading term [Eq. (4.15)] of Eq. (4.13)
contributes by the familiar expression

where we recognize the usual energy levels of a set of harmonic
oscillators. Note that wj in Eq. (5.1) must be replaced by -iA, for an

unstable direction. The other possibility, +iA,, is excluded in the Green

operator of the forward semigroup where the integral [Eq. (2.4)] extends

over T >0.

   The term of Eq. (4.13) next to the leading one, which corresponds to
Eq. (4.20), brings in anharmonic corrections that can be evaluated by
noting that the factor T in Eq. (4.20) is equivalent to a derivative
( h / i ) ( d l d E ) in front of the integral [Eq. (2.4)] defining the Green
operator. Since the corrections can be transformed into an exponential,
we conclude that the contribution of the equilibrium point qs is of the
form

so that the energy levels are shifted by the quantities -ynl...nf with respect
to the eigenenergies of the harmonic oscillators. For instance, we have

for the term [Eq. (4.20)].
   Assuming that there is no degeneracy between the frequencies { o k }

we obtain the eigenenergies as a series of the form

cf   f
i) i) + + + E = E, AE, f h k ( n ,
k=l  ksl=l  xkl(nk+ i ) ( n ,+ + 6(fi3) (5.4
192  P. GASPARD ET AL.

where the coefficients xkl and the constant AE2 are functions of the
frequencies and the derivatives fklm and fkkll of the potential,

A similar result can be calculated by conventional perturbation theory or

by Van Vleck contact transformation [134-1361. The same result with
AE, = 0 can be derived from the classical Birkhoff normal form of

the Hamiltonian with the semiclassical substitution (Pi" + w f Q f ) / 2 +

+ i). hoj(n, The term AE, may be interpreted as the contribution of the

anharmonicities of the potential to the zero-point energy.
   The result [Eqs. (5.4-5.7)] is valid for the bottom of a potential as well

as for a saddle point with ( k h , *A). In the latter case, Eq. ( 5 . 4 ) gives
the complex eigenenergies of the metastable states associated with the
saddle point [137, 1381. A calculation shows that Im AE2 = 0, Im xI1= 0,
Im x Z 2= 0, and Re x12= 0. Accordingly, the real energies and the half-
widths of the resonant states are given by
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 193

&nk = E, + Re AE, + hw(n + i)+ Re x l l ( n+ +)'

+ + Re xZ2(k+ +)' O(fi')                          (5.8)

The resonances that dominate the dynamics at long time have the
smallest half-width, that is, k = O . We see that all these dominant
resonances have the same lifetimes in the harmonic approximation. The
anharmonicities modify this result. The lifetimes may then take different
values but the important point is that the resonances remain labeled by
the same integers as in the harmonic approximation. In this sense, the
assignment of quantum numbers remains possible, which we associate
with the notion of effective separability.

                                   B. Discussion

The effective separability exists as long as the Dunham expansion [Eq.
(5.4)] is valid [139]. However, this expansion breaks down for different
reasons.

   Classically, the expansion [Eq. (5.4)] is equivalent to the existence of
the Birkhoff normal form of the Hamiltonian [71,140-1411. The normal
form is established by using a nonlinear canonical transformation from
the original coordinates p, q to a new set of coordinates P, Q. This
nonlinear transformation can be expressed as a series that is known to
diverge in the presence of homoclinic orbits [1411. Conversely, homo-
clinic orbits are at the origin of classical chaos so that there is a close
relationship between the breakdown of the reduction to a Birkhoff
normal form and the emergence of chaos. The reduction to the previous
normal form often becomes impossible when the frequencies are close to

rational ratios like 112, 113, 114, where the coefficients x k l , y k l m , .. . of

the Dunham expansion may become large due to small denominators. It
is under the same conditions of near commensurability between the
frequencies that the KAM theorem no longer applies [2,3,71].

   In quantum mechanics, the breakdown of the validity of the Dunham
expansion may be understood in similar terms. When the frequencies are
close to rationals, the denominators that define the coefficients [Eqs.
(5.5) and ( 5 . 6 ) ] are small and the perturbation series badly approximates
the eigenenergies. This situation is known in molecular systems by the
names of Fermi or Darling-Dennison interactions [134]. In these circum-
stances, off-diagonal terms of the Hamiltonian start to play a role that can
194  P. GASPARD ET AL.

no longer be neglected. Due to those off-diagonal terms, the energy
levels are affected by Wigner repulsion so that the discrete spectrum
acquires the properties of the eigenvalue spectra of random matrices
[ 1421.

   In this section, we showed that the resummation on an equilibrium
point is essentially equivalent to perturbation theory using as basis
functions the eigenfunctions of the normal mode harmonic oscillators or,
equivalently, to a reduction by quantum Van Vleck contact transforma-
tions. If we disregard the constant AE2, this method is equivalent to the
reduction to a Birkhoff normal form by a classical contact transformation
followed by a semiclassical quantization of the normal mode action
variables. These procedures extend the WKB method from 1F systems to
systems with more than one degree of freedom. The method is successful
even in the presence of mild classical chaos if the quasiperiodic motions
remain dominant in phase space [143-1461. This success is based on the
results of the KAM theorem, which guarantees that the motion remains
partially regular in the vicinity of the equilibrium points where an
effective separability holds.

   In this chapter, we would like to emphasize the role of the periodic
orbits. According to our previous discussion in Section IV, the equilib-
rium points are not the only classical trajectories that contribute to the
trace formulas. The periodic orbits also contribute. Near an equilibrium
point, we may understand that their role is negligible because a line of
constant T rarely crosses a period, as a function of energy, near the
energy of an equilibrium point in Figs. 6 and 7. From this point of view,
the anharmonicities enhance the role of the periodic orbits. However, the
anharmonicities do not necessarily preclude the existence of an effective
separability [138].

   The periodic orbits proliferate exponentially in the highly excited
regimes where the classical motion becomes chaotic, which signals the
transition to a regime where the equilibrium point quantization fails. The
effective separability breaks down and the role of the periodic orbits
becomes dominant in these regimes where a particular equilibrium point
around which the phase space structure is ordered does not exist. It is the
purpose of the following section to describe the periodic-orbit quantiza-
tion.

VI. ENERGY DOMAIN: PERIODIC-ORBIT QUANTIZATION

The semisided Fourier transform (or Laplace transform) in Eq. (2.4) can
also be evaluated by the stationary-phase method. According to this
method, we find several critical points: the first one is the origin of time,
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 195

T = 0, which contributes to the Fermi-Thomas-Weyl-Wigner average
level density. Next, we find the contributions from the periodic orbits
where the phase S = W ( T )- ET is stationary. The equilibrium points do
not contribute in the stationary-phase method because the phases of their
contributions increase linearly with time. Accordingly, no critical point is
selected if the stationary-phase condition is applied to terms of the form
(4.20). Therefore, the equilibrium points do not contribute to the trace of
the Green operator if G ( E )is derived from k ( T )by the stationary-phase
method. Thus, we will refer to periodic-orbit quantization when re-
summation is carried out around the periodic orbits.

                 A. Contribution of the Paths of Zero Length

In the stationary-phase integration of Eq. (2.4), T = 0 is a critical point
that produces a very important contribution to the trace of the Green
operator. This contribution can be attributed to paths of zero length since
the propagation is infinitesimal if T = 0. The real part of tr G ( E ) is in
general divergent but its imaginary part is finite for bounded systems.

   According to Eq. (2.9), the imaginary part of tr G ( E ) gives the
average level density considered by Fermi, Thomas, Weyl, Wigner, and
others. The level density is the derivative of the staircase function,
defined by

where e(.) is the Heaviside function. The smooth function obtained by

averaging over the stairs of this function is the average staircase function
N,,(E), which can be obtained by integrating the average level density.

   As for the equilibrium points and the periodic orbits, this contribution
can be expanded in powers of the Planck constant [130]. For smooth
potentials, the first terms of the average staircase function are given by
196  P. GASPARD ET AL.

This expression is obtained using the Weyl-Wigner representation of
operators as functions over the (9,p) space (see Section 1I.D). In systems
with Dirichlet, Neumann, or more complicated boundary conditions,
further corrections appear that are in odd powers of fi with respect to the
leading term [147].

   In two-dimensional billiards, the average staircase function of the
Helmholtz equation, ( A + K')I,!J = 0 , is given by a formula the leading
term of which was derived by Weyl while the next-to-leading terms were
obtained thereafter by several authors [148]

     + c - + + -' 2-Oi21-h
                    7~
     corners 2 4 ~ 0 , - 6 O(K In K )  (6.3)

J- with 0 < 5 1 The quantity K is the wavenumber related to the energy

by K = 2rnEifi so that here the wavenumber plays the role of the
inverse of the Planck constant, K -K1. The parameter A is the area of
the billiard, L is the length of its perimeter, the parameters Oi are the
interior corner angles, R ( l ) is the local radius of curvature (measured
positive when concave), $ d t is an integral along the arc of perimeter,
and h is the number of smooth holes in the domain that characterizes the
connectivity of the billiard. The different signs correspond, respectively,
to the Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions. We see that the hard
walls introduce terms in the average staircase function that have odd
powers of the Planck constant with respect to the leading term and that
are sensitive to the boundary conditions. These new terms are not present
in Eq. (6.2) for smooth potentials. We also remark that the corner term
converges to the curvature term if we approximate the smooth billiard by
a polygonal billiard and take the continuous limit,

   Similarly, in three-dimensional billiards we have [12,1481

where V is the volume of the billiard, S is the area of its surface, R , and
R , are the local two main radii of curvatures of the surface (measured
positive when concave), $ d u is a surface integral, O,(C) are the angles
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 197

formed by the walls at the edges of the billiard, and J d t ? are integrals
along the arcs of length of the edges. Balian and Bloch [12] also derived a
formula for general boundary conditions where the wave function is
proportional to its gradient on the surface of the billiard.

   To illustrate the power of these formulas, Fig. 20 shows a nice
agreement between the exact and average staircase functions for the
circle billiard.

         B. Contribution of Unstable and Isolated Periodic Orbits
According to the discussion in Section V, periodic orbits become im-
portant in nonseparable systems, especially when the system is classically
chaotic. We will now continue the calculations of Section 1V.E and obtain
the contribution of the periodic orbits to the trace of the Green operator.

                         1. Stationary-Phase Integration
As in Section IV.E.1, we suppose that the periodic orbit is unstable and
isolated. To go from the time to the energy domain, we have to carry out
the semisided Fourier transform [Eq. (2.4)] to obtain the periodic orbit

               2000

1000

n

"0    2000  4000  6000  8000

            E

    Figure 20. Staircase function of the circle billiard: comparison between the exact (solid
line), and the average staircase function [Eq. (6.3)] (dashed line). Insert: initial part of the
staircase function.
198                 P. GASPARD ET AL.

contribution

              1 46 I tr G(E) =
                    dT exp(f E T ) tr k ( T )                                                                                                  (6.5)

              p.0.                                                                                                                       p.0.

where the lower limit E > 0 is to remind us that the contribution from the

critical point T=O has already been taken into account, as in Section
V1.A.

   By introducing the trace of the propagator given by Eq. (4.28), we

have a new integral over time T with the oscillatory kernel exp[(ilfi)(W +

T E ) ] ,which we evaluate once again by the stationary-phase method. The
phase is stationary when a , W + E = 0 , that is, at the periods T = r T p
[75]. In going from the time to the energy domain, it is convenient to
introduce the reduced action

              S(E)=fp.dq=W(T)+ET                                                                                                               (6.6)

where the time T is eliminated for the energy E by the period-energy
relations T = r T p ( E )for each periodic orbit. Equation (6.6) is a Legendre
transform from the action function W ( T )to the reduced action S ( E ) .

+ From the previous stationary-phase condition a,W E = 0, we obtain

T = a,S for the full period T = rT, and Tp= d,Sp for the fundamental
period (with S = r S p ) .

   By Taylor expansion around the stationary periods, the integral is
reduced to a sum of Gaussian integrals and its moments. Performing the
integrals as before with Eq. (2.57), we obtain [19]

en where the coefficients depend on the energy E , since they are

evaluated at T = rT,(E). For the first of them, we get [19]

where C, is given by Eq. (4.29) and

                                                                                            T

                                                                                                                                      1

                                 = I(a,T,) det(mi - l ) l I i 2
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 199
The next coefficients can be obtained systematically.

                             2. The Maslov Index

It is time to come back to the Maslov index p, as it appears in Eq. (6.7).
We have already discussed the Morse or Maslov index in Section I1 on the
semiclassical formula for the propagator from q, to q in a time T. The
Morse index v, associated with the classical orbit 8 in Eq. (2.84) is given
by the number of negative eigenvalues of the second derivative matrix
[Eq. (2.75)]. The works of Morse have shown that it is equal to the

number of conjugate points on the classical orbit e as we explained in

Section I1 [72].
   We have not mentioned an alternative possibility to go from the time

to the energy domain, which is to derive a semiclassical approximation of
the Green function by taking the semisided Fourier transform [Eq. (2.4)]
of the semiclassical propagator [Eq. (2.84)] [ll?1491. Each new
stationary-phase integral adds a new term to the index that is given by the
number of negative eigenvalues of the quadratic form appearing in the
corresponding imaginary Gaussian. This principle is very general and we
can see an illustration of this mechanism with the addition of the phase
-(n-/4) sgn a,T, when going from the time domain equation (4.28) to its
energy domain correspondent [Eq. (6.7)]. Indeed, we recognize the sign
of the quadratic form entering the imaginary Gaussian in the last time

integral since sgn d,T, = sgn a$., Accordingly, the semiclassical Green

+ function would have a Morse index given by K( = v, a!, where a, is the

contribution to the index from the time integral.
   In this context, we can take the trace of the semiclassical Green

function, G,,(q, qo, E ) , to obtain the trace formula [Eq. (6.7)] by
identifying the initial with the final positions, q, = q, and performing an
extra integral over q, which can be evaluated with the stationary-phase
method. This last integral selects the periodic orbits of the classical
dynamics. The extra stationary-phase integral introduces an additional
phase that has to be added to the Morse index K( to give the Maslov
index p, of the periodic orbit. In this way, the works by Gutzwiller [149]
have shown that the Maslov index p, is composed of two contributions,
which emerge from the derivation of the trace formula. The first
contribution is associated with the energy-domain Green function, while
the second contribution is related to the formation of the trace with
respect to G,,(q, q,, E ) as we just mentioned. According to Robbins
[150], the Maslov index may be evaluated as

p p = K~ - sgn(F)  (6.10)
200  P. GASPARD ET AL.

The first contribution counts the zero-crossings of the off-diagonal matrix
element (dq/ dp) of the stability matrix in the surface-of-section coordi-
nate system (q,p). In the second contribution, sgn(F) refers to the
difference between the number of positive and negative eigenvalues of
the 2(f- 1) x 2(f- 1) matrix F,

                        (6.11)

where a, b, c, and d are ( f - 1) X ( f - 1) matrices entering the definition
of the 2(f - 1) X 2(f - 1) monodromy matrix

                                                                                   (6.12)

The matrix F appears in the evaluation of the stationary-phase integral of
the trace of the semiclassical Green operator, dqG,,(q, q; E ) , which
contains the phase exp[iS,(q, q; E ) l h ] . The quadratic form of the
stationary-phase integral involves the expression of the PoincarC mapping
as an interlaced transformation between the variables (q,-', q,) and

(P,-~,p,) instead of the forward transformation from the variables

(q,-', P , - ~ ) to (q,, p,). This interlacing of the variables explains the
complicated form of the matrix [Eq. (6.11)] [150].

   Inspired by the works of Maslov, Creagh et al. [151] emphasized that
the Maslov index is a canonical invariant of phase space (like the other
quantities appearing in the trace formula), and thus is independent of the
coordinate representation. In fact, the Maslov index can be defined
topologically as the winding number of the invariant manifolds around a
periodic orbit. The invariant manifolds are known to be Lagrangian
manifolds, a property that applies to a torus in the case of an integrable
system, as well as to the stable and unstable manifolds of an unstable
orbit in a non-integrable system (see Section II.E.4). Caustics appear in
coordinate space on the fold lines formed by the projection of a
Lagrangian manifold from phase space to the coordinate space. The fold
causes a singularity in the inverse mapping.

   According to the concept of p,, being a winding number associated
with a Lagrangian manifold [151], one may explicitly identify the
invariant manifolds and follow them in the surface of section transverse to
the periodic orbit. For Hamiltonian flows, the surface of section can be
constructed in a local coordinate system as proposed by Eckhardt and
Wintgen (Section 1II.A) [92]. The number of intersections of the
invariant manifolds with the momentum axis of the surface of section
then corresponds to the Maslov index [150,151]. This number will be
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 201

even if the periodic orbit is hyperbolic, and odd if the periodic orbit is
hyperbolic with reflection, as in the latter case, the orbit will not return to
its initial position, but to a position related by inversion symmetry to the
initial one.

                          C. Dynamical Zeta Functions

                   1. Level Density and Staircase Function

Let us now carry out the summation over all the unstable periodic orbits
of the system that is assumed to be hyperbolic and possibly chaotic.

   A direct consequence of Eqs. (6.2) and (6.7) is Gutzwiller's semiclassi-
cal formula for the level density [Eq. (2.9)] [ll]

n ( E )=- -1 Im tr  1

T                   E-&+iO

+xT + 1
                    cos[+S,(E) - r $ p P ]
                                                   O(fio) (6.13)
                    Tp Idet(mi - 1)I1l2

The first term is the aforementioned average level density while the
second term is an oscillatory part due to the periodic orbits. Let us
remember that the level density is a distribution in energy rather than a
smooth function. Truncating the sum over the periodic orbits gives a
smooth function. Therefore, we expect that the sum over the periodic
orbits is not convergent to a function but could converge to a distribution
in energy. This is the case for one-degree-of-freedom systems like the
harmonic or the Morse oscillators. Integrating Eq. (6.13) with respect to
energy gives the staircase function that is a discontinuous function of
energy and, therefore, more regular

   ''1 sin[+Sp(E)- rTpp]
i-P r = l              Idet(mi - 1)11" + Q(fi)  (6.14)
202           P. GASPARD ET AL,

     25       I'"l''~i"'I"'

     20

     15 -

     10                                                              -I

                                                                     1
     5i
     00    2  4  6               8  10                               12

                                                     E

   Figure 21. Staircase function of the Morse oscillator with h = 1, wo = 1, and D = 10:
comparison between the exact (solid line), and the semiclassical ho approximation [Eq.

(6.15)] (dashed line), which is so good that it is hidden by the curve of the exact staircase
function.

For one-degree-of-freedom systems with one well (f = l ) , we have

     N ( E )S=JEm) + ~ - s i1n [ , S ,r( E ) - r ~ p , ]7+T O ( h )      (6.15)

                                        r=l

for the single periodic orbit p . Figure 21 shows an excellent agreement of

v-1. this formula with the exact quantum mechanical staircase function in the

case of the Morse oscillator where S p ( E )= ( 4 r / w , ) [ D-

                     2. Selberg and Ruelle Zeta Functions

In classically chaotic systems, the periodic orbits proliferate exponentially
so that the sum over the periodic orbits is not guaranteed to converge
everywhere for complex energies. In order to study these convergence
properties and to calculate the energy levels or the resonances, we
introduce the so-called Selberg and Ruelle [127,152] zeta functions. With

this approach, the corrections in (in)" are neglected, which is an

approximation for general hyperbolic systems.
   For simplicity, we assume that all the periodic orbits are unstable with

2(f - 1) transverse stability eigenvalues over the fundamental period

T,: {A:), l/Af)} ( k = 1, . , . ,f - 1). The determinant involving the

monodromy matrix can be calculated in the coordinates where the
monodromy matrix is diagonal. In this case, we find the diagonal
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 203

elements A:) - 1 and P - 1with k = 1, . . . ,f - 1. Therefore, we get

       nf - 1   -&-()l                     - 1)                 (6.16)

det(mS, - 1) =
     k= 1

Assuming that none of the stability eigenvalues is on the unit circle,
1AF'1> 1, we can expand in Taylor series [153] and obtain

f-1

                                                                (6.17)

We remark that all the terms inside the sum [Eq. (6.17)] are of the form
of a certain quantity to the power r , which suggests the possibility of
performing the summation over the repetition number r . Moreover, if we
neglect the 75-corrections in Eq. (4.28), we have the property

                 ia

     h r S p = - - -y aE " p ( i r S ~ )
( ) -TienPxp                                                    (6.18)

Accordingly, we obtain a series over the repetition number r of the form

                                                                (6.19)

By gathering the previous results, we get

                                                                (6.20)

where we introduced the Selberg zeta function [154] defined by

In Eq. (6.20), we note that the logarithmic derivative of Z ( E ) is in K 1 .
204                  P. GASPARD ET AL.

Thanks to the zeta function, we can rewrite the level density in the form

Since the energy levels or the scattering resonances are poles of the trace
of the resolvent in Eq. (6.20) these poles should appear as zeros of the
Selberg zeta function [Eq. (6.21)]. Indeed, if the zeta function has a zero
at E , so that Z ( E )= A ( E )X ( E - E,), where A@,) # 0, then its logarith-
mic derivative has a pole at Eo since

 a~ aa          [ln(E - E,) + In A@)]=  +                        (6.23)
                                            A(E)
- dE In Z ( E )=

Therefore, we reach the periodic-orbit quantization condition, Z ( E )= 0,
which generalizes the Bohr-Sommerfeld and WKB conditions to systems
with many isolated periodic orbits.

   We may also consider systems where periodic orbits are isolated and
unstable but have several stable directions for which the stability eigen-

values are A:)?' for k = 1, . . . ,u and exp( ?i27~p/)for I = 1,. . . ,s with

s + u = f - 1. In these systems, the zeta function appearing in Eq. (6.20)

is given by

     n l , ...,n,=O

                                                                 (6.24)

The zeta function for one-degree-of-freedom systems is given by

                                        "I                       (6.25)

so that we recover the standard Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization condition

S p ( E )= p d q = 2.rrh(n + pp/4).

   In scattering systems, it may be interesting to consider the factorization
of the Selberg zeta function into semiclassical Ruelle's zeta functions
according to [114],

                                                                                            m
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 205

In systems where the factorization [Eq. (6.26)] is valid, the poles of the
Ruelle zeta functions give the scattering resonances.

                3. Convergence and the Topological Pressure

In systems with two degrees of freedom, the semiclassical Ruelle zeta
functions can be compared with the classical Ruelle zeta function [Eq.
(3.58)] we considered in Section 1II.D on the thermodynamic formalism
of dynamical systems [97]. In this section we mentioned the result that the
leading pole of the zeta function [Eq. (3.58)] is equal to the topological
pressure s = P ( p ) defined by Eq. (3.49). This zeta function is analytic in

the upper half-plane Re s L P( p ) but has poles in the other half-plane.

The same property holds if we multiply the weight given to each orbit by
a phase as in

P  I+ exp(-sTp i s ) -1  (6.27)
       I*,IP

for arbitrary `pp. In this complex case, s = P ( p ) is no longer a pole of Eq.
(6.27) but R e s = P ( p ) is still the threshold of analyticity. This general
result can be applied to the semiclassical Ruelle zeta function

                         (6.28)

of two-degree-of-freedom systems, or to systems with similar zeta
functions. The existence of a threshold at a finite value of the classical
rate s implies that the threshold is proportional to the Planck constant in
the complex energy surface. Indeed, we know that the imaginary part of a

r complex energy E = E - i r / 2 is related to the lifetime by = h / r .

Accordingly, we have

Inserting in Eq. (6.28) and neglecting terms in h [consistently with the
leading semiclassical approximation, Eq. (6.14)], we obtain the Ruelle

+ zeta function with s = -1127, a parameter p = 112 m , and some

particular phase `pp. According to the previous result on the poles of the
Ruelle zeta function, the scattering resonances of the quantum system are
206  P. GASPARD ET AL.

localized in the complex energy surface such that [97,114]

     1                          with m = 0, 1,2, . . .      (6.30)
     -hI m E , s P ( + + r n )

in terms of the topological pressure P ( p ) . The pressure is a nonincreasing
function of /3 so that the scattering resonances with the highest imaginary
parts are given by the poles of the first semiclassical Ruelle zeta function
[Eq. (6.28)] with m = 0. As a consequence, the pressure gives us a bound
on the lifetimes of the scattering resonances { E n= E,, - iI?,/2} in the
semiclassical limit ( h+0)

                                                            (6.31)

at energy E,. For complex energies above this threshold, the zeta function
is absolutely convergent. Equation (3.51) shows how to express the

+ pressure in terms of the KS entropy and the mean Lyapunov exponent

but of the unusual invariant measure with p = [114]. The last bound

follows from the geometry of the pressure function in Fig. 17 [155]. The
bound [Eq. (6.31)] is effective as long as the partial Hausdorff dimension
of the repeller is smaller that one half. Otherwise, the pressure becomes
positive and the bound [Eq. (6.31)] is overwhelmed by the known result

that I?,, 2 0. Related results have been proved in [156,157].

   Other results above the convergence of the zeta functions have been
obtained recently by several groups [158-1601.

     4 . Approximating the Zeta Functions

Different schemes have been proposed to approximate the zeta functions.
   One approach is the cycle expansion of CvitanoviC [161]. Let us

assume that the system is topologically equivalent to a Smale horseshoe
so that its symbolic dynamics has two symbols. The idea of the cycle
expansion is to develop the product over prime periodic orbits defining
the zeta functions as follows. For the case of a Ruelle zeta function,

      n l;1 = (1 - x t p ) = 1- xto - xt, - X 2 ( t , , - tot,)

                                            P

     - x 3 ( t o 0 1 - toto, + to11 - tolt,) + 0(x4)        (6.32)

with tp= exp(iSpl h - irpp/2)/(IA, I1'2AF). The role of the fictitious

parameter x is to help counting the period in terms of numbers of
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 207

symbols, and truncating the series accordingly. It is set to x = 1 after-
wards. Besides the first three terms, the other terms appear as differences
between the amplitude corresponding to a longer period and products of
amplitudes corresponding to the different orbits of shorter periods that
are topologically composing the longer period. If we suppose that the
longer periods are exact combinations of the fundamental periods 0 and
1, then we have exact factorizations such as to, = totl so that all the higher
order terms vanish and the zeta function reduces to S,' = 1- to - t,. In
general, we should not expect that this cancelation mechanism is exact,
but rather that it is approximate such that the higher order terms are of
small amplitudes and can be neglected at a large enough order.

   A different approach by Gaspard and Rice [114] is based on the
transfer operator. If we have a generating partition in a Poincark surface
of section, we may assume that the dynamics is piecewise linear in each
cell of the partition if the cells are small enough. The amplitudes of
transitions between these cells can be approximated semiclassically and
gathered in a semiclassical transfer matrix

                    (6.33)

where a and b are strings of symbols labeling cells of the partition. The
parameters Sab, pab,and A,, are the contributions to the action, the
Maslov index, and the stability eigenvalue coming from the segments of

the classical orbits that go from cell a to cell b. The matrix element Eabis

equal to 1 if the transition between the cells a and b is allowed by the

phase-space geometry and 0 otherwise. The matrix {a,,} is the transition

matrix of the topological Markov chain induced by the dynamics on the
adopted partition, and it defines a symbolic dynamics in the sense of
Section 1II.C [119]. The topological Markov chain can be represented by
a graph that is weighted by the elements of the transfer matrix [Eq.
(6.33)]. The chain is characterized by the topological entropy per symbol,
which is the growth rate of the set of periodic orbits with respect to their
period, and which is given by the logarithm of the largest eigenvalue of

the matrix { E a b } .

   This method essentially corresponds to the truncation of the cycle
expansion at a period p approximately equal to the length of the strings a
of the partition. The approximate Ruelle zeta function can be written as

lil= det(1- xQ'"')  (6.34)

where x is the same fictitious parameter as in Eq. (6.32), which is set to
208  P. GASPARD ET AL.

x = 1 at the end of the calculation. We observe that the Fredholm

determinant Eq. (6.34) of the transfer matrix can be expanded in the
form of the cycle expansion [Eq. (6.32)], where a cancelation mechanism
automatically occurs, which truncates the expansion. Finally, the approxi-
mate Selberg zeta function of a two-degree-of-freedom system becomes

         nlo                                    (6.35)

     Z ( E )= det[l - Q'"'(E)]

                    m=O

where the integer m is the power of stability eigenvalues that appears in
the denominator of Eq. (6.33). The presence of the product is related to
the number of degrees of freedom. The proliferation of factors increases
with the number of degrees of freedom, as shown in Eq. (6.21).

   Let us suppose that the system is equivalent to a Smale horseshoe,
which has a topological entropy equal to In2 per symbol. Different
approximations of the form of Eq. (6.33) can be constructed depending
on the size of the cells. We can choose the cells as the 2" curvilinear
rectangles labeled by n-uples of symbols 0 and 1. In this case, the transfer
matrix is a 2" x 2" matrix. Each line of the transfer matrix has only two

- nonvanishing elements. For the line labeled by a = w - m - l w - m . . w-2 *

w-lwo . w ~ - ~ t-he~ t,wo nonvanishing columns are b = w-, * w - ~ .

w o w l . ~ ~ - , , , - ~ w , , - , -w~ ith u " - , - ~= 0 or 1. For n = 1, we have the
transfer matrix

                                                (6.36)

Here the approximate zeta function is equal to

     pm= 1 - x400 - x411 - x2(401410- 400411)   (6.37)

Now we have a shadowing mechanism that is very similar to the one
working in the cycle expansion. Thus, if the stretching and folding
dynamics is quasilinear, we would have qooqll=qo1ql0.The diagonal
matrix elements can be approximated by the values of the factors tp
associated with the periodic orbits going through the corresponding cells:
qoo= to and qI1=t,. From this, we obtain the same approximate zeta
function as given by truncating the cycle expansion [Eq. (6.32)] at the
level of the fundamental orbits of unit period.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 209

For a finer partition, n = 2, we have the transfer matrix

                               0 . 0 0.1 1 . 0 1 . 3

                     \ 0 ~ 0 / 4 0 0 , 4001 0 0

                                                           (6.38)

and the approximate zeta function

Here, the correspondence with the cycle expansion is obtained with the
identifications qooo=t o , q l l l = t,, and qol0, qlO1= $$ and by observing

that approximate cancelations occur at the orders x ,x , . . . . In this case,

the approximate zeta function is equivalent to the truncation of the cycle
expansion (6.32) between the orders x2 and x3. In this way, successive
approximations can be obtained in the transfer matrix approach and
shown to be equivalent to those of the cycle expansion approach. A
transfer matrix built on a partition with 2" cells contains 2ni1 nonvanish-
ing elements. Such a transfer matrix corresponds to the inclusion of all
the fundamental periodic orbits with a period less than n in the cycle
expansion, which represent a set of about Y / ( nIn 2) periodic orbits. The
advantage of the cycle expansion is the high precision that is available in
favorable systems, but the search for periodic orbits may be tedious. The
advantage of the transfer matrix approach is that we can take an arbitrary
partition suitable for numerical purposes and automatize the construction
of the transfer matrix.

   At each level of approximation, the transfer matrix can be represented
by a weighted graph, as shown in Fig. 22. The vertices represent the
classical states (i.e., the partition cells), while the lines correspond to the
transitions and are weighted by the transition amplitudes given by the
elements of Eq. (6.33).

   Since the work by Gaspard and Rice, the transfer matrix approach has
been applied to a number of systems. In particular, Bogomolny de-
veloped an extension of the transfer matrix method to bounded systems
[162, 1631.

                                5. Bounded Systems

Instability is a natural property of scattering systems. The large Lyapunov
exponents of the classical repeller introduce a damping corresponding to
the finite lifetimes of the scattering resonances. Convergence is therefore
210       P. GASPARD ET AL.

                01

          00 1               01 1

     (c)  3 010 101100       110

    Figure 22. Graphs of the topological Markov chains corresponding to the transfer
matrices associated with a binary symbolic dynamics {0, l}. (a) Graph of the transfer matrix
[Eq. (6.36)] based on single-symbol strings. ( b ) Graph of the transfer matrix [Eq. (6.38)]
based on two-symbol strings. (c) Graph of the transfer matrix based on three-symbol strings.

favored in scattering systems. On the other hand, the pressure function of
classically chaotic bounded systems is always positive, which introduces a
barrier that prevents us from reaching the real energy eigenvalues.
Several schemes have been proposed to remedy this difficulty.

   One proposition is to perform a convolution of the level density or the
staircase function with a Gaussian to achieve regularization [164, 1651.
This Gaussian smoothing justifies the use of the trace formula (6.14) if
the sum only includes periodic orbits up to a period determined by the
average level density [164]. In the same context, a related method was
proposed where the eigenvalues are the zeros of the functional equation
[I661

N,,(E) being the average staircase function. This method has been
applied to the anisotropic Kepler problem as well as to the closed
three-disk billiard [167, 1681.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 211

                        6. Inclusion of the h-Corrections

For the level density or the staircase function, we can $ways take into
account the h-corrections by calculating the coefficients C,(rTp)for each
periodic orbit and its repetitions [19].

   However, methods using the zeta function in Selberg's form [Eq.
(6.21)] are neglecting the higher corrections in the Planck constant. The
inclusion of these corrections will in general modify the form of the
function Z(E) according to the dependency of the corrections C , on the
repetition number r . In hyperbolic systems, the classical Green functions
%Jt, t ' ) feature the clustering property, that is, they decrease to zero
when It - t ' (+CQ together with T+ t ~ .The decrease is often exponential
and controlled by the Lyapunov exponents of the periodic orbit. Accord-
ing to this property, the coefficients Cn(rTp)will in general depend on the
repetition number r as r y exp(-hkrTp). The consequence of this behavior
is that the corrections in powers of h remain of a simple and controllable
form at the level of the first Ruelle zeta function in the product [Eq.
(6.26)]. With the corrections in h", this becomes [20,169]

                                            (6.41)

with

      c",,(E)  =lim        -r1  -           (6.42)
                     1-50       Cn[rTp(E)]

en where are the coefficients of the series in (ih)" appearing in Eq. (6.7).

The first of them is given explicitly by Eq. (6.8) with Eq. (4.29).
   However, the next Ruelle zeta functions are not modified in a simple

way by the corrections in h" so that we do not know the corrected
expression for the Selberg zeta function. Nevertheless, in a number of
scattering systems, the scattering resonances with the longest lifetimes are
given by the poles of the first Ruelle zeta function as explained above.
For these scattering systems, which appear in many applications, Eq.
(6.41) may be sufficient to obtain the resonances.

   An example of resummation in the two- and three-disk scatterers will
be presented in Section IX, where we illustrate the above theoretical
methods in the case of billiards [19,20].
212  P. GASPARD ET AL.

                           D. Complex Periodic Orbits

                          1. Tunneling in 1F Systems

Complex periodic orbits arise in different contexts where a process is
possible according to quantum mechanics but is classically forbidden
[170,171]. The purely wave mechanical process can then be taken into
account by a complex classical orbit, which may join two regions of phase
space separated by a barrier. Semiclassically, the classically forbidden
processes are described in terms of complex periodic orbits.

   The best known example is tunneling through a potential energy
barrier, for instance in one-degree-of-freedom systems, of the type

                          (6.43)

The potential may be bounded with several wells separated by barriers
where tunneling leads to a splitting of degenerate energy levels. O n the
other hand, the potential may be bounded on one side with a well and
unbounded beyond a barrier on the other side. Such a potential is of the
scattering type where tunneling may lend a finite lifetime to quasibound
states of the well.

   Recent works by Strunz [172] have shown that tunneling in bounded
1F systems with N wells can be taken into account by an appropriate sum
over complex periodic orbits so that the level density can be written in the
form of Eq. (6.22), but here with the following zeta function

     Z ( E )= det(1- Q )  (6.44)

The transfer operator Q contains the amplitudes of transitions between
the semiclassical states with positive and negative momenta in each well.
This transfer operator has an interpretation that is similar to the transfer
operator [Eq. (6.33)], where the motion is described by coherent
transitions between different semiclassical states. As shown in Fig. 23, the
semiclassical state is associated with a point qp located in each well

( j = 1,2, . . . ,N ) such that the reduced actions from this point to each

one of the left and right turning points, q<j and q j > , are equal,

  Iq;' iq' p dq = p dq = - s2, with p = q2m[E - V(q)](6.45)
                                         q <I

where S, is the reduced action from the left turning point to the right one.
The states with positive and negative momenta are labeled by the symbols

( j , +) and ( j , -) with j = 1 , 2 , . . . ,N . Figure 23 shows the graph that
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 213

(1, -1                          (2, -1  (3, -1  (N,-1

    Figure 23. Multiple-well potential (a) and the corresponding graph ( b )of the associated
transfer operator Eqs. (6.46)-(6.47) describing tunneling. The symbols ( j , *)correspond to
semiclassical states with positive or negative momentum at the mid-points qp in each well.

describes the possible transitions between the different vertices associated
with the semiclassical states.

   The amplitudes of the transitions are calculated by the uniform
approximation technique by matching WKB wave functions between pairs
of wells. Accordingly, the transfer operator is a 2N X 2N matrix of the
form

        "-> ("+ Q = Q-+ Q--                            (6.46)

with the matrix elements [172]

                                                       (6.47)
214                     P. GASPARD ET AL.

with fi = 1to simplify the notation. In each well, the amplitude to go from
one turning point to the other is given by exp(iSj), where Sj is the
reduced action of the path [Eq. (6.45)]. At each barrier, part of the
amplitude is transmitted by tunneling and another part is reflected. The

parameter pi denotes the reflection amplitude from the jth to the ( j +

1)th well and the corresponding phase shift. The semiclassical reflec-
tion amplitude and phase shift are given by 11721

                                            (6.48)

                                            (6.49)

in terms of the tunneling integral

         11 q<

     8 ( E )= -% dqq2m[V( q ) - E ] for
               4>

     8 ( E )=  -XIi 9-  dqq2m[E- V(q)J for

               q+

In the case of tunneling through the barrier, the energy is below the
maximum Vmaxof the barrier and there are two real turning points, q ,
and q<. Far below the barrier, the phase shift goes to zero while the
reflection amplitude tends to the value 1 because O + --co.

   On the other hand, for energies above the barrier, there are two
complex-conjugate turning points, q+ and q - . When the energy is far
above a maximum of the potential, the two adjacent wells merge and
form a larger well, because the reflection amplitude tends to zero (since
now O + +to) while the phase shift vanishes in this limit. The behavior of
the reflection amplitude and of the phase shift as a function of the
tunneling integral 8 are shown in Fig. 24.

   On the left and right sides of the potential, the potential increases
without limit so that these reflection amplitudes are always equal to 1
with zero phase shifts. Moreover, a change of sign of the momentum
implies a multiplication by a phase (-i). For bound potentials, the
transfer matrix [Eqs. (6.46) and (6.47)] is unitary

                        Q Q =~ Q'Q = 1      (6.51)

As a first example, we consider a double-well potential, as shown in
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 215

       l " ' l ' " i ' i ' i ' iI 0.25

-4  -2  0  2  4

        e

    Figure 24. Reflection amplitude p [Eq. (6.48)] (solid line and left-hand axis) and phase

shift 4 [Eq. (6.49)] (dashed line and right-hand axis) versus the tunneling integral 6 [Eq.

(6.50)].

Fig. 25, with the corresponding graph. The transfer matrix is given by

                                                                                    (6.52)

from which we obtain the quantization condition in terms of the zeta
function

Deep in the wells, the reflection amplitude is nearly equal to 1, while the
phase shift vanishes so that the right-hand side of Eq. (6.53) nearly
factorizes into cos(S,lh) cos(S,/h), and each well sustains levels that are
quasiindependent of each other. Nevertheless, tunneling couples both
wells through the transmission amplitude, which causes a well-known
splitting in the case where a level of the first well is nearly degenerate
with another level of the second well.

   Another example is given by the potential of Fig. 26 where the
quantum states of the well acquire a finite lifetime by tunneling through
216  P. GASPARD ET AL.

    Figure 25. Double-well potential (a) and
the corresponding graph ( b ) of the associated (b)
transfer operator [Eq. (6.52)]. In the double-
well potential, tunneling induces a splitting of
the low-lying energy eigenvalues.

    Figure 26. Single-well potential                 (1, +)  (2, +)
with barrier (a) and the corresponding
graph ( b ) of the associated transfer     6-
operator [Eq. (6.54)]. In this potential,            (1, -)
the energy eigenvalues correspond to (b)
metastable states that acquire a finite
lifetime because of tunneling through

the barrier.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 217

the barrier. This potential, which is of the scattering type, may be
considered as the limit of the double-well potential of Fig. 25 when the
right-hand wall is moved a large distance. The reflection at this wall takes
so long that we replace it by a boundary with infinite absorption. The
graph is reduced to a two-state graph and the transfer matrix is given by

                       (6.54)

For this open potential with the scattering boundary conditions we
adopted, the transfer matrix is no longer unitary as it was for a bounded
potential. The scattering resonances are obtained as the complex zeros of
the following zeta function

0 = Z ( E )= 1+ p exp  (6.55)

Deep inside the well, the scattering resonances are given by En= E, -

Z , I 2 with

so that the half-width r, vanishes for a large enough barrier where

f3-+ -w. We observe that the half-width is exponentially small with a

nonanalytic behavior, of the form exp(-Clh) (C > 0), which is typical of

tunneling phenomena.
   We end this section with several observations. We see that the one-

freedom zeta function [Eq. (6.44)] has a form that is similar to the
two-freedom zeta function [Eq. (6.35)]. The difference comes from the
extra product over the integer m , which characterizes two-dimensional
systems. In systems with more degrees of freedom, the product would

extend over several integers m,,. . . ,mf as in Eq. (6.21). This remark

suggests that a 1F system acquires a kind of topological chaos if we
consider its complex dynamics rather than its real dynamics [1731. Indeed,
the existence of a nontrivial transfer matrix associated with the graph of
Fig. 23 shows that here the complex periodic orbits also proliferate
exponentially as in real chaos. It is possible to characterize this topo-
logical chaos by a topological entropy per symbol given by the logarithm
of the largest eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix of the graph of Fig. 23
[i.e., the skeleton of the transfer matrix in Eq. (6.46) with elements equal
218  P. GASPARD ET AL.

to 1 if two vertices are joined and 0 otherwise]. We obtain  (6.57)

           ( ) htop= In 2 cos - N + 2 per symbol

where N is the number of wells. For one well, this quantity vanishes while
it tends to In 2 in the limit N + CQ.

                          2. Tunneling in 2 F Systems

In systems with two degrees of freedom, the situation becomes more
complicated. We find two types of tunneling: (1) tunneling through a
barrier and (2) dynamical tunneling out of quasiperiodic islands.

   The first type of tunneling is a generalization of tunneling in 1F
systems. In systems like the HCnon-Heiles Hamiltonian, at energies
below the saddle equilibrium points, we may find potential energy
barriers that cannot be crossed by real classical orbits although the
quantum mechanical waves may tunnel through them. As in 1F systems,
complex classical orbits may be invoked to estimate the tunneling
amplitude in these situations. Among the complex classical orbits, the
simplest ones are the periodic orbits of the inverted potential. The
tunneling amplitude can be calculated in terms of the action of such
complex periodic orbits.

   On the other hand, there is no potential energy barrier in the
phenomenon of dynamical tunneling. In 2F systems, we may find stable
periodic orbits surrounded by a main quasiperiodic island at energies
higher than any barrier. Trajectories in the vicinity of the stable periodic
orbit are forever trapped by the concentric tori of the quasiperiodic
island. Therefore, the lifetime is infinite for such orbits according to
classical dynamics. Nevertheless, the quantum mechanical wave functions
can extend from inside the island to the outside continuum, allowing the
quantum states supported by the island to have a finite lifetime. We
remark that the island can support such metastable states only if its area
A is larger than 2 r h , the number of supported metastable states being
given approximately by A / 2 r h . The states deep inside the island have a
long lifetime while the outer states have shorter lifetimes. Dynamical
tunneling is due to complex classical orbits, although very few results are
known for the moment [174]. Progress in this question may be expected
for Hamiltonian mappings and their quantum extensions. Adachi [175],
as well as Shudo et al. [176], devoted several works to tunneling in the
time domain at the level of the propagator. In the energy domain, the
real parts of the eigenenergies of the states supported by a quasiperiodic
island can be obtained from the work on quantum maps by Balazs et al.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDINGSEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 219

[lo41 but the calculation of the imaginary parts remains an open problem.
In the integrable limit, the dynamics in a PoincarC surface of section
transverse to the orbits can be approximated by a 1F flow so that 2F
dynamical tunneling can be reduced to barrier tunneling in a 1F effective
system in such a limit. However, such an approach is not systematic.
Important hints for a better understanding of dynamical tunneling in
area-preserving maps are provided by several recent works on the
complex classical dynamics of maps. In particular, Percival and co-
workers [177] showed that the invariant tori of the quasiperiodic island
have an analytic continuation in complex coordinates up to an uncross-
able frontier where singularities are dense. Moreover, the structure of the
Julia set, that is, the set of trapped complex orbits, has been recently
studied by Gelfreich et al. [178].

   In bifurcations, new stable periodic orbits surrounded by their
quasiperiodic island may appear. Therefore, we may expect that complex
periodic orbits play a special role in the quantization of the dynamics near
bifurcations. This problem is the object of a revived interest stimulated by
the experimental observation of bifurcations in the periodic orbits
emerging from the wave dynamics in the Rydberg states of hydrogen-like
atoms in a magnetic field [34,35]. We may expect important advances in
this exciting problem.

             3. Partition Functions of Statistical Mechanics and
                              Thermal Reaction Rates

The calculation of partition functions and of thermal reaction rates also
involves the use of complex periodic orbits with respect to the real
classical dynamics or real periodic orbits in the inverted potential
[66, 1791. Indeed, if we follow a calculation of the partition function,
which is analogous to Section II.F, we obtain

                                                                                    (6.58)

where p = l/k,T is the inverse temperature. Equation (6.58) can be

evaluated by the steepest-descent method. The points (9,) , where the
argument of the exponential is at a maximum, are determined. These
points correspond to the solutions of Newton's equation in the inverted
220        P. GASPARD ET AL.

potential

                   d2q dV                             (6.59)
                                                      (6.60)
              dr2 - as with q(r = 0) = q(7 = t i p )

in terms of the fictitious time
                                    r = it(=tip)

Since the fictitious time r is the complex-rotated real time t , we may
speak about complex periodic orbits. Contrary to the stationary-phase
method, the steepest descent method only selects the maxima of the
exponential in (6.58) so that we do not have to consider every solution of
Eq. (6.59), but only those corresponding to a maximum.

   Similar integrals also appear in the calculation of thermal reaction
rates, as shown elsewhere [66, 1791.

                         E. Nonisolated Periodic Orbits

Periodic orbits may also be nonisolated, for instance , in integrable

systems or, equivalently, in systems with continuous symmetries. In such
systems, the periodic orbits are found in continuous families, but these

families proliferate at most algebraically as T q with their period. Since

the families of periodic orbits do not proliferate exponentially, as in the
chaotic case, the topological entropy vanishes in these systems (htop= 0).

   When the periodic orbits are nonisolated, the integration of the trace
formula requires a different procedure, as mentioned in Section IV.E.2.
Indeed, the presence of a continuous family implies that the matrix of
second derivatives [Eq. (4.23)] of the action is degenerate due to one or
more extra neutral directions besides the direction of the flow. As a
consequence, the integration must be carried out on a smaller set of
variables, as shown in Eq. (4.30). The sum over periodic orbits should be
replaced by a sum over different continuous families of periodic orbits,
and the corresponding amplitudes will necessarily differ.

   In this context, Berry and Tabor [ N O ] derived a trace formula for
integrable systems. In this case, there exist action-angle variables such
that the Hamiltonian turns out to depend only on the actions, % =

%(I,, . . . ,If).According to the EBK quantization condition, the energy

levels are then obtained by the substitution

                                                      (6.61)

where pi is the Maslov index corresponding to the loop Ciaround the
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 221

Lagrangian manifold labeled by J,, , . . ,Jf. The energy eigenvalues are

then given by

+ Enl. . . flf = %[h(n, p1/4), . . . ,h(n, + y / 4 ) ]  (6.62)

Inserting this result into the level density and converting the sums over
the quantum numbers into integrals and sums over Fourier components
by means of the Poisson summation formula, Berry and Tabor [180]
obtained the following trace formula for the level density

n(E)= n,,(E) + - fi(fL+1)'22,2,=7, Fy i1jE

                                                                                         (6.63)

The quantity S,(E) is the total reduced action of one of the prime
periodic orbits of the continuous family labeled by the set of positive
integers m. These integers are relatively prime and count the rotations
around the different circuits Ciof the torus over one prime period. The
frequencies of rotation of the angle variables are given by w = dJ%. The
quantity K, is the scalar Gaussian curvature of the action surface
E = %(J) defined by

                                                                                        (6.64)

for a set of intrinsic coordinates {&}{I: of the action surface E = X(J).

Equation (6.64) is evaluated at the point J,. The parameter a, is the
excess of positive over negative eigenvalues of the matrix inside the
determinant [Eq. (6.64)].

   The Berry-Tabor formula shows that continuous families of periodic
orbits have a much larger contribution, namely in h-(f+1)'2t,o the level
density than the isolated unstable periodic orbits, the contribution of
which is in h-' according to the Gutzwiller trace formula [Eq. (6.13)].
Recently, Creagh and Littlejohn have shown in detail how the presence
of continuous symmetries converts the Gutzwiller-type contribution into

the Berry-Tabor one [MIT.he h-corrections can be calculated for Eq.

(6.63) by methods similar to those developed in the previous sections.
   It is important to remark that continuous families of periodic orbits

may exist in systems without continuous symmetries, such as the stadium,
222  P. GASPARD ET AL.

the Sinai billiards, and the hard sphere gas [133,182]. In these systems, a
different procedure is necessary to obtain the contributions from the
families of periodic orbits.

   We should also mention that several periodic orbits may coalesce at
bifurcations. As a consequence, the assumption of isolation of the
periodic orbits is no longer satisfied at a bifurcation, where we may also
expect an enhancement of the amplitude. The quantization of bifurca-
tions is the subject of recent works.

                   F. Periodic Orbits Close to Bifurcations

Thus, close to bifurcations, we may encounter another situation where
the trace formula for real unstable periodic orbits does not provide an
accurate description. Complex orbits (which have been called "ghost-
orbits" [183]) may be invoked to improve the analysis, which thus bears
some similarity to the analysis of tunneling phenomena. The limitation of
the trace formula, Eq. (6.13), in this context lies in the fact that the
amplitude factor in Eq. (6.13) depends entirely on the linear stability of
the orbit, and will thus diverge at a bifurcation point where the
eigenvalues of the linear stability matrix pass through the value one. This
divergence may be prevented by a modified amplitude factor, which takes
into account terms beyond the linear stability, as shown by Ozorio de
Almeida and Hannay [7,184]. We quote the amplitude factor given in
[184]:

where S:)(P, Q ) is the generating function for the PoincarC map in terms
of the canonical conjugate variables (Q, P ) transverse to the periodic
orbit p , and the index r refers to the rth repetition of the orbit. If only the
quadratic part of S:) is taken into account, the integral reduces to a
Gaussian form, and can be related to the linear stability matrix mp,

     A:I ) --e - i ( * / 2 ) 4 $ Idet(mf,- 1 ) ( - " '  (6.66)

which is the factor found in Eq. (6.7). The index u:) is equal to 0 or 1
depending on the sign of the quadratic form in the Gaussian integral.

   In the neighborhood of a bifurcation, the generating function takes on
a particular normal form, characteristic of the given type of bifurcation.
The normal form is determined by the topology of the bifurcation, and
contains all information on the generation or annihilation of satellite
orbits around the central orbit. In particular, in dependence of a control
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 223

parameter E , which indicates the deviation from the critical energy of the
bifurcation point, the normal form features a different number of
extrema, which correspond to the fixed points of the PoincarC map. On
one side of the bifurcation, complex-valued extrema of the normal form
may occur, which correspond to the "ghost orbits" mentioned above
[183].

   In fact, the normal forms for the generating function S t ) with r = 1
correspond to the so-called "elementary catastrophes", or structurally
stable caustics [185,186]. For example, a tangent bifurcation corresponds
to the fold catastrophe, with its characteristic normal form [7]

SF'(P, Q ) - PQ = P2 + Q 3+ &Q2       (6.67)

Alternatively, in the presence of the symmetry Q + - Q , we may find
pitchfork bifurcations with the characteristic normal form [7]

+ S:'(P, Q ) - PQ = P 2 -+ Q 4 & Q 2  (6.68)

Examples of such bifurcations will be given in the context of the dynamics
of the molecular transition complex (see Section XII). The integrals [Eq.
(6.65)] involving the normal forms are standard diffraction catastrophe
integrals [185,186]. If evaluated by the stationary-phase method, they
will yield contributions at the extrema of the normal form, which may
include "ghost orbits", as shown in "31. The general result is that the
amplitude A t ) increases at a bifurcation in a way controlled by the
nonlinear stability of the critical periodic orbit. As a consequence, there
is an effect of nonlinear saturation of the amplitude in contrast to the
prediction resulting from linear stability analysis, that the amplitude
diverges.

   The contributions involving higher than quadratic terms of the generat-
ing function S;' correspond to higher h orders, which were obtained in
Section V1.B. The contributions of these h-corrections may be small when
the periodic orbit is far from a bifurcation, but they become non-
negligible and essential at bifurcations in the joint limit E +0 and h+ 0
[7,1841.

VII. SEMICLASSICAL AVERAGES OF QUANTUM OBSERVABLES

                           A. Diagonal Matrix Elements

In many problems of interest, we would like to evaluate, with a
semiclassical method, not only the eigenenergies but also matrix elements

of some observable A between eigenstates of the Hamiltonian %o.
224    P. GASPARD ET AL.

   We found it most enlightening to formulate this problem in terms of
perturbation theory [1011. We consider a new Hamiltonian including the

A, operator which is assumed to be Hermitian and acts as a perturbation

with respect to the Hamiltonian $to

       &=&o+AA                                     (7.1)

There is a result of perturbation theory stating that the first-order

perturbation of the energy levels is given by the average of A over the

corresponding eigenstates of &o [187]

for

where

       + E , ( h ) = EP' + hE;) B(A2)              (7.4)

If the eigenvalue problem [Eq. (7.3)] has been solved, the matrix element

A of may be calculated as the derivative of the eigenvalues E,(A) with

respect to the perturbation parameter A. The eigenenergies of Eq. (7.1)

can be obtained be periodic-orbit quantization. With these results, we can
calculate the averages of Eq. (7.2) in the limit h+O in terms of the
periodic orbits of the classical Hamiltonian corresponding to $t. The
classical Hamiltonian can be defined as the Wigner transform Xcl=

%x4(9,P) of 22.

   The perturbed eigenenergies are given by the zeros of the Selberg zeta
function [Eq. (6.21)] for the Hamiltonian [Eq. (7.1)]. The zeta function
can be expanded into a series according to the method of the cycle

expansion

       a

with

                     + + i                         (7.6)

       t,,(E; A) = exp[hS,(E; A) C,,(E; A) O(fi)]

where C,, contains the contributions of the stability eigenvalues and of
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 225

the Morse indexes of the periodic orbits. The periodic orbits are labeled
by p , and m denotes the vector of integers appearing in Eq. (6.21).

   The derivative of the zeros with respect to the parameter A is given by
taking the total derivative dZ[En(A);A]/dA = 0. Setting A = 0, we get

where we used the notation x { ~ , , ,=~(->"tplm, . tPnm, as well as the
result Tp= aESp.We observe that the leading semiclassical approximation

A to the diagonal matrix elements of only involves aASp,while the

derivatives a,Cp, appear in the next correction of order h in the
numerator. At the leading semiclassical approximation, those corrections
O(h) are neglected. Accordingly, we only need to calculate dASpfor each
periodic orbit, which is given by the following formula of classical
mechanics [188]

where S is the reduced action of the periodic orbit p and A, is the
classical function obtained from the operator A by the Wigner-Weyl
correspondence. The circular integrals are evaluated over the periodic
orbit.

   In the same context, it is interesting to mention the formulas

   1             a      %)
tr,=tr-ln(E-                        (7.9)
   E - X aE

A             a         ko-AA)lA=o  (7.10)
t Er -TXo= -tr-lanh(E-

for complex values of E and with the operations ordered as shown.
Commuting the operations may require subtractions and/or regulariza-
tions of infinities. These formulas show the similarity with the logarithmic
derivative appearing in Eq. (6.20). The derivative is taken, in one case,
226                      P. GASPARD ET AL.

with respect to energy and, in the other case, with respect to the
perturbation parameter.

               B. Semiclassical Photoabsorption Cross-Section

Using Eq. (7.10), a formula can be obtained, which gives the photo-
absorption cross-section for atoms or molecules [189]. In Section II.C, we
mentioned that the photoabsorption cross-section is given by the Fourier
transform of the autocorrelation function of the electric dipole operator.
At zero temperature, the atom or the molecule is initially in its ground

state 4, of eigenenergy E, so that Eq. (2.11) becomes

which may be rewritten as follows:

                                    1            a
             = tr[As(E,  - %,)I = - -Im tr                  (7.12)
             + K,                                           (7.13)
                                    9T       E,  - $20  iO

where E, = E , + hw and

and where we used the property of the Green operator that

             G + ( E )=  1                1  i%- S ( E- k)  (7.14)
                                 --gap-
                         E-&+iO     E-$2

with 9 denoting Cauchy's principal part.

   A semiclassical expression can be obtained for the cross-section using
Eq. (7.10) applied to Eq. (6.14) giving the staircase function of the

perturbed Hamiltonian % = %o + h a with the operator in Eq. (7.13).

After setting h = 0, we get the following semiclassical formula for the
photoabsorption cross-section [1891

     1       a
K~ = --Imtr
             E-k0+iO
     %-
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 227

                             + cos[$Yp(E)- Y 3 L p ]
                                                                              0(fi0)
                                              Idet(mL - 1)11'2

                                                                                    (7.15)

a with E = Em.The semiclassical level density [Eq. (6.13)] is recovered in

the special case where = 1. The quasiclassical term contributes to a

background in the photoabsorption cross-section, while the periodic-orbit
terms contribute to oscillations on top of the quasiclassical background
[1901. This formula applies to either discrete or continuous spectra.

   For nonzero temperatures, however, the preceding semiclassical meth-
od does not seem to remain applicable and we need the quasiclassical
method as we will explain below (see Section X1.A).

VIII. QUANTUM BILLIARDS

A. Wave Equation and Generalities

Billiards occupy a special position among the dynamical systems because
of the relative simplicity of their dynamics where hard particles fly in free
motion between elastic collisions. The Schrodinger equation is therefore
identical to the free particle equation

+ (Af K ' ) $ = 0                  (8.1)

where Af is the f-dimensional Laplacian and K = fi-'(2mE)"* is the

wavenumber. The specificity of the system is expressed by the boundary

condition such as the Dirichlet boundary condition 4 = 0, which is taken

on the impenetrable border of the billiard.
   The border of the billiard is simply the walls of the cavity for billiards,

such as the Bunimovich stadium, the Lorentz, or the Sinai billiards. For
the hard sphere or hard disk gases, the border is formed by the walls of
the container and by the hypersurface of the locations of the collisions
between the particles [182].

   Effective realizations of billiards have been carried out in microwave
cavities as well as in electronic nanometric semiconductor devices in order
to investigate how the transition from regular to chaotic ray motion
influences the wave properties [41,48].

   As we mentioned earlier, billiards may be bounded or open. In the
first case, the eigenstates are solution of the Helmholtz equation (8.1)
with Dirichlet boundary conditions that select eigenvalues of the
wavenumber K so that the energy spectrum is discrete. In the second
228  P. GASPARD ET AL.

case, the billiard is a scattering system. The quantum dynamics is then
given by the scattering S-matrix and by the scattering resonances that are
the complex poles of the S-matrix, as well as of the Green function, in the
second Riemann sheet of the complex energy surface. In this regard, the
situation is very similar to the case of smooth Hamiltonian systems
described in Section IT.

   However, the fact that the particle is in free flight between its elastic
collisions on the walls already introduces significant simplifications into
the classical dynamics in the sense that the classical action has the same
form of Eq. (3.40) for each billiard. Similarly, the simplicity of the
Schrodinger equation (8.1) inside the billiard considerably reduces the
quantum mechanical treatment of billiards. In particular, explicit expres-
sions can be given for the total Green function, as shown elsewhere [97],
while the Feynman path integral reduces to multiple but ordinary
integrals so that the quantization can be expressed as series of usual
integrals. For these reasons, billiards are often used as solvable models in
theoretical argumentation as well as to test numerical procedures and,
especially, semiclassical methods. In this way, it is our purpose in this
chapter to illustrate our theory of 6-expansion with the two- and the
three-disk scatterers.

                        B. Multiple Scattering Expansion

In the following, we will focus on two-dimensional billiards ( f = 2). The
solution of the Helmholtz equation (8.1) requires the Green function
satisfying

     (Af + K ~ ) =GS(q - q')                 (8.2)

together with the Dirichlet boundary condition that G(q, q'; K ) = 0 for q
belonging to the border of the billiard. For f = 2, the free Green function,
which is solution of Eq. (8.2) without any boundary condition on the
border of the billiard, is given by [132]

     Go(q,g';K  )  =  -  i        (Kls-s'l)
                         -4 H"0)

where H c ' ( z ) is the first Hankel function.
   According to Green's theorem, a solution I,!Iof Eq. (8.1) must satisfy

the relation [191,192]
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 229

where d l d n denotes the derivative along a direction normal to the border
and interior to the domain D of the billiard, that is, exterior to the
obstacles, such as disks or hard walls. In Eq. (8.4), the integral extends
over the arc of perimeter of the border. Because of the Dirichlet
boundary condition, the second term vanishes and we get an equation
giving the wave function in the domain in terms of its normal derivative
on the border. We would like to have a closed equation for the function

+ which is the normal component of the gradient of on the border dD.

This gradient is a function of the arc of perimeter s. The gradient of 9 is

discontinuous on the border because of the Dirichlet boundary condition.
It is known that integral representations, of the form Eq. (8.4), give the
value of the function at the middle of the jump at the discontinuities just
as for Fourier series of discontinuous functions. By differentiating Eq.
(8.4), we get the closed equation [191,192]

      d                                          (8.6)

         Go[q(s), q'(s')]u(s')= (Qu)(s)

which defines the integral operator Q ( K ) acting on functions defined on

the perimeter parametrized by the variable s.

   The eigenvalues or the scattering resonances are therefore the zeros of

the Fredholm determinant of the operator 1- Q ( K ) in the complex plane

of the wavenumber K = m / h ,which is the condition for the existence
of a nontrivial solution u(s) for Eq. (8.6). The Fredholm determinant is

expanded as a series of its traces according to

      0 = det[i - Q(K)]  = exp -  "    1         (8.7)

                                  N=l  x t r $"

with

where q i = q(s,) belongs to the border of the billiard. Using the definition
230  P: GASPARD ET AL.

of Eq. (8.3) for the free Green function, we get

where qjj+lis the angle between the path from the point q j to the point

qj+l and -nj+,, which is minus the unit vector normal to the border and
exterior to the obstacles. Here Hil)(z) is the first Hankel function of first

qj+l order and = Iqj+l- qjl is the length between those points. Intro-

ducing Eq. (8.9) in Eq. (8.8), we obtain

with the cyclic identification N + 1= 1.

              C. Stationary Phase Method and 'Periodic Orbits

The integrals [Eq. (&lo)] are evaluated by the stationary phase method
[HI. In the short wavelength limit, the wavenumber K is large, and K - ' is

a small parameter. In the domain where all the lengths qj+l remain

nonvanishing during the integration of Eq. (&lo), the Hankel functions
may be replaced by their asymptotic expansion for large z . In this case,
Eq. (8.10) may be rewritten as [20]

where we introduced the definitions                                          (8.11)
                                                                             (8.12)
                                                                          N  (8.13)

                       2-2 qj+l
                                                                       j=1

                                                                                     (8.14)

2 is the total length of the path joining the N border points in the
integral [Eq. (8.11)]. We will work in a system of units where the lengths
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 231

( e ) ,the arcs of perimeter (s),and the wavenumber ( K ) are dimensionless,

for instance, taking the radius of the disks as unit length (a = 1).
   According to the stationary phase method, the multiple integrals [Eq.

( 8 . l l ) l are evaluated locally around the critical points of the integration

domain {sl, . . . ,s N } ,where the total length 2 of the path is extremal. A

set of critical points are given by the trajectories of classical motion that
are solutions of

                                                                                  (8.15)

The stationary solutions are periodic orbits of several types [20]:

   1. Regular Periodic Orbits. For those stationary solutions, all the N

    qj+l lengths are real, nonvanishing, and exterior to the obstacles.

       At each elastic bounce, the incident angle equals the reflection
       angle, which is the law of geometric optics. A periodic orbit may be
      a multiple r of a prime periodic orbit 9 with P bounces if N = rP.
      We will denote this multiple by r 9 . The integral [Eq. (8.lO)l has P

      distinct stationary points `Piwith i = 1, . . . ,P, which are associated

       with this prime periodic orbit 9. If {s:s: * * s}: are the coordinates
       of the impact points of the prime periodic orbit ?? on the border of
       the billiard, these P stationary points are located at the distinct
       cyclic permutations of

                             1  2                   r

which are only P in number. They all contribute by the same

amplitude because they lead to the same integrals.

Regular periodic orbits may be of different stabilities. Here we

will assume that they are unstable of saddle type and isolated.

2. Degenerate Periodic Orbits. For those periodic orbits, one or
q,+, several of the lengths
                             are going to zero at the critical point

[121. Consequently, a degenerate periodic orbit contains consecu-

tive bounces that are located at the same point: s,"   so that

e;+, = 0.

   First, we consider the case where one length goes to zero. Let 9
be a regular prime periodic orbit whose impact points are {s:s: . . .

s",. We want to calculate the number of stationary points corre-

sponding to 9 in the integral [Eq. (8.lO)l with N = rP + 1. Any one
of the P impact points s," with j = 1, . . . ,P may be repeated so that

we obtain P different orbits
232  P . GASPARD ET AL.

                                                                                  (8.17)

     which cannot be mapped onto each other by cyclic permutations.
     Contrary to Eq. (8.16), each one of these P sequences now has

     + + N = rP 1 distinct cyclic permutations. Hence, we get PN = P(rP
     1) stationary points that we denote by 'Pi7with j = 1, . . . ,P and
     + i = 1,. . . ,N . These P(rP 1) stationary points only contribute by

     P different amplitudes corresponding to the P sequences [Eq.
     (8.17)], which differ by the repeated impact point. We will see that
     these amplitudes contribute to corrections in K -I.

        When two lengths go to zero, we find two cases where both

     - lengths vanish either consecutively,as in 2P{ = { * * *s;;,sj 0si0s0j s0.+, * a } ,

     orseparately, asin(l,l)Pi(j,k=) {. ~s~-0ls0 j0sisj+*ls k - l so kos kd s k +*l .a > .
     The contributions of these periodic orbits appear in the K - ~ -
     corrections.

        Since we will restrict ourselves to the K-'-corrections, we will
     focus on the degenerate periodic orbits where one length goes to
     zero.

        Besides the regular and the degenerate periodic orbits, we also
     find ghost and complex periodic orbits that play no essential role in
     our present considerations. The ghost periodic orbits are special
     orbits that cross hard walls [12,132]. Although unphysical the ghost
     orbits are solution of Eq. (8.15) but it turns out that their
     contributions vanish by cancelation [12]. On the other hand,
     complex periodic orbits may be important in particular billiards
     with nearly bifurcating periodic orbits. In certain billiards, such as
     the open stadium, sharp edges may introduce special critical points
     for the integration of Eq. (8.10) by the stationary-phase method.
     The edges are known to produce important diffraction effects so
     that the corresponding amplitudes may in general be large. Smooth
     edges, where the curvature of the border of the billiard has a
     discontinuity, are also encountered in bounded billiards such as the
     Bunimovich stadium. Alonso and Gaspard [1331 showed elsewhere
     that such smooth edges may have contributions as important as the
     regular periodic orbits of the Gutzwiller type. Nevertheless, the
     regular and degenerate orbits give the dominant contributions in
     smooth billiards on which we will focus in the following sections.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 233

              D. Contribution of the Regular Periodic Orbits

Here, we assume that no length goes to zero. The functions in Eqs.
(8.12-8.14) may be expanded in Taylor series around the stationary

solutions in terms of the deviations { t i= si - sp}. We obtain

3 = 3' + $ i 6 i        + + + 3 2 v i j 6 i 6 j i z p i j k 6 i 6 j 6 k & z y i j k 1 6 i 6 j 6 k 6 1  +'(t5)

                    =O                                                                                       (8.18)
                                                                                                             (8.19)
                        A = A 0+ + ;Ayiiti6+i '(63)

                        K=K'+ O(6)                                                                     (8.20)

where we adopted the convention of summation over repeated indexes.
   The stationary phase method in its simplest form is based on the

matrix of the second derivatives of the total length. This matrix controls
the linear stability of the periodic orbit and contains the Lyapunov
exponents. The inverse of the second derivative matrix,

                        911.= 3'2 1.1 . yjij3 (9                                                       (8.21)

propagates linear perturbations along the periodic orbit and is therefore
playing the role of a classical Green function. Because the total length is
of the form

                                                                                                       (8.22)

the matrix 9 is symmetric and of the cyclic type with only two
nonvanishing bands beyond the diagonal

                                                                                                       (8.23)

                                                                                                       (8.24)

                        9ij= O for l i - j l z 2                                                       (8.25)

with periodic boundary conditions, such that i = N is identified with i = 0
234   P. GASPARD ET AL.

+ and i = N 1 with i = 1. Consequently, the corners 91Nand BN1of the

matrix are nonvanishing. Similarly, the tensors A:,, 2 : i j k , and z : i j k [

are nonvanishing only when li - j l , li - kl, li - I1 5 1.

   By introducing the above Taylor expansions in Eq. (8.11), the

integrals can be carried out by methods analogous to those of the

preceding sections. Now we have ( - K -112 . Finally, the contribution of

the regular periodic orbit rP becomes

                                                                        (8.26)

with

where we use the quantities defined by the prime periodic orbit 9:
N = rP, 2' = r2$, N o = rN,, p ( N ) = rpP, and h ( N )= A&. The quantity
A, is the stability eigenvalue (whose absolute value is larger than unity)
of the symplectic PoincarC map linearized near the periodic orbit 9. The
parameter p, is the Maslov index, which is the number of negative
eigenvalues of the P x P matrix 9. In the case of defocusing billiards,
such as the disk scatterers, these indexes are vanishing, p, = 0.

   The second term of the corrections in K - ' is given by [20]

      % , ( r P )=-;2;ijkl'ij'ki

      + $2:ijk2?lmn  `ij'kl'mn    + k z ; i j k z : 1 m n q l q m `kkn

      -+2;ijkAplql'k+l +(A;i+i A:iA;j)'ii                               (8.28)

This coefficient can be written in terms of connected diagrams, as shown
in Fig. 27, where the filled vertices represent derivatives of the total
length 2 and the open vertices represent derivatives of the logarithm of
the amplitude A. Each line corresponds to the classical Green function 3
and summation is carried out over the repeated indexes.

   The next K -2-correction can also be calculated and, moreover,
involves derivatives of X . However, we point out that there are extra
corrections in K -1 as we will see in Section VII1.E.

             E. Contribution of the Degenerate Periodic Orbits

+ In Section VIII. C, we observed that degenerate periodic orbits contribute

P(rP + 1) stationary points `P: (i = 1, . . . ,rP 1; j = 1, . . . ,P ) to the
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDINGSEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 235

   Figure 27. Feynman diagrams contributing to the coefficient V, [Eq. (8.28)] of the

fi-correction in the case of billiards.

integrals  tr  Q1 N + 1  with  N =rP;  among  those,  there  are  only  P  distinct

                  ,

amplitudes that we will label by 'B', dropping the index i but keeping j .

To fix the ideas, we will consider the case where tN,,+is ,the length that

goes to zero ( j = N ) .

Here we are not allowed to use the asymptotic expansion of the

Hankel function for the particular factor where t N , N + l + O at the

stationary point, but we may use it for all the other factors since q,+l# 0

for j # N .

We will restrict ourselves to the case of defocusing billiards for which

the path from sN to sN+lgoes inside the obstacle (see Fig. 28). Locally,

   Figure 28. Geometry of a path where one length tN,N+goles to zero between the

successive collisions N and N + 1. The dashed lines represent the stationary phase for which

the incident angle (P:-~,~ equals the reflection angle.
236  P. GASPARD ET AL.

we can approximate the wall by an arc of circle of radius a, which is the
inverse of the curvature of the border. With this assumption, the angle
between the points sN and sN+l on the circle of radius a is given by

     Ae  =  `N+1                    -'N          (8.29)

                                  a

+ while the length of the path from N to N 1 is

                                                 (8.30)

+ The cosine of the angle ( P ~ , ~b+etw~ een the direction of the path

( N ,N 1) and the normal interior to the obstacle at the point N + 1 is

                                                 (8.31)

The integral [Eq. (&lo)] becomes

                                                                                    (8.32)

+ with j = 0 identified with j = N 1.

   This integral has been evaluated elsewhere [20] and the result was

                                                                                    (8.33)

with the definition of Eq. (8.27).
   Let us note that this correction would disappear if the wall was flat at

the point of impact (a+m). However, if the periodic orbit becomes
tangent to the disk ( P : - ~ , ~ - +~ / 2th)e contribution diverges because of
diffraction,
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 237

                                 F. Resummation
Going back to the Fredholm determinant in Eq. (8.7), we obtain

      n c det(1- Q ) = y exp - $ X ( r 9 )            (8.34)

      9  r=l

with

The factor y in Eq. (8.34) contains the possible contributions of paths
where all the lengths go to zero at the critical point as for tr Q. The factor
y is nonvanishing in the region of the complex plane K , where the
scattering resonances appear.

   In order to obtain the scattering resonances, we consider the tail of the
series when Y is large. We observe that

                                                      (8.36)

The summation rapidly converges for the factor associated with each

unstable periodic orbit since lh, 1 > 1. In this case, we get

      n det[i - $ ( K ) ] = A ( K ) [1 - r p ( K ) ]  (8.37)
                                              B

where A ( K )is a function that is nonvanishing in a strip of the complex

plane K just below the real axis where the second factor admits its main

zeros.

   If the corrections in K-' were neglected we would recover the Selberg

zeta function (6.26). At the leading approximation, the factor 4,'
corresponds to n, (1- r,) while the product of the other factors with

m = 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . corresponds to the function A ( K ) .It is known that the

dominant scattering resonances with the longest lifetimes are the zeros of

the factor lil at the leading approximation. As a consequence, the

scattering resonances are given at the K approximations by the zeros of
238           P. GASPARD ET AL.

the inverse of the corrected Ruelle zeta function [20]

                                                              (8.38)

with

      d     =-zl P 1      c3 p 1  1
                          i--8 - to11.+ 1 +lri-mm -r %`,(rB)  (8.39)
           -  ,=1 (cos o

where %`*(rB)is given by Eq. (8.28).

                     G. Application to the Disk Scatterers

The disk scatterers are examples of smooth billiards for which the walls
are given by analytic curves of the plane.

                             1. Three-Disk Scatterer

The three disks of unit radius are assumed to form an equilateral triangle
(see Fig. 11) and the centers of the disks are separated by a distance
R = 6. The structure of the scattering resonances of this classically chaotic
system has been elucidated by Gaspard and Rice [114], who used the
transfer operator approach limited at the leading semiclassical approxi-
mation. Later, CvitanoviC and Eckhardt [115] refined the calculation of
the scattering resonances by the cycle expansion method still limited to
the leading semiclassical approximation in K O.

   At the K O approximation, the scattering resonances are given as the
zeros of the inverse Ruelle zeta function [Eq. (8.38)] with the K - ~ -
coefficients set equal to zero: dp= 0. Figure 29 depicts the scattering
resonances located in the complex plane of the wavenumber K at this
approximation. Because of the threefold symmetry of the scatterer under
the group C,,, each resonance falls into one of the three symmetry
representations: A , and A , , which are simply degenerate, and E , which
is doubly degenerate [114,193]. In Fig. 29 we observe that there is a zone
below the real axis that is empty of resonances. The formation of this gap
can be explained thanks to the topological pressure and the inequality
[Eq. (6.31)]. Indeed, the corresponding classical repeller has a partial
Hausdorff dimension equal to d, = 0.289538, which is smaller than one
       NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 239

                      Re K

               0  25                       50  75
       0~""""'""'j

               L                               4
       L-0.1

       Y

       E -0.2

       H

       -0.3

                -0.4

   Figure 29. The quantum resonances of the three-disk scatterer (R: a = 6 : 1) in the

complex plane of the wavenumber K , compared with the semiclassical approximation
calculated with the cycle expansion in the fundamental domain up to period 6. The crosses
are the exact poles. The semiclassical A , poles are denoted by filled circles, the A , poles by
white circles, and the E double poles by crossed squares (adapted from [97]).

half. According to the results of Section 1II.D (see Fig. 17), the

topological pressure at p = + is then negative so that Eq. (6.31) con-

strains the resonances to have a nonvanishing half-width, which implies

the formation of a gap. For two-dimensional billiards, this gap is given by

[1141                   -

                  Im K, 5 P ( 3 ) = -Xgap          (8.40)

which is valid for R e ~ , + m . Now ? ( p ) = P ( P ) / u is the topological

pressure per unit length, which is equal to the pressure per unit time
divided by the particle velocity. In this regard, let us mention here that a
velocity is associated to a quantum resonance according to u, =
( f i / r n )Re K,. In the three-disk scatterer, the pressure per unit length can
be estimated in the limit of large separations R between disks of radius a
as follows [93]:

Figure 30 shows the behavior of the quantum gap as a function of the disk
separation Rla. Moreover, the quantum gap, which is the limit of the
longest lived resonances, is compared with the classical escape rate (at
velocity u = 1) given by Eq. (3.52). We observe that the classical lifetime
240            P. GASPARD ET AL.

     0.05 - j

        - :*

     0  'i ' / ' ' ~ ~ ' " ~ " " " " ' ' '

                                            R

  Figure 30. Quantum gap x,,, [Eq. (8.40)] in the distribution of the scattering

resonances of the three-disk scatterer versus the interdisk distance R for disks of radius
a = 1. Comparison between the gap obtained from the_exact quantum resonances (dots) and

its semiclassical approximation [Eq. (8.40)], xga=P - P ( + ) , calculated from the zeta function
{ii2: 1- to- t , truncated at the fundamental periodic orbit (solid line). The dashed line is
the naive classical expectation, ,ygj = Y,,/2 = -P(1)/2. The difference between the quan-

tum (solid line) and the quasiclassical (dashed line) is the effect of the Gaspard-Rice
lengthening of the resonance lifetimes.

is significantly shorter than the quantum one in the presence of classical
chaos. For a nonchaotic scatterer with a single periodic orbit, the classical
and quantum lifetimes would coincide (at the leading semiclassical
approximation) because the KS entropy would vanish in Eq. (6.31) and
the inequality would be replaced by an equality. This lengthening of the
resonance lifetimes in the presence of classical chaos may be attributed to
the quantum mechanical interferences between the different periodic
orbits of the repeller, as shown by Gaspard and Rice [114].

   The presence of a gap also has a consequence on the distribution of the
imaginary parts of the resonance wavenumbers

               h(x) = Pr{ -1m K, <x }       (8.42)

where x =r:lu, = -1m K, is known as the reduced half-width of the

corresponding resonance. For the three-disk scatterer, Fig. 31 shows the
cumulative distribution function [Eq. (8.42)]. This distribution should be
compared with the distributions of the reduced half-widths of a scattering
system with v open channels obtained as chi-square probability dis-
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 241

5                         5

4                         4

     3                         3

xn x                      n

     2                    x

                               2

1                         1

0       0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0

           X=-ImK                       x=-IrnK

    Figure 31. Cumulative distribution function h(x) [Eq. (8.42)] of the imaginary parts
x = -1m K of the three-disk resonances for the geometry R : a = 6 :1. (a) Comparison
between the semiclassical approximation with cycle expansion truncated at maximum period
6 (solid lines) and the quantum results from [114] (dots with error bars), both calculated in
the range Re K = 8 - 35. ( b ) Same semiclassical approximation as in (a) but calculated in the
range Re K =O-200. The symbols A , , A , , and E denote the contributions from each
symmetry representations.

tributions of the parameter v from the random matrix assumption [194]

                                                                                    (8.43)

The Porter-Thomas distribution is the particular case of one open
channel (v = 1). Figure 32 gives several chi-square distribution functions
for comparison. We observe that none of those distributions strictly
possesses a gap although a gap starts to appear when the number of open
channels increases: v +m. For the widely open three-disk scatterer with
Ria = 6, we can partly explain the formation of a gap by the large
number of open channels that is of the order of the maximum angular

momentum involved in the scattering process, namely, v - K R . To

understand that the gap is independent of the wavenumber, the semiclas-
sical theory is nevertheless required.

   Recently, Alonso and Gaspard [20] applied the semiclassical quantiza-
tion of the three-disk scatterer at the next-to-leading semiclassical
242                   P. GASPARD ET AL.

     1.2

     1

           0.8

     n

     x 0.6

           0.4

     0.2

     0                                      10           15

                0       5

                              A

   Figure 32. Cumulative functions h(x) of the ,yz distributions [Eq. (8.43)] for different
numbers of open channels v. These distributions are obtained for random-matrix models of
the imaginary parts x = -1m K of the scattering resonances and should be compared with
the corresponding distribution for the three-disk scatterer shown in Fig. 31.

approximation in K - u~sing the formula [Eqs. (8.38) and (8.39)]. We will
now describe the content of this work. The coefficientswere evaluated for
every prime periodic orbit up to a maximum period of P = 9 bounces.
The lengths Zp,the stretching factors {Ap}, we well as the coefficients

     defined by Eq. (8.39) are plotted in Figs. 33 and 34. At the
K -approximation, the main contribution is due to the degenerate

                                                , .*     i

                                                         i

                   A'.

     0             l<,,l,,,l,,,lL,,
       0
                   2       4             6            8  10

                              P

    Figure 33. The lengths and the stability exponents In A, versus the period P in
number of bounces for the prime periodic orbits of the three-disk scatterer ( R : a = 6 : 1).
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 243

        41                               :

  31                             .: ..f     i

 E2                          '*

qR                *. ' '

               :..

0           2  4             6           8  10

                          P

   Figure 34. The coefficients .d9 [Eq. (8.39)] versus the period P in number of bounces
for the prime periodic orbits of the three-disk scatterer ( R:a = 6 :1).

periodic orbits where one length goes to zero. This contribution has a
very strong dependency on the incident angle of the trajectory at the
point of impact. The contribution diverges in two circumstances: (1)
when the periodic orbit becomes tangent to the disks; (2) when the
border of the billiard becomes edgy. Here we recognize the effects of
wave diffraction that are nonclassical effects. In this respect, the h-
expansion incorporates purely quantum mechanical effects in the semic-
lassical trace formula.

   The semiclassical calculation is compared with exact quantum me-
chanical values obtained by Gaspard and Rice [114] and by Wirzba [195].
The numerical convergence of Re K as P increases is depicted in Fig. 35
for the A,-resonance K = 14.0070- i0.13463. We observe that the real
parts are improved at the K -1 -approximation and this improvement
increases with Re K , as seen in Fig. 36, which shows the relative errors at
the K O - and K-'-approximations for the A,- and A,-resonances. We
observe that the error diminishes with R ~ fKaster for the corrected
values. The accuracy improves by more than one order of magnitude at
large wavenumbers. We see that the accuracy is considerably improved
when the K -'-corrections are taken into account.

   However, the imaginary parts have deteriorated at the K -'-approxi-
mation. A similar deterioration is observed in the two-disk scatterer
where we have to go to the K -2-approximation to obtain an improvement
on both the real and the imaginary parts of the resonances [19]. The
reason for this behavior is that the coefficient of K-' in Eq. (8.38) is
imaginary just like the leading term ~ K Zw?h,ile the coefficient of K - , is
244                               P. GASPARD ET AL.

             1                 0

     i14.02                                                K"-approx.

                                     0

     'c                        0             0          0  0                                     -

     2 14.015 -

     14.01 -                         0                                                           -

             ............................................................................

     14.005           j        I  ' I   *    I ' ' ' "I ' "I ' ' ' '

   Figure 35. In the three-disk scatterer, Re K versus the maximum period P of the prime
periodic orbits included in the cycle expansion [Eq. (8.38)] used to calculate the A , -

-'- resonance K = 14.0070- i0.13463 without (open circles) and with (filled circles) the K

correction. The dashed line is the location of the exact quantum mechanical value.

                            I                        I                                     1 oo

             0                    \                           10.'
                   0

                                                              lo-*

                                                              Io - ~

                                           slope -3           Io - ~

              K.'-approx.                                       I 0-5

                                                              aI

                         I                           I        1 1o-6

                         I                           10

                                       Re K

    Figure 36. In the three-disk scatterer, relative error \Re(K,, - K,,,,~)/R~(K,,,,~o)\n the
real parts of the A , and A , resonances versus Re K at the K O - and K -'-approximations, both
calculated with cycle expansion truncated at maximum period P = 9.

real. As a consequence, the real parts are corrected at the K-l-approxi-

mation and the imaginary parts at the mat approximation. At the next-to-
leading approximations , there may exist a few low-wavenumber reso-

nances for which Eq. (8.40) is not satisfied. However, Eq. (8.40) still

holds as an asymptotic property in the limit of large wavenumbers since
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 245

the K -"-corrections become negligible in this semiclassical limit. For the
two-disk scatterer, we have been able to obtain the corrections at the
K -2 -approximation where the accuracy can be improved up to two orders
of magnitude, as summarized in Section VIII.G.2.

                               2. Two-Disk Scatterer

Going to the K -'-approximation is more complicated because the
diagrams become numerous for both the regular periodic orbit and the
degenerate ones [19]. However, in the case of the two-disk scatterer there
are two main simplifications. (1) There is only one periodic orbit in the
scatterer. (2) Many diagrams have vanishing contributions because
' p i + 1= 0 here. Thus we have been able to carry this numerical calculation

up to the corrections for the two-disk scatterer. If the distance

between the centers of the disks is R = 6 and the disks are of unit radius,
we get

where 23 = 8 is the total length of the orbit, A = 97.989795 is its stability
eigenvalue, and c1 =;, c2 = -0.75 are the two first correction coeffi-
cients. These coefficients have ben obtained independently by Turner
[196]. Figure 37 depicts the resonances of the two-disk billiard in the

                      Re K

0                  5  10       15       20

Y

l.5
            'X

                0

                X     4w                '
       t+
-0.31 " '          "" "I    '  " "  ""

   Figure 37. The A quantum resonances of the two-disk scatterer ( R: a = 6 :1) in the
complex plane of the wavenumber. The crosses are the exact poles from [195]. The pluses

are the poles at the Gutzwiller Ko-approximation, while the filled circles are the poles at the
K -2 -approximation [Eq. (8.44)].
246  P. GASPARD ET AL.

                        1 O0

                        lo-]

                        lo-*

                        1o - ~
                        1o - ~
                        1o - ~

                        1o-6
                        1 o-'

  - Figure 38. In the two-disk scatterer, relative error - / ( K ~ ~K ~ ~ ~ on~ th~e A) , - / K ~ ~

resonances versus the quantum number n Re K labeling the resonances at the K O - , the
K - 1 - and the K-'-approximations.

complex plane of K . Figure 38 shows the relative error between the exact
quantum mechanical values of the resonances obtained by Wirzba [195]
and the values of,the K O - , K - ' - , and L*-approximations. We observe the
successive improvements in accuracy by more than two orders of
magnitude at large wavenumbers.

   We are now able to reproduce the structure of the resonances at low
wavenumbers, which was overlooked in the standard Gutzwiller approxi-
mation [19]. In particular, the K-2-approximation can now explain the
lengthening of the lifetimes at low energy. This lengthening is a new
effect that arises only at the next-to-leading semiclassical approximations
as well as in the absence of classical chaos, contrary to the preceding
Gaspard-Rice lengthening mentioned in Section VIII.G .1.

   This study on the disk scatterers shows that the semiclassical method
can describe particular effects at its successive orders of approximation.
These effects would remain unexplained in quantum mechanics, which
would precisely locate the resonances but without providing an under-
standing of the resonance structures.

                        IX. MATRIX HAMILTONIANS

In many molecular systems, a set of degrees of freedom remain in
quantum regimes with low quantum numbers while others reach semi-
classical regimes. An example of such a situation occurs when vibrational
         NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 247

motion takes place on two or more Born-Oppenheimer (BO) electronic
surfaces that are coupled together [197]. Another example is a spin S in

an inhomogeneous magnetic field, in which case there are 2S + 1coupled

potential surfaces [198, 1991. Still another example is a Van der Waals
molecule, such as benzene-helium or benzene-argon, where the rare gas
adatom moves on different potential surfaces corresponding to different
quantized vibrational states of the host molecule of benzene [200]. The
separation of the orders of magnitude of the vibrational frequencies of
the covalent bonds with respect to the Van der Waals bonds justifies the
choice of an adiabatic scheme in a first approximation.

   In the preceding sections, we have been concerned with the vibrational
motion on a single BO surface. As soon as there are several coupled BO
surfaces, new phenomena are possible, such as surface hopping and
geometric phases at conical intersections.

   One of our purposes in this section is to discuss how the presence of
several BO surfaces modifies the results of the previous sections. In these
sections, we saw that the semiclassical approximation essentially has four
levels:

   0. The quasiclassicallevel given by microcanonical ensembles of orbits
       according to the Weyl-Wigner method.

   1. The leading semiclassical level given in terms of real periodic orbits
       and their linear stability.

   2. The level of h-corrections given as series in powers of h, which are
       related to the nonlinear stabilities of the real periodic orbits.

   3. The superadiabatic level with exponentially small corrections of the
       form exp(-C/k) given in terms of complex periodic orbits.

   We will see that, for matrix Hamiltonians, surface hopping is not
allowed at the three first levels but can only be described at the fourth
level in terms of complex periodic orbits [203], Accordingly, nonadiabatic
transitions between potential surfaces are not described by classical
dynamics of real orbits. A recent work of Littlejohn and Weigert
[198, 1991 showed that the matrix Hamiltonian can be diagonalized to
obtain a set of Hamiltonians that determine the motion on each in-
dividual potential surface. The transformed Hamiltonians are given as
series of powers of the Planck constant. For each one of them, we can
apply the semiclassical methods of the preceding sections. Therefore, we
see that series in powers of the Planck constant appear at two points in
the treatment of matrix Hamiltonians: (1) in the derivation of the
Hamiltonians of each potential surface; (2) in the application of the
semiclassical methods of the preceding sections to each one of them.
248                  P. GASPARD ET AL.

   In Section IX.A, we will first present this reduction of the matrix
Hamiltonian to a set of individual Hamiltonians. Subsequently, the
problems of surface hopping and of geometric phases at conical intersec-
tions will be discussed and illustrated with examples.

                  A. Diagonalization of Matrix Hamiltonians

We suppose that the Hamiltonian is an N X N matrix of the form

                      %=fi2T1+ V(q)

where 1 is the identity matrix and V is a matrix of potential energy with

the matrix elements V,,(q) ( p , v = 1,2, . . . ,N ) . For simplicity, we do

not treat the case where the off-diagonal elements also depend on the

momentum 6.

   A spin in an inhomogeneous magnetic field is an example to which the

following theory applies. The matrix potential is then given by

where S is the spin angular momentum with multiplicity N = 2s + 1 and

pB is the Bohr magneton. For the case of coupling between different BO
surfaces, the potential matrix V(q) is a general matrix, each element of
which depends on position q.

   Let us now proceed to the diagonalization of the Hamiltonian [Eq.
(9.1)] essentially following a derivation by Littlejohn and Weigert [199].
In a first step, the potential matrix is diagonalized into its position-
depending eigenvalues and eigenvectors

                                                 N

such that we obtain

Since the potential matrix is Hermitian, the diagonalization is carried out
by a unitary matrix U, =W according to

The unitary matrix is composed of the local eigenvectors of the potential
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 249
matrix

Accordingly, we have the local completeness and orthonormality rela-
tions

This unitary transformation is now applied to the full Hamiltonian.
Because the kinetic energy operator does not commute with the position
operator, we may expect that new terms in powers of h will arise. We
have

but the transformation depends on position so that

Since W is unitary, the extra term in Eq. (9.10) is a Hermitian matrix that
defines a matrix of potential vectors

                                                                                    (9.11)

with the matrix elements

                                                    (9.12)

where the last equality only holds for p # v. Accordingly, we obtain

&(" = +[$1-hA(q)]'+ v                               (9.13)

We observe that the diagonalization of the potential has introduced a
gauge structure into the Hamiltonian. Changing the phase of the eigen-
250                          P. GASPARD ET AL.

IT") vectors according to    -+ exp(ig)lT(')) implies the following modi-

fication of the potential vector: A+ A - Vgl.

Ordered in powers of h , the new Hamiltonian [Eq. (9.13)] is com-

posed of three terms as follows:

      &b" &('I =             &;" + &:I) +                        with

                                                                       (9.14)

      n2 X (21) =-A22

The leading Hamiltonian is already diagonal but the next-to-leading

ones are not. Therefore, we must continue the transformation by

successive unitary transformations

                           - &e"" =  utn    x    )f  i  n              (9.15)
                                             (n

with

      fil = ,ifis,                   fi     =  eifi23,     )  .  .  .  (9.16)
                                         2

on such that eliminates the nondiagonal terms in 6". By this procedure,

which is reminiscent of the Van Vleck contact transformation method

[134], all the successive terms can be formally diagonalized. We obtain

with

      &3} $4"] $k = kb" + h{k y - i[Sl,
                                            + h2{%;l) - i&,

      -;SI- 2XoA (1) +Sl&:)$l"-+(1) xS-21o- i [ S 2 , &3}+s(n3)

      = go+ fig1+ n2$k2 + qn')                                         (9.18)

This calculation shows that

                             =$(R*fi+fi*R)                             (9.19)
      NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 251

with the matrix elements

      R,, = O  and        R,"=-i-    A,,     for p f v (9.20)

                                   u F - u'

The matrix g 2 does not need to be calculated if we limit ourselves to the

%'kl'] second order because the second-order terms are given by the diagonal
elements of the corresponding matrices while [g2,  has vanishing

diagonal elements. Finally, the Hamiltonian diagonalized up to second

order takes the following form

                                                   (9.21)

with

where u(') and A,, depend on the positions q and where : denotes a
contraction between the tensors on the left- and right-hand sides.

   Because the Hamiltonian is now completely diagonal, the different

G N ) components of the transformed wave function $ = U ' q = (&, . . . ,

are independent of each other in this new representation. Nevertheless,
the effective coupling between the potential surfaces has been taken into
account, first, because the eigenpotentials u") depend on the off-diagonal
elements of the potential matrix V and, second, because these off-
diagonal elements also enter the vector potentials A F V .

   However, the Hamiltonian [Eqs. (9.21) and (9.22)] cannot explain
nonadiabatic transitions between the potential surfaces, which are now

decoupled. Consequently, the individual Hamiltonians h") are all

Hermitian and conserve the probability on each potential surface separ-
ately. This result leads us to conclude that the description of nonadiabatic
transitions has been pushed into the nonanalytic terms in the Planck
constant and that their amplitudes are exponentially small like
exp(-Clh) [201]. The examples of Sections 1X.B and C will illustrate this
point.

   With respect to the dynamics on the separated surfaces, the individual
Hamiltonians [Eq. (9.22)] can be treated by the semiclassical methods of
the preceding sections, with the new feature that a potential vector
appears as in electromagnetism. We also observe that the Hamiltonians
252  P. GASPARD ET AL.

[Eq. (9.22)], which determine the classical periodic orbits, depend on the
Planck constant. Besides this dependency, the &expansion of the preced-
ing sections will introduce other terms in powers of h so that here the
&corrections have the two origins (1) and (2) as mentioned earlier.

   If we limit ourselves to the first order in fi, the classical equations of
motion are modified by the presence of the vector potential A,,(q). In
particular, the time derivative of the positions is now related to momen-
tum according to

                        (9.23)

As a consequence, the reduced action of a periodic orbit-which enters in
the semiclassical trace formulas [Eqs. (6.7), (6.13), (6.63), or (7.15)] and
the zeta functions [Eqs. (6.21) or (6.28)]-is now given by

                                                                                    (9.24)

Therefore, the vector potential introduces an extra phase into the trace
formulas and the zeta function, which is of the same order in fi as the
Maslov index [see, e.g., Eq. (6.7)]. This extra hase, exp(iy,), is given in
terms of the position-dependent eigenvectors 7")(q) and potential matrix
V(q) as follows [202-2051:

where we use the definition [Eq. (9.12)] of the vector potential and
&(IL) = dq -%-(IL) between the first and the second lines, and Stokes'
theorem is applied between the second and the third lines with A
denoting the exterior product. From the third to the fourth line, we used
the completeness relation [Eq. (9.7)] following an argument by Berry
[205]. In our semiclassical context, the circuit C denotes a closed loop in
position space traced by a classical periodic orbit. The phase [Eq. (9.25)]
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 253

is well-known today as the geometric phase, after many fundamental
contributions since the works of Mead and Truhlar [203] and, par-
ticularly, of Berry [205]. Let us remark that the geometric phase is a
gauge invariant as shown by the last line of Eq. (9.25), but that the
application of the above formalism rests on the occurrence of nonzero
diagonal elements of A, together with the single-valuedness of the
eigenvectors, T(')(q), as q moves along the circuit C. As a consequence,
we will see hereafter than the geometric phase appears only in problems
where different potential surfaces are degenerate at some position q, for
example, at conical intersections, while the geometric phase does not
arise in usual situations where the potential surfaces remain well sepa-
rated.

   In order to fix the ideas, we consider simple examples.

              B. Two-Surface 1F Model and Surface Hopping

One of the simplest examples is given by the Hamiltonian

                          & = =Pl2+ V  (9.26)

with the potential [201]

                                       (9.27)

This real symmetric matrix can be diagonalized by an orthogonal
transformation

                                       (9.28)

m. with the angle 8 = arctg(b/ux), such that the eigenpotentials are u ( * ) = ?
               Hence, the vector potential is given by

In this problem, we observe that the eigenvectors remain single-valued in

the domain of variation of the angle 0 < 0 < rr since it is never closing a

whole circle. Therefore, the choice [Eq. (9.28)] of eigenvectors is
appropriate for the potential [Eq. (9.27)]. As a consequence, the vector
potential matrix has no diagonal components in Eq. (9.29) and the
geometric phase is not present in this problem. The eigenvectors remain

single-valued as long as the two potential surfaces do not intersect, which
254                       P. GASPARD ET AL.

allows us to choose a gauge where the diagonal components of the
potential vector vanish, whereupon the absence of the geometric phase in
such nondegenerate systems is guaranteed.

   The individual Hamiltonians are therefore given by

                                                               (9.30)

At the second order, the coupling between the surfaces leads to a

renormalization of the mass into effective masses associated with each

surface and depending on the position of the system, as well as a

corresponding modification of the potential (see Fig. 39). These h-

corrections imply modifications in the energy eigenvalues and eigenfunc-

tions of the corresponding potentials. In the present example, we have

two different Hamiltonians. The upper Hamiltonian hA ( + ) is bounded so

that it sustains quantum states that are stable, and its spectrum is discrete

Aat(-t)hiissleovfelthoef  approximation.   On the other hand,  the lower Hamiltonian
                          scattering type  with nonvanishing   accelerations at large

distances (which is particular to this model).

The energy levels of the upper surface can be obtained with the tools

of the preceding sections. At the leading order, we have

                          En = E r ' ( h ) + h2Ey'(h)+ . * .   (9.31)

with the following condition on the energy at lowest order     (9.32)

                   + S ( + ) ( E f ) =) 27rh(n +)

where the reduced action is given by

x y ) and x y ) are the two turning points of the bounded potential u`"(x).

To be consistent, a calculation of the energy levels at the second order
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 255

                        3

        >o

-5

    -5  0  5

        X

    -5  0  5

        X

    Figure 39. (a) Effective uncoupled potentials ~ " ' ( x ) and ( b ) effective masses m"'(x)
for the matrix potential [Eq. (9.27)] at the h2-approximation [Eq. (9.30)].

should include not only the corrections in fi2 in the potential and the
effective mass, but in addition the h2-corrections of the preceding
sections.

   Figure 40 shows the classical phase spaces of the upper and lower
surfaces. At low energy, the motion is harmonic on v") but at high
energies the potential seen by the system becomes v ( + ) = a l x ( .In this

limit E + b, the turning points are x = * E t a , and the reduced action is

obtained as

                                                                                   (9.34)
256          P. GASPARD ET AL.

     2

     PO

     -2  -4                    -2  0  2  4

                                   X

     2

     a0

     -2  -4                    -2  0  2  4

                                   X

   Figure 40. P h a s e y t r a i t s of classical motion in the (a) upper and ( b )lower uncoupled

potentials u(*)(x)= ? azx2+ bZat the fie-approximation.

so that the energy levels are

     [ E n = - 3.rrafi ( n +          for EnS b  (9.35)
             46

We obtain discrete energy levels without imaginary parts because
nonadiabatic transitions are neglected as we explained before. In reality,
however, these states are metastable and their lifetime is exponentially
small in h , as we now explain. The lifetimes can be obtained by
considering complex orbits. Indeed, we can jump from the upper surface
to the lower one via complex paths. Figure 41 shows the geometry of the
potential surfaces for a complex-valued x coordinate, where we see that
the two surfaces join each other at x = t i b / a . Therefore we have a
complex periodic orbit that oscillates between these degenerate points,
and alternately visits the upper and the lower surface (see Fig. 42). In a
semiclassical scheme, the surface hopping would occur each time the real
periodic orbit oscillating in the bounded potential v(+) reaches the point
x = 0 , where the complex periodic orbit can make the connection to the
lower surface u(-) so that the system escapes to large distances. By this
   NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 257

         4

   2 --

   I --

>  0 --

2

   -1 --

   - -2 ~-                        2
     -2

                  1     20

            Re x            Im x

   Figure 41. Real parts of the potentials Re ~ ' " ( x ) = Re( ?.\/$x2+bz) at the hO-approx-
imation represented in the complex plane of position x = R e x + i Im x .

                  Im x

                                                           Re x

    Figure 42. Real and complex periodic orbits involved in the process of surface hopping
between the upper and lower branches of the complex surface of Fig. 41, depicted in the
variables Rex, R e p , and Imx. The closed real orbit around the origin describes the
periodic oscillations in u ' + ) ( x ) , The dashed orbits with I m x Z 0 are the complex periodic
orbits responsible for surface hopping between u ( * ) ( x ) . The two open real orbits describe
the escape toward large separations on the surface u'-'(x).
258  P. GASPARD ET AL.

nonadiabatic process, a lifetime is given to each energy level, which can
be calculated from the imaginary part of the action of the complex
periodic orbit, namely,

where we have set x = i(b/a)sin 5. In the high-energy limit, we obtain

     7ib2g Im S, =- a
     E%b                (9.37)

According to Fig. 42 the reduced action [Eq. (9.36)] of the full complex
periodic orbit is twice the reduced action to go from the upper to the
lower potential. Therefore, [ l - exp(-IIm S,l/h)] gives the probability of
transition between the upper and lower surfaces, which is the square of
the corresponding transition amplitude. Since the point x = 0, where the
transition is possible, is crossed twice in a period of oscillation on u " ) ,
the system has two opportunities to escape from u") in a period.
Accordingly, the half-width of the quantum states is obtained as

                        (9.38)

where the period is given by T'+'(E) = dES(+)(ES)i.nce this reasoning is

based on a weak decay of the upper surface states, the above result holds
in the energy range

                                                                                   (9.39)

By using Eq. (9.37), we see that the lifetimes become shorter as the
energy increases. Indeed, at higher energies, the coupling between the
potential surfaces becomes ineffective and the upper surface rapidly loses
its probability amplitude. In the limit b = 0, the two diabatic surfaces
become independent and the system no longer has resonances. Figure 43
shows the distribution of the resonances in the complex energy surface.
Time-dependent dynamics due to resonances of a similar type have been
observed in femtosecond laser experiments by Zewail and co-workers
[206] on the dissociation of NaI.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 259

    - 1o.6

  I - 1 0 ' ~

w

E

U

      - 10"

-10.~  0       1  2        3  4  5

                     Re E

Figure 43. Complex energies of the scattering resonances of the matrix potential [Eq.

(9.27)] obtained at the semiclassical approximation of Eqs. (9.32)-(9.33) for two different
values of the parameter C = b G / ( f i a ) ,namely, C = 4 and C = 5 . The imaginary parts are
due to tunneling and are given by Eqs. (9.36) and (9.38).

                 C. Conical Intersection and Geometric Phase

                         1. Isotropic Conical Intersection

According to a result of von Neumann and Wigner [207], the positions
where the eigenvalues of a real symmetric matrix, such asV in Eq. (9.1),
are doubly degenerate form a set of codimension two. Consequently, the
potential surfaces given by the eigenvalues u""'(q) of the potential matrix
may intersect each other if the system has two degrees of freedom or
more. A model of such a system is given by the Hamiltonian [Eq. (9.1)]
with the potential matrix

                                    (9.40)

whose eigenvalues are u ( * ) = i - a v m . We see that the potential
surfaces form a cone centered at x =y = 0, so that we speak of a conical
intersection in this situation (see Fig. 44). Such a potential locally appears
in triatomic molecules, such as Na, or 0, [204,208].

   When going to polar coordinates (x = r cos 8 , y = r sin 8), the potential
matrix can be diagonalized by the same orthogonal transformation as Eq.
(9.28), but here 8 = arctg(y/x). Now, the angle 0 can vary over the whole

circle: 0 <8 5 27~.After circling once around the origin, we remark that

the matrix W does not come back to its initial value but that a minus sign
260     P. GASPARD ET AL.

     /

                     Y

     intersection formed by the upper and lower uncoupled potentials
     of the matrix potential [Eq. (9.40)] at the h'-approximation.

has now appeared                for e + e + 2 ~ n      (9.41)
                       w+(-)"W

Therefore, the eigenvectors composing the matrix W are not single-valued
in the two-dimensional potential [Eq. (9.40)]. To remedy this problem,
we need to perform a gauge transformation, that is, to multiply the
eigenvectors by a position-dependent phase: T(")' = exp(ie/2)~`"'.The
new unitary transformation is now single-valued

     WI = e i f l / 2 ~ + ~ ~ for e - + e + 2 ~ n      (9.42)

As a consequence of the gauge transformation, the potential vector
matrix acquires diagonal elements

          -3ve -;ve             with Ve =-( - y ,      (9.43)
     A = ( toe -;ve                              x +Y

By applying the results of Section IX.A, the diagonalized Hamiltonians
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 261
become

The classical equations of motion are              (9.44)
                                                   (9.45)
               + au"'                       O(h2)

      jt=+YB -- ax
      &'+'
      + y = -XB - - O(h2)
      aY

where the pseudomagnetic field is given by

We remark that the pseudomagnetic field is vanishing everywhere except
at the origin where it forms a Dirac distribution. As a consequence, the
classical dynamics does not see the effect of the conical intersection at the
leading semiclassical approximation that neglects the h2 terms in Eq.
(9.45). However, the quantization is dependent on the pseudomagnetic
field, which gives a geometric phase to the quantum amplitudes of the
orbits encircling the origin, like in the Aharonov-Bohm effect [202].

   We observe that the isotropic Hamiltonian [Eq. (9.1)] with Eq. (9.40)
commutes with a constant of motion, which is given by the z-component
of the total angular momentum, composed of the orbital angular momen-
tum plus a one-half pseudospin, each one of them projected along the
z-axis

      Ann                                          (9.47)

      J, = L,1 +-2a,

with

      ( i o ) t , = x f i y -yjjx and 0;= 0 -i     (9.48)
262  P. GASPARD ET AL.

such that [%, j z ] = 0.2 This isotropic system is therefore separable. The

presence of an extra one-half pseudospin shows that half-integer quantum
numbers are entering the quantization [208].

   We now turn to the semiclassical quantization at the leading approxi-
mation in order to determine the resonance states that are localized in the
upper half-cone of the system. The classical equations of motion [Eqs.

(9.45)-(9.46)] are integrable. If we neglect the terms in n2, the equations

can be rewritten in polar coordinates as

     r2&'= J,           (9.49)

     -i+2+ r +?=JE?
     2         2r

where the two constants of motion are the total angular momentum along
the z-axis J, and the energy E. We see that the classical orbits remain
confined in the upper half-cone without approaching the intersection
point r = 0 except if J, = 0, but we will see below that this value is
excluded by the quantization. As in the 1F system discussed above, we
should expect that the quantum states supported by the classical orbits
are actually metastable states with small lifetimes given by a complex
periodic orbit.

   Under these conditions, we can perform the semiclassical quantization
by the WKB method. At the leading approximation, the Bohr-Sommer-
feld conditions read

     $ $ S:+' = p , dr = i dr = 2&(n + +)

     S r ' = $ p , d B = f ( r Z 8 + n A , + + ) d B = 2 r ( J 2n - ~=)2 d i m (9.50)

where we used the facts that the radial component of the vector potential
vanishes, A,++= 0, while its angular component is given by A,++= -12 '
and that the Maslov indexes are, respectively, p, = 1 and p, = 0. The
radial quantum number is the integer n E N, while the quantum number

of orbital angular momentum along the z-axis is the integer m E Z.As a

      There exists another representation where the matrix a, is the standard third Pauli
matrix, which is diagonal. In this other representation, the matrix potential has the form

                                                       0 x-iy
                                                    x+iy 0

instead of Eq. (9.40). Both representations are connected by a unitary transformation.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 263

consequence of the geometric phase, the total angular momentum is a
+ 3). half-integer multiple of the Planck constant J, = h(m
                                                             The quantiza-

tion of the radial motion requires the evaluation of the integral

                                                                                   (9.51)

The motion is harmonic at low energies, whereas it is controlled by the
linear part of the potential at high energies. In these limits, we obtain

Here, we remark that we could have worked in the gauge of Eq. ( 9 . 2 8 ) ,
where the diagonal components of the potential vector matrix are
vanishing, but we should have been careful to avoid missing the geomet-
ric phase. Indeed, in that case, the geometric phase is still present but is
hidden in the eigenvectors T ( * ) , which appear in the amplitude of the
phase function: 'I'=T ( * ) exp(iS")/h - i p ( ' ) / 2 ) . Then, it is the eigen-
vector that produces the phase - 1 when circling around the conical
intersection rather than the reduced action S"', which contains no
potential vector. In the gauge adopted in this section, it is the reduced
action that produces the geometric phase because it does contain the
potential vector, while the eigenvectors T ( * ) ' remain single-valued and do
not produce an extra phase.

   We now turn to an evaluation of the lifetimes of the metastable states
supported by the upper half-cone. Figure 45 shows classical phase
portraits of the radial motion on the upper and lower half-cones. We are
looking for a complex path that will join a closed orbit on the upper
surface to an open orbit but on the lower surface, both orbits being at the
same energy E and angular momentum J,. The complex orbit should
make a contour around the branch point r = 0, where both surfaces join
each other. There exists such a complex orbit with R e p , = O with a
reduced action having the following imaginary part
264            P. GASPARD ET AL.

           1-

     d 0-
        -1 -

     0         1  2  r  3             4  5

    Figure 45. Phase portraits of classical motion in the (a) upper and ( b )lower potentials

no of the conical intersection of Fig. 44 at the approximations for a = 1, J, = 1, and varying

energy E in Eq. (9.49) (with p , = i).

                                            (9.53)

There is a cancelation between the two singularities at r = 0 so that the
total integral is finite. At high energies, the integral can be estimated by

     Im S, =( 2r a~J 2) 3[I: +~a(V-1        (9.54)

Since the turning point is approached only once in a period T'+'(E) =
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 265

d,S'+'(E) on the upper surface, the half-widths and the lifetimes are

given by

                                                                                    (9.55)

holding in the range aJf B hE3'2.
   The structures of the scattering resonances of the conical intersection

are depicted in Fig. 46 in the complex plane of energy. We observe that
the lifetimes increase with the total angular momentum J, but decrease
with energy. Indeed, at high angular momenta, there is a confinement
effect in the upper half-cone due to the centrifugal force. On the other
hand, as the energy increases the centrifugal barrier decreases and the
conical intersection becomes more easily accessible so that the lifetimes
shorten.

                       2. Anisotropic Conical Intersection

In general, the conical intersection will not be isotropic. A more general
potential is given by

                   2                  -ax                         (9.56)

w                                          ', j = 25.5'...

A  -10.~ i                  *.. '. j = 20.5           .

                       ,   '.. j = 15.5 ' a ,          '.   '.:.

   -lo3 i                                         .. - . . ' . *
                                                       *. *.
                      j = 10.5 ' , ,                       *.. :

                                      *.
   f ' . - ' 3 -. 1 _ 0 . 2 i '            *'...
            j=5.5                                     ' "'
            " "            I " "
                   ""                      "

   0        5          10             15          20        25

                           Re E

    Figure 46. Complex energies of the scattering resonances of the isotropic conical
intersection [Eq. (9.40)] obtained at the semiclassical approximation of Eq. (9.51) in units

+ where a = 1 and R = 1 and for different values of the auantum number i = m 112 of

angular momentum. The imaginary parts are due to tunneling and are given by Eqs.
(9.53)-( 9.55).
266                                   P. GASPARD ET AL.

     -1  0                            1

         X

   Figure 47. Poincar6 sections y = 0 in the classical flow of the upper surface u ( + ) =
q    m of the anisotropic conical intersection [Eq. (9.56)] for a = 1, energy E = 1, and

different values of the other parameter that cannot be scaled out: (a) b = 0 ; ( b ) b = 0.2; (c)

b = 0.5; ( d ) b = 0.8; ( e ) b = 1.
       NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 267

v m . The classical motion on the upper half-cone is ruled by the potential
,(+I=  Such a potential is known to appear locally in

pyrazine [209], as well as in other molecules [62]. Figure 47 shows several

2/-. PoincarC surfaces of section in the plane y = 0, where the linear momen-
tum along the x-axis takes its values in the range l p , l s  The

system can be rescaled in such a way that energy is set equal to E = 1 and

the only bifurcation parameter is the ratio a / b . In the limit alb = 1, the

system is integrable with a stable circular orbit. When a l b decreases,

bifurcations occur, introducing a mild chaos in the system that remains

dominated by quasiperiodic motions. At aib = 0.5, the phase portrait

shows the existence of a pair of local modes resulting from a period-

doubling bifurcation. There are two stable orbits surrounded by quasi-

periodic islands. At lower values of a l b , there is a new main quasi-

periodic island that grows around the period-one orbit at the origin x =

p , = 0, and that invades the whole phase space as alb+ 0. In the

limit alb = 0, the system is quasi-one-dimensional and is therefore also

integrable. Between both the integrable limits a / b = 1 and alb = 0, the

system shows quasiperiodic motions with thin chaotic zones that are never

covering the phase space. We may expect that the nonintegrability of the

system when 0 <a / b < 1 gives rise to an irregularity in the distribution of

the scattering resonances of the conical intersection.

       X. ATOMIC AND MOLECULAR HAMILTONIANS

In the preceding sections, we described the semiclassical methods of
quantization. In the following sections, we would like to apply these
methods to several atomic and molecular systems, especially of the
scattering and reactive types. The purpose of this section is to discuss and
compare the semiclassical properties of the atomic and molecular
Hamiltonians.

                             A. Coulomb Hamiltonian

If we neglect spin interactions and others of the same order, the
nonrelativistic Hamiltonian of a molecule or an atom is given by the
Coulomb interaction between the electric charges of its constituent
particles [1971

                                                              (10.1)

where the indexes i, j label the electrons of mass m and the indexes a , b
label the nuclei of masses Ma and atomic numbers 2,. If the particles are
268  P . GASPARD ET A L .

exposed to an electromagnetic field, the Hamiltonian of the electro-
magnetic interaction and field must be added. Here, it is not our purpose
to describe the details of this formalism [197], but we would like to
summarize the treatment of this type of Hamiltonian in the case of atoms
and molecules, and to describe some of the general properties we should
expect.

                                 B. Atomic Systems

Since atoms have a single nucleus, the solution of the atomic Hamiltonian
describes the electronic motion. As the number of electrons increases, the
methods of solution change. In certain circumstances, semiclassical
methods turn out to be very effective. Let us summarize different cases.

   It is well known that the one-electron Coulomb Hamiltonian is
separable and can be exactly solved by wave function methods. On the
other hand, the exact solution is also obtained by semiclassical methods,
since the classical one-electron Coulomb Hamiltonian is integrable. As
soon as we turn to two-electron systems, the solution becomes more
complicated and numerical methods should be developed. Thanks to
modern computers, the properties of the quantum Hamiltonian can be
obtained with very high precision even at high electronic excitations.
Nevertheless, semiclassical methods are important to provide an interpre-
tation of the very complex spectra of highly excited states. One of the
most remarkable new results is probably the numerical and experimental
observation that the classical periodic orbits are emerging from the wave
dynamics [34]. Such observations are based on the use of the Fourier
transform to go from the energy domain to the time domain [18]. We will
come back to this aspect later. For the moment, let us remark that the
difficulty encountered in the solution of the quantum Hamiltonian by
wave function methods appears to be related to the nonintegrability of
the corresponding classical two-electron Coulomb Hamiltonian [23].
Numerical integration of the classical two-electron motion has shown that
the phase space is a mixture of quasiperiodic and chaotic motions [loo].
As soon as two electrons are present, it seems that the classical system
will be of scattering type because of the mutual Coulomb repulsion
between the electrons. Accordingly, the classical dynamics turns out to be
much less stable than the quantum dynamics. In particular, ionization
seems to be classically very common in energy domains where the
quantum dynamics sustains bound states.

   Semiclassical methods for atoms or ions with many electrons have been
successfully developed since the pioneering works of Thomas and Fermi
in which the electrons are supposed to form a low-temperature gas
obeying the Pauli exclusion principle [30]. In this context of the many-
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 269

body systems, let us mention that the indistinguishability of the fermions
can be incorporated into the semiclassical trace formula [147, 1821.
Nevertheless, we may expect that the quantum mechanical wave prop-
erties remain important at low temperatures.

   On the other hand, the atom or the ion may enter a semiclassical
regime at high excitations of one or several electrons. High excitations of
one electron are known as Rydberg states, which have been the object of
many recent studies [33,34]. When a Rydberg atom is exposed to an
external magnetic field, its classical motion becomes chaotic and its
quantum spectrum irregular [210]. In the energy domain, the assignment
of the spectral lines becomes impossible because of spectral irregularity.
On the other hand, appropriate Fourier transforms to the energy domain
show distinct peaks that can be assigned to classical periodic orbits [34].
Recently, similar studies have been devoted to doubly excited electronic
states [36]. In such highly excited electronic states, it is natural to turn to
semiclassical methods to understand the properties of the Coulomb
Hamiltonian.

                               C. Molecular Systems

                      1. Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian

In molecules, not only the electrons but also the nuclei are in relative
motion, thus adding vibrational and rotational degrees of freedom to the
electronic ones. At low electronic excitations, the electronic degrees of
freedom may be eliminated thanks to the Born-Oppenheimer (BO)
method [56,197]. This method exploits the difference in mass between
the nuclei and the electrons. Accordingly, the nuclei are slowly moving in
an effective potential produced by averaging over the fast motion of the
electrons. Let us summarize the BO method. The Coulomb Hamiltonian
[Eq. ( l O . l ) ] is separated as

              -                                             (10.2)
% n o l e c u l a r - 'nuclei + 'electrons, nuclei

where Tnucleiis the nuclear kinetic energy, while Velectrons, nuclei is the

electronic Hamiltonian (kinetic and potential energies) plus the inter-

nuclear potential. Because of the fast electronic motion, the electronic

Hamiltonian plays the role of an effective potential for the nuclear

motion. In a discrete basis of electronic states, the electronic Hamiltonian

Velectrons, nuclei may be represented by a matrix, similarly to the Hamilto-

nian [Eq. (9.1)], where the dynamical variables are now the nuclear

positions [q = { f l R a } ] and the nuclear momenta [jj =  [56].

The BO method is then similar to the diagonalization of the matrix
270  P. GASPARD ET AL.

Hamiltonian, as explained in Section 1X.A. The role of the small
parameter h is played here by the ratio between the electronic to the
nuclear masses.

   The wavefunction is assumed to be of the form [56,197]

where 7') are the eigenvectors of the electronic Hamiltonian

Velectnruoclneis. ,The Hamiltonian is therefore reduced to the form [Eq.

(9.13)], where v is a diagonal matrix giving the effective potentials for the
motion of the nuclei. Since the ratio between the electronic and the
nuclear masses is in general very small, the vector potential matrix A may
be neglected in a first approximation.

   There will exist as many BO surfaces as there are discrete electronic
states for fixed positions of the nuclei. The BO surfaces are thus assigned
by electronic quantum numbers as long as they remain separated in
energy. The BO potential is bonding if the electrons spend most of their
time between the nuclei so that they can screen the Coulomb repulsion
between nuclei, which is the case if the electronic wave function has no
nodal surfaces between two nuclei. However, if there is such a nodal
surface, there is no screening effect and the BO potential will be
antibonding, leading to dissociation of the molecule. If a BO surface has
a barrier between a well and a dissociation channel, tunneling may occur
through the barrier so that the quantized states of the well may acquire a
lifetime determined by the tunneling (probability) rate. This rate can be
calculated semiclassically using complex periodic orbits.

   At higher electronic excitations, the BO surfaces may come close to
each other. In such situations, strong coupling may occur between several
BO surfaces resulting in surface hopping and conical intersections with
geometric phases, as we explained in Section IX. In particular, the BO
surfaces cluster at the ionization thresholds where the electronic states are
forming Rydberg series (as well as series of doubly excited electronic
states). The potential surfaces may then overlap, which may lead to a
breakdown of the classification scheme in terms of electronic quantum
numbers. This breakdown (which also occurs at the level of the vi-
brational states within each electronic surface) is attributed to the
nonintegrability of the electronic (respectively, vibrational) dynamics,
which appears together with chaos in the corresponding classical dy-
namics. When the electrons move at large distances from the nuclei, the
orbital periods of the electrons become comparable to the vibrational
periods of the nuclei so that the BO scheme is no longer valid. In these
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 271

highly excited electronic or vibrational regimes, semiclassicalmethods are
important to find order in the spectral complexity thanks to the classical
periodic orbits. Such studies are only at their beginning in the case of
molecular Rydberg or doubly excited states [37], but they are already well

developed for atomic systems, as we mentioned in Section X.B.

   After this description of the electronic degrees of freedom, we turn to
the vibrational and rotational motion sustained by a BO surface.

                     2. Rotational-Vibrational Hamiltonian

As soon as the electronic degrees of freedom are eliminated such that the
vibrational motion is found to take place on a given BO potential surface,
the BO Hamiltonian can be further simplified in terms of the translation-
al, rotational, and vibrational degrees of freedom, to obtain the Watson
form in the case of semirigid molecules [211]:

                                                                                         (10.4)

ek where = -ifi a/aq, is the vibrational momentum conjugated to the

vibrational positions q k . The operators ja are the components of the

angular momentum (with the indexes a , p = x , y , z ) , and pap(q) are the

elements of the inverse of the tensor of inertia of the molecule, which is
dependent on the vibrational positions. Moreover,

                                                                                   (10.5)

is usually called the vibrational angular momentum, where [ l l are the

Coriolis interaction parameters. uBo(q) denotes the BO potential and the
last term is the Watson term due to rotation.

   The rotational part of this Hamiltonian can also be studied semiclassi-
cally to reveal very interesting phenomena at the level of the molecular
rotational bands [171,212]. Here, semiclassical regimes can also be
reached because the quantum numbers of angular momentum can climb
up to numbers as high as J = 50 or more.

   If we assume that the angular momentum is fixed, the vibrational
motion can be studied on the corresponding potential surface. If the
potential is bonding and possesses a minimum, we may introduce the
normal modes of this stable equilibrium point and then reduce the
vibrational part of the Hamiltonian to a sum of harmonic oscillators plus
272  P. GASPARD ET AL.

anharmonic corrections. A similar procedure exists near the saddle
equilibrium point of an antibonding potential as we discussed in Section
V.

D. Coulomb and BO Potentials: Comparison of Their Semiclassical
                                       Properties

There is a major difference between the Coulomb potential that de-
termines the motion of the electrons around the nuclei and the kind of
potentials that are obtained by the BO approximation. This difference
has consequences on all properties of these systems. The Coulomb
potential is long ranged and obeys well-known classical scaling laws [70].
If we scale all the positions and the time according to

     rk+ark and t--ta3I2t  (10.6)

with k = (i, u) in the classical Hamiltonian corresponding to E . ( l O . l ) ,
the latter scales like Ye+ X / a ,while the actions scale like S+ aq"S. This

scaling law controls a lot of different properties. In particular, the periods
of periodic orbits also scale like T+a3`*T, which gives the famous
Kepler law [70]. Furthermore, to any classical solution of the Hamilto-
nian flow at an energy E l there corresponds another solution at an ener y

E,, which is scaled by a factor E,/E,, and which has a period ( E , / E , )3F2 .

A similar reasoning applied to the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom
shows that the energy quantization En = - 1 / 2 n 2 is also a consequence of

-this scaling law, since the actions of the orbits are quantized according to

S, n. Therefore, the scaling law is responsible for the accumulation of
an infinity of energy levels at the ionization thresholds. Of course, the
quantization breaks the scaling so that the property remains only in the
semiclassical limit. The accumulation of levels forming Rydberg series is
equivalently attributed to the infinite range of the Coulomb potential.

   On the other hand, the BO potentials are short ranged and thus
decrease faster at large distances. A typical Hamiltonian that is often
considered, particularly for diatomic molecules, is the Morse Hamiltonian
[Eq. (3.31)],where the decrease of the interaction is exponential at large
separations [98]. We already mentioned that this potential is exactly
solvable in classical and quantum mechanics: The quantum energy
eigenvalues are given by Eqs. (4.32)-(4.33). Accordingly, the number of
eigenstates sustained by the Morse potential is finite although it may be
large. Using the rescaled energy E, = E,/D, the spectrum is given by

     En = 1 - (77, - 1)2   (10.7)

in terms of the variable 77, = h 0 ( n+ 1 / 2 ) / 2 Dwith 7,s1. The spectrum
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 273

         1

oc

     0.1

0.01        10     100  1000
       1

                Y

    Figure 48. Quantum energy levels {E, = E , / D } [Eq. (10.7)] of the Morse oscillator
versus the quantum variable y = 2D/(hw0) for n = 0-17, together with the location of
several diatomic molecules in this model. Note the accumulation of energy levels in the
semiclassical limit y + m . The purpose of this figure is to illustrate how the semiclassical
limit is reached for the Morse oscillators. The limit does not exist within a single system but
exists only within a class of systems.

is depicted in Fig. 48 versus the variable y = 2D/(ho,), which in this case
plays the role of the inverse of the Planck constant and gives the number
of eigenvalues. We remark that the spectrum of the Morse oscillator may
be homogenized in the sense of Eq. (4.4). Indeed, the energy levels

+ m). correspond to an equal spacing between the values taken by the

+ quantized variable y = y , = (n 1 / 2 ) / ( 1

   If we assume a Morse potential for several diatomic molecules, we can
localize the individual systems along the y axis in a plot of E, versus y , as
in Fig. 48, where we observe that the number of eigenstates may become
large in heavy molecules. The semiclassical limit is reached in the limit
y + c ~ , where the number of eigenvalues is very large. The Morse
potential is a theoretical idealization of a molecular potential, and more
general potentials are used in practice to fit the experimental data.
Nevertheless, the Morse potential already illustrates our point that there
is no simple scaling law for molecular potentials contrary to the Coulomb
potential.

XI. MOLECULAR VIBROGRAMS: SPECTROSCOPY IN THE TIME
                                        DOMAIN

In this and the following section, we report on the application of
periodic-orbit theory to molecular systems. Transitions between elec-
274  P. GASPARD ET AL.

tronic states, which can be bonding or nonbonding, may feature vi-
brational fine structure that can be associated with the nuclear motion on
a BO potential energy surface. If the potential surface is known, and the
number of degrees of freedom is limited, a detailed analysis in terms of
the periodic orbits of the system may be undertaken. We give an example
of such an analysis for the case of photodissociation of the HgI, molecule
in Section XII.

   Proceeding by the inverse route, one may extract information on the
classical periodic orbits by analyzing molecular spectra. We will discuss
this approach [214] in the present section, and give examples for several
bound and unbound molecular systems.

                         A. The Principle of Vibrograms

As explained earlier, classical orbits are emerging from wave dynamics in
the semiclassical limit of high excitations. The theory developed in the
preceding sections provides us with the tools to establish explicitly the
correspondence between the quantum mechanical quantities and the
emerging classical ones. In this correspondence, a central role is played
by the Gutzwiller trace formula [Eq. (6.13)] and, especially, by the
semiclassical expression [Eq. (7.15)] for the photoabsorption cross-sec-
tion. These semiclassical formulas differ for the different physical observ-
ables that are considered. In Eq. (7.15), we have the photoabsorption K,.
In a bounded system, the photoabsorption cross-section is discrete as

where ,Z are the transition intensities between the levels rn and n

separated by the Bohr frequency a,, = (En- E,)/h. If the initial state of
the molecule is at low temperature, the transitions occur essentially
between the ground state rn = 0 and some excited state. In this case, the
photoabsorption cross-section essentially reproduces the energy spectrum
of the molecule

with E, = E , + fiw.

   The discrete energy levels of some molecules are known with precision
so that we may consider the so-called stick spectrum

                                                                                    (11.3)
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 275

If the excited state is unbounded, the photoabsorption spectrum is
continuous. Since diffuse bands usually occur at high energies [213], the
molecule may often be supposed to lie in its ground state before
absorption. In this case, the photoabsorption cross-section also re-

produces the energy spectrum according to E, = E , + nu.

   Let us point out that it is important to know the energy spectrum in
order to apply semiclassical considerations. Otherwise, we could not use
the semiclassical relations Eqs. (6.13) or (7.15). If thermal effects are
important, the molecular spectrum will be composed of a large number of
possible transitions as in Eq. (11.1). In this case, the photoabsorption
spectrum is given by the autocorrelation function of the electric dipole
operator averaged over a statistical ensemble represented by a density
matrix [60]. The time evolution is therefore controlled by the Landau-
von Neumann operator [187]. Accordingly, the photoabsorption spectrum
as a function of the Bohr frequency gives information on the eigenvalues
of the Landau-von Neumann operator rather than of the Hamiltonian
operator. If the spectrum presents distinct discrete lines, both sets of
eigenvalues are simply related to each other. However, since lines
accumulate in the semiclassical limit, the Landau-von Neumann operator
starts to be well approximated by the classical Liouville operator accord-
ing to Section 1I.D [69]. The Liouville operator is known to have its own
eigenvalues giving the classical frequencies in quasiperiodic motions as
well as the classical relaxation and escape rates in unstable and chaotic
phase-space regions. As a consequence, Bohr-frequency spectra tend to
provide information on the quasiclassical eigenvalues in the semiclassical
limit rather than on the quantum eigenvalues. In this chapter, which is
devoted to semiclassical methods, we focus on the energy spectra that are
amenable to the semiclassical analysis.

   Let us assume that we know, for a molecule of interest, a spectral
quantity u(E)of the kind described above. To obtain information on the
classical periodic orbits from the energy spectrum, one may use the
Fourier transformation to go from the energy domain to the time domain
and define

I-,+X  i
G ( T )= U ( E ) exp( - s T ) ds  (11.4)

When referring to Eq. (6.13) or (7.15), we face the difficulty that the
reduced actions of the different periodic orbits do not have a simple

- dependency on the energy, except in systems where the actions scale with

energy, such as S IE(",with the exponent a being characteristic of the

i, system. Such is the case for billiards where a = for pure Coulomb
276  P. GASPARD ET AL.

-3, systems where a = for quantum maps where a = 1, and for the

hydrogen atom in a magnetic field where a combined scaling exists
between the energy and the magnetic field. However, the dependency is
general in molecules so that a Fourier transform may introduce mixing
between the behaviors at different energies and the periods of the orbits
would not be available.

   If the energy spectrum presents distinct diffuse bands [213], we could
apply the Fourier transform [Eq. (11.4)] to each one of the diffuse bands.
Here, the aforementioned difficulty would not arise if the classical actions
of the periodic orbits remain nearly constant over the energy range of the
diffuse band. However, a global Fourier transform, such as Eq. (11.4),
would be useless if the energy spectrum extends over a large range, where
classical actions and periods undergo significant variations.

   As a solution to this problem, we propose a windowed Fourier
transform, which we define by [214]

     i-m         exp - (& - q 2- i i E T ]ds

          (+(&I
     [ S(T,E ; A E ) =  2AE2                  (11.5)

     --oi

where AE is the width of the window.
   The function [Eq. (11.5)] leads to a natural graphical representation

that we call a vibrogram. The vibrogram is constructed as follows. Since
the function [Eq. (11.5)] is complex let us define another real function
according to

where the normalizing factor N ( E ;A E ) is taken such that limT+of ( T ) / T
= 1. We expect successive peaks { T i ( E ) } to appear in the function [Eq.
(11.6)] when the time T varies for fixed energy E . The vibrogram is a
representation of the locations in the ( E , T ) plane of the different peaks
{ T i @ ) } as a function of the energy E .

   These peaks may be interpreted as the periods of recurrences of the
wavepacket dynamics. Under the following assumptions, the peaks may
be interpreted moreover as the periods of the classical orbits emerging
from the quantum dynamics:

   1. The observable quantity has a periodic-orbit expansion of the
       Gutzwiller type:
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 277

2. Within the energy window AE, the different quantities on the

right-hand side of Eq. (11.7) are slowly varying with energy E . In

particular, the actions of the periodic orbits have an approximately

linear dependency on energy E while the amplitudes  are

approximately constant:

                                                    (11.8)

       where E is the center of the energy window of width AE.
   3. There are enough energy levels inside the window AE.

   Let us now discuss the behavior of the vibrogram if the above
assumptions are not satisfied. If we suppose that the actions of the
periodic orbits have a quadratic dependency of the form

              S P ( ~ ) ~ S p O (TE, () E+ ) ( E - E ) + ~ S , , ( E ) ( E - E ) ~ (11.9) '

in the Gutzwiller-type formula [Eq. (11.7)], a calculation shows that the
function S(T, E ; A E ) is composed of a superposition of complex Gaussian
functions of the following kind

          ( T - T, 1'                               (11.10)

exp[- 2h2(AE2- iS,,/ti)

Consequently, the function [Eq. (11.5)] exhibits well-defined peaks
centered on the classical periods at the condition that the second
derivative of the action of each periodic orbit is small enough and satisfies
the following inequality with respect to the time domain, using S,, =
d,T,:

                          n

                                A T = ~ B ~ ~(11.11)

Otherwise, the structure of the peaks may be more complicated. A
dependency on the energy of the amplitudes A , , , seems to have a less
important influence on the structure of the peaks than the nonlinear
dependency of the actions as in Eq. (11.9). Therefore, we expect that the
vibrogram would correspond to the diagram of the periods versus energy
of the classical orbits of the system introduced in Section I11 if the
semiclassical assumptions (1)-(3) and conditions [Eq. (11.11)] are
satisfied.

   The transform [Eq. (11.5)] is also known as energy-time Husimi
278  P. GASPARD ET AL.

transform [214]. The window AE can be interpreted as a squeezing
parameter. In one limit, we remain in the energy domain, while we
recover the global Fourier transform [Eq. (11.4)] to the time domain in
the other limit. Indeed, we have

     exp(iET /6)
     a ( E ) = lim               E S(~T,E ; A E )  (11.12)
             AE-O A

and

     G ( T )= lim S(T,E ; A E )                    (11.13)
                  AE--

Moreover, we have the alternative relation

       I--c-                                      +1

S ( T ,E ; A E ) = - AE G(T)exp             (T - T ) 2 E(T - T ) ]d~
                  66

                                                   (11.14)

which shows that the Husimi transform of the energy spectrum is
equivalent to a windowed Fourier transform of the time spectrum with a
time width AT = h/AE. The form [Eq. (11.14)] suggests another alter-
native type of diagram known as the sonogram in acoustics, where the
frequency (or here energy) content of a time signal in the window AT is
represented as a function of time [214]. O n such a sonogram, we can
observe how the frequencies of the fast vibrational modes change in time
due to the molecular distortions induced by the slow modes [214].

   Let us conclude this introductory section with a remark on the
semiclassical limit in molecular systems. Because of the B O approxi-
mation, traces of the limit fi+O are lost as soon as we focus on a single
BO surface, which implies that the electronic motion is treated quantum
mechanically. If we nevertheless assume that this BO potential is given,
we may formally consider the semiclassical limit for the vibrational
motion on this given BO surface. However, the molecular potentials are
of the Morse type and their energy levels do not accumulate in infinite
series as for the Coulomb-type potentials. Therefore, we are obliged to
use the windowed Fourier transform, at least in the case where the
spectrum of a single molecular species is to be analyzed. However, it may
be possible to study the semiclassical limit along a series of isotopomers
with increasing nuclear masses as in Fig. 48. In this way, another kind of
semiclassical scaling may be available.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 279

                         B. Bounded Molecular Systems
For a discrete energy stick spectrum [Eq. (11.3)], we can also convenient-
ly use a squared rather than a Gaussian window and define the function

where the sum extends over all the energy levels in the range of width AE
around the energy E . Here the parameter J ( E ; A E ) is the number of
energy levels in this range so that we have limT+of ( T ) / T= 1. This
function can be used to draw the vibrogram associated with the stick
spectrum.

           Z,(x 1. Morse-Type Model for 'C)

As a first example, we consider a Morse model of the ground state 'C

of the diatomic molecule I, for which the dissociation energy is D =

12,542 cm-', the ground-state frequency v = 215.2 cm-', and the equilib-

rium distance r = 2.67 A [215]. Figure 49 shows the vibrogram of I,

superposed on the classical periods T ( E )= r v - l v m . The vibrogram
is composed of the points where the function [Eq. (11.15)] exceeds
certain thresholds, in order to display the values of T where this function
has large peaks. We see that the vibrogram reproduces the classical

               1500

   - 1000

                 0
               a,

     G

          b

               500

-12500 -10000 -7500 -5000 -2500  0

E [cm-'1

    Figure 49. Vibrogram of a Morse model of 12(R'C) calculated with the function [Eq.
(11.15)] with AE = 1000cm-'. The solid lines are the classical periods. The big dots mark
the points where the functions [Eq. (11.15)] is larger than a high value while the small dots
do the same at a lower value of [Eq. (11.15)].
280  P. GASPARD ET AL.

periods of the system. Because of the Heisenberg uncertainty relation
between time and energy, only the structures of the vibrogram that have
an area larger than Tz = 5308.7 fs cm-l are meaningful. In this sense, the
periodic orbits emerge from the wave dynamics but they do not underlie
the wave dynamics.

              2. CS,(x ' E l ) : Fermi Resonance

In its ground electronic state, the molecule carbon disulfide ( C S , ) is
collinear and shares several other properties with carbon dioxide (CO,).
In particular, its vibrational spectrum is dominated by a Fermi resonance
between the symmetric stretching and bending modes. This molecule has
been the object of recent high-resolution spectroscopic studies, par-
ticularly those by Pique et al. [216-2181 who obtained some 1000
vibrational energy levels in the energy range 0-20,000 cm-'. Below about
13,000 cm-', the experimental spectrum of Pique et al. [218] essentially
contains levels of excited symmetric stretching and bending modes.
Above 13,000 cm-', a transition is observed where the asymmetric
stretching mode starts to interact strongly with the two other modes.

   The spectroscopic analysis of the low-energy part of the spectrum

' E l (below 12,000 cm-') led to the following effective Hamiltonian for the

2 ground electronic state of the CS, molecule [216,217]

     & ? = g9okF+                   (11.16)

with

    + + + w2 + &o = wl(ul 1/2) w2(u2 1) w3(u3+ 112) +X''(Ul +

         + + + + x2z(u2 1)' x33(u3 1/2), + X12(U1 + 1/2)(u, + 1)
         + + + xI3(u1 1/2)(u3 + 112) + ~ 2 3 ( ~ 2l)(u3 + 112)

     + Y 2 2 2 ( V 2 + 1)' + g22e:  (11.17)

and with the Fermi interaction

                                    (11.18)

In Eqs. (11.17)-(11.18), u l , u 2 , u3 stand for the vibrational quantum
numbers of the corresponding symmetric stretching, bending, and
asymmetric stretching modes. Since the CS, molecule is collinear in its

ground state, the bending mode is doubly degenerate and t2= u 2 , u2 - 2,
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 281

. . . , -u2 is the corresponding quantum number of vibrational angular

momentum. In terms of the creation-annihilation operators, we have

+ v , = Ci:Ci,, v 3 = ;id,, u, = Cii6, a.I,t an,l, and 8, = Ci:Ci, - a,. I ? aA 2l , where 8,

and Ci; are annihilation operators for the two bending modes. The Fermi
interaction gives a coupling between energy levels of $??o separated by
Aul = 51 and Au, = 32. Table I provides the constants for this model as
obtained by Pique et al. [216,217].

   In Fig. 50, we present the vibrogram obtained from the experimental
spectrum of the CS,(x 'C,') molecule. The experimental data have been
kindly provided to us by Pique et al. and give the vibrational energies of a
laser fluorescence spectrum of CS,. Here, the vibrogram has been
calculated by Fourier transform using a Gaussian window as defined in
Eqs. (11.5)-(11.6) with AE = 4000cm-'. The maxima of the function

[Eq. (11.6)] along the T axis are given by dots of different sizes
depending on the height of the maxima.

   In order to interpret the vibrogram, we studied the classical dynamics
of the model [Eq. (11.16)-(11.18)]. In the classical limit, the vibrational
quantum numbers become action variables according to

                      ui+ di/2- Ji                      (11.19)

with d, = d, = 1, and d, = 2. Besides, we also have the vibrational
angular momentum 8, e L, with -J, I:L, 5 J2. Associated with the

action variables, we have the conjugated angle variables, 0, and x,.The

                                      TABLE I
Set of Parameters for the Low-Energy Model [Eqs. (11.16-11.18)] of CS,

Parameter (cm-')      Values by Pique et al. [216,217]

                W1                  665.699
                W2                  399.835
                03                 1561.347
                 x11                 -0.175
                 x1z                 -1.243
                x13                  -8.003
                x22                  +0.770
                 '23                 -6.710
                x33                  -6.333
                                     -0.0124
        Y 222                         40.908
        km
282              P. GASPARD ET AL.

            300                      ..................................
                                    ....................................
           250
                                        .............................
     - 200

     g

            150

     b

           I00

     50

     0

                                            E [crn-l]

  ' E l ) Figure 50. Vibrogram of CS,(X calculated with a Gaussian window according to

Eqs. (11.5-11.6) with AE=4000cm-'. The experimental data by Pique et al. [216-2181
contain about 900 levels in the range 0-20000 cm-'. The size of the dots increases with the
height of the peak in the vibrogram. In the lower part at small energies, the solid lines are
the periods of the individual modes of the Hamiltonian [Eq. (11.20)] calculated according to
T , = 27ri0, with w1= d J I X ( J , ,J2 = J3 = 0), and T2= 2 ~ r / ww~ith a corresponding definition
for w2. In the upper part, the solid lines are the periods of the periodic orbits of the
Hamiltonian [Eq. (11.21)] calculated as explained in the text and reported from Fig. 5 2 .
The black square has an area equal to fi = 5308.7 cm-' fs.

classical Hamiltonian is therefore

       + + + Xc1= wlJl + w2J2 w3J3 xllJ? + + x Z 2 J ; ~ 3 3 J : X 1 2 J l J 2

                                                                                    ( 11.20)

We have a Hamiltonian system with four degrees of freedom. The
Hamiltonian is integrable. Indeed, the angle variables appear only in the
combination 8, - 28, in the Fermi resonance term. Therefore, we may

+ introduce the angular-momentum type variables appropriate to the Fermi

resonance [219], namely, Z = (J, J2/2)/2and f3= 8, + 28,, together with

1, = (J1- J2/2)/2 and CC, = 8, - 28,. Z and Z, correspond to operators of

the angular momentum group SU(2) [219]. The Hamiltonian is now the
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 283

function Yecl(Z,I,,,)I L,, J3). Accordingly, the actions Z, L,, and J3 are
constants of motion and there remains a single degree of freedom. A last
quadrature shows that the system is integrable. This example illustrates
the fact that a single Fermi resonance does not necessarily imply the
presence of chaotic behavior. Extra perturbations are necessary to induce
classical chaos [216,217].

   To simplify the discussion, we consider the two-degree-of-freedom
subsystem where L , = J3 = 0. This assumption is reasonable to discuss the
low-energy part of the vibrogram in Fig. 50, since the quantum numbers
ug and 8, are often vanishing in the experimental spectrum below
13,000 cm-I. The classical Hamiltonian [Eq. (11.20)] becomes

                                                                                   (11.21)

A few words are now in order about the types of motion described by this
Hamiltonian. A local mode of bending character is present around $ = 0,
Z, = -Z for all energies. On the other hand, a transition occurs at the
energy E = 3061.3 cm-l, where new local modes of symmetric stretching
character emerge from Z = I, at $ = T.(Note that Z = I, corresponds to
pure symmetric-stretch motion.) This bifurcation from normal-to-local
modes is due to the 2 : 1Fermi resonance [219]. Figure 51 shows two types
of phase portraits before and after the 2 : l bifurcation. The phase
portraits are drawn in the (Z,, $) plane. The different trajectories
correspond to different energies. Note that the angle 8 is not represented

+ in Fig. 51, although it is rapidly increasing as 8 = (wl 2w2)t.

   In a semiclassical approach, the energy levels would be obtained as a
sum over periodic orbits as discussed in the preceding sections. In the
integrable case, the trace formula we should consider is the Berry-Tabor
formula [Eq. (6.63)] of SectionV1.E. The periodic orbits of an integrable
system are obtained from the condition that the ratio between the
periods, T* and To, along the angles $ and 8 is a rational number

                                                                                   (11.22)

This condition selects a discrete set of periodic orbits at each energy. The
overall period is given here by T = rmT, = rnT,, where r is the number of
repetitions of the fundamental period. In the harmonic limit of the model

+ [Eq. (11.21)], for example, we have T o / T ,= (2w, - w1)/(2w, w l ) =
284             P. GASPARD ET AL.

     I

            -n  0                  tn

                w

        +I

     I0

        -I  -n

                0
                w

   Figure 51. Phase portraits of the classical flow of the Hamiltonian [Eq.(11.21)]in the
($,Iz) plane for two different values of the action (a) before and ( b ) after the 2:l
bifurcation of the Fermi resonance of CS,: (a) I = 1; ( b ) I = 5 .

1/11, which shows that the smallest period should be expected at a
relatively high value of the order of 250 fs with respect to the periods of
the individual modes, namely, T I = 2rrlw, = 50 fs and T2= 2.rr/w2= 83 fs.
This phenomenon is referred to as the stroboscopic effect and is general
in vibrograms of multifrequency systems, as discussed by Pique- et al.
[216,2171.

- We have carried out a systematic search for the periodic orbits of

lowest period beyond the harmonic limit. Figure 52 depicts the corre-
sponding period-energy diagram of the Hamiltonian [Eq. (11.21)]. As
energy increases with the anharmonic effects, a larger range of periods
[Eq. (11.22)] is generated. This range is determined by two extreme
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 285

      500                1,"'I'I\"I'"

     400 -                         I        \                                        3

- 300 - ,.,'                       I           \                                     -

     200 L '..= ....            I                   \

      100 -                     1                      \

        0                       I                         . \                        -
                                                                \
                                I                                          \

                                                                                     <

                                I

                                I                                                    -

                         ..._.  ,'......-..._._...

                                I                   *..-..-..  .  .  .  .  _  .  __  __ _ __.-__  .

                                I

                                I

                      1  ,  <I I      I  I     I    1  I          ,        ,     ,

    Figure 52. Period-energy diagram of the periodic orbits of the Hamiltonian [Eq.
 (11.21)] of CS,. The dotted lines mark the borders of the main family of periodic orbits.
The vertical dash-dotted line locates the critical energy E = 3061.3cm-' of the 2 : 1
bifurcation of the Fermi resonance where a new family of periodic orbits emerges, which
have periods beyond the long-dashed line.

orbits in the phase portrait of Fig. 51. A lower limit is determined by the
period of the small oscillations around the fixed point at CC, = 0 in Fig.
51(a) (represented by the lower dashed line in Fig. 52). On the other
hand, the period of the orbit of pure symmetric stretching mode at
Z = +I, determines the upper limit (the upper dashed line in Fig. 52). The
intrinsic periodic orbits satisfying the condition [Eq. (11.22)] are lying
between these limits. In Fig. 52 we only depicted the periodic orbit with
m = 1 and with repetition r = 1, since they are of smallest period near the
lower limit. These periodic orbits are generated or absorbed by the two
extreme orbits as the energy varies. Consequently, the solid lines
representing their periods start abruptly on the limits. There are many
more families of periodic orbits besides the l l n given orbits, which are
obtained by varying the integers m and r.

   As energy increases, we meet the bifurcation at E = 3061.3 cm-'
(vertical dash-dotted line in Fig. 52) where a new fixed point appears at
CC, = T , as seen in Fig. 51(b). At this bifurcation, the period of the upper
extreme orbit (Z= +Z,) has increased to infinity due to a critical slowing
down, which is a typical phenomenon at bifurcations. Beyond the
bifurcation, the fixed point ($ = T) is surrounded by oscillations that
286  P. GASPARD ET AL.

correspond to periodic orbits of a new type (not represented in Fig. 52).
These new periodic orbits exist beyond the long-dashed line in Fig. 52,
which gives the period of infinitesimal oscillations around the fixed point
at = T .

   The classical period-energy diagram can help us to interpret the
vibrogram of Fig. 50. In the nearly harmonic regime at very low energies,
we observe a stroboscopic effect with high maxima at periods significantly
larger than the periods of the normal modes. Nevertheless, we also find
small maxima at the periods of the normal modes taken individually:
T I= 50 fs and T2= 83 fs. Still, at low energies, we find a series of lines of
maxima in approximate correspondence with some periods l l n of Fig. 52
(solid lines). In particular, the classical periods explain the observed
recurrence at 160fs. However, this correspondence disappears at higher
periods. This deterioration may be due to various reasons: (1) the
accumulation of higher periods rnin, (2) the presence of energy levels

with u3 > 0 in the experimental spectrum, (3) the finite number of energy

levels that leads to a breakdown of the classical-quantum correspondence
after long time periods. For those reasons, the observation of the 2 : 1
bifurcation remains elusive. Nevertheless, the main periodic orbits seem
to be well accounted for by the vibrogram for this molecule.

   Further examples of vibrograms are given in the following sections.

                       C. Unbounded Molecular Systems

Besides bound electronic states, molecules feature antibonding excited
electronic states that give rise to dissociation and produce intrinsically
continuous bands in ultraviolet (UV) absorption spectra [213]. In the case
of diffuse bands, the vibrogram may also be useful to obtain the
recurrence periods of the transient dynamics of dissociation. If the bands
do not overlap, and since the bands already have a finite width, there is
often no need to consider a Gaussian window in the Fourier transform so
that we can apply the Fourier transform [Eq. (11.4)] to the individual
bands.

                           1. co,

Figure 53 shows the UV photoabsorption spectrum of CO, obtained by
Nakata et al. [220] in 1965. It is composed of different bands associated
with different electronic states.

   In the infrared (IR) and visible (vis) parts of the spectrum, which are
not shown in Fig. 53, the motion takes place on the potential surface of

the linear ground electronic state of the molecule (2'C,'). This elec-

tronic state is bonding and thus gives rise to stable vibrational motion of
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 287

60  80  I00         I20  I40

        E [lo3cm"]

    Figure 53. Ultraviolet photoabsorption spectrum of carbon dioxide (CO,) obtained by
Nakata, Watanabe, and Matsunaga in 1965 (adapted from [ZZO]).

the molecule. The energy spectrum is discrete so that the spectral lines
are sharp except for radiative (or Doppler and collisional) linewidth.

   At higher energy, the motion on other electronic surfaces may be
excited so that the UV spectrum reveals the different electronic states of
the molecules in the form of successive bands as shown in Fig. 53. At low
and medium energies, the electronic states appear in the form of distinct
bands due to the series of vibrational states sustained by each electronic
potential surface. The bands are either composed of discrete lines if the
surface is bonding (which is not the case in Fig. 53) or are intrinsically
continuous if the surface is antibonding or coupled to a dissoci_ative

continuum. The first two bands of Fig. 53 are known as 2 ' A u and B 'IIg

c states, which have forbidden transitions with the ground surface [213].

The next band of high intensity is the 'C: state, which features
structures due to nontrivial vibrational motion in spite of the fact that the
band is continuous. A potential surface proposed for the collinear motion
of CO, on this surface is shown in Fig. 54 [221,222]. The potential
surface presents a saddle point between the two channels of dissociation

            (0-C)* + o*+-(O-C-O>*+ 0"+ (C-O)*

   If the molecule has been excited to this potential surface, we have a
process of direct dissociation that is very fast, of the order of 10fs for
CO,. In spite of its rapidity, the vibrational motion is far from trivial, and
288  P. GASPARD ET AL.

   Figure 54. LEPS-type potential surface of the electronic state CO,(? 'Z:) versus the

two distances rco in the collinear configuration with the parameter values adopted in [223].

may remain trapped and oscillate for a while in the region of the saddle
equilibrium point. In a classical model of the dynamics, there exists a
classical periodic orbit that corresponds to the symmetric stretch of CO,
at an energy just above the saddle. This classical periodic orbit is trapped
along the diagonal ridge of the potential energy surface, although it is
unstable with respect to antisymmetric perturbations. Accordingly, it is
possible to estimate the average time spent in the vicinity of the unstable
periodic orbit using classical stability theory, as shown later. At higher
energies just above the saddle, the classical motion becomes chaotic,
which we also discuss later.

   This example shows that the vibrational dynamics may contain meta-
stable states of finite lifetime in the region of the saddle. These dynamical
states can therefore be identified with the molecular transition complex so
important in chemical kinetics. We will also show that the vibrational
metastable states are at the origin of the peaks on top of the continuous
bands. If the preceding reasoning is essentially classical we will show that
it describes the phenomenon to a very good approximation, and thus
gives a good example of the intuitive appeal of the semiclassical method.

   At still higher energies, we find other bands forming Rydberg series
leading to the ionization thresholds. The electronic states accumulate at
the ionization thresholds of CO, for the formation of the corresponding
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 289

ion

                   (co,)*+(co,+)+*e-

   In particular, the first threshold around 110,000cm-' corresponds to

the ground state 2 *IIg of the ion and the second visible threshold around
145,000cm-' to the state g 'Z: of the ion [213]. The studies of Rydberg

states and doubly excited electronic states in atomic species suggest the
possibility of irregular spectra in these highly excited regimes of the
molecules, which would correspond to classically chaotic behaviors.

   The vibrogram of CO, was calculated by Eqs. (11.5)-(11.6) and is

depicted in Fig. 5 5 . In the lowest 2 'A, band, we find two recurrences at

60 and 150fs, which also appear in an ordinary Fourier transform of the

band. By contrast, the g *IIgband is dominated by recurrences at 52 and
92 fs. In the intense E C band there are more pronounced recurrences

with two dominant ones at 50fs and 60fs. At higher energies, the
vibrogram is more complicated with more recurrences. The origin of the

large number of recurrences in the E 'Z: band has been the object of

recent works [62,222,223]. It has been shown by Schinke and Engel [223]

200                                                                  -..j ........................-.I....-.....
                                                                                                           ......
                                                                     ..........

150

c                                                                     ....

       50                                                            .......

                                                                      .................
                                                                     ......

0                  '  '. . . . . . . I .  / , / , ..I........,                           I  1
                          80
           """"""

           60                             100                   120                                        140

                                          E [lo3cm"]

    Figure 55. Vibrogram of CO, calculated from the experimental UV photoabsorption
spectrum by Nakata et al. [220] shown in Fig. 53. The vibrogram is calculated with a
Gaussian window according to Eqs. (11.5)-(11.6) with AE=4000cm-'. The size of the
circles increases with the height of the peak in the vibrogram and visual contrast is increased
by alternating black and white circles. See text for comments.
290          P. GASPARD ET AL.

that the antibonding potential surface accommodates classically chaotic
behavior. Accordingly, there exist several possible periodic orbits of short
periods that can be at the origin of the two main periods. As we discussed
above, the presence of recurrences does not contradict the antibonding
character of the potential since there may exist trapped periodic orbits,
particularly corresponding to symmetric stretch motion of the molecule,
as shown by Heller and Pack [61,224]. On the other hand, the possibility
of several overlapping electronic potential surfaces is not excluded.

   Note that the main recurrences of the three lowest bands are clustered
around the values of 50fs in spite of the fact that they are related to
different bands. It seems as if the force constants were homogeneous for
the different bands.

                                  2. HJ and D2S

Another example is given for the molecules hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and
deuterium sulfide (D2S). Figure 56 shows a diffusive band of the
absorption spectrum of these isotopomers obtained experimentally by
Lee et al. [225] (see also [226]). The standard Fourier transforms of these
bands are given in Fig. 57. We observe recurrences at 25 fs for H,S and at
37 fs for D2S, which correspond to unstable vibrational motion in the
region of the transition complex. Schinke et al. [62,227] showed that
there are two antibonding electronic surfaces that are coupled and form
an unstable ridge with two conical intersections. According to our

     8           *-- D S

                                2

     6-

     4-                                4..

     2-

     0       50                    60  65
     40  45      55

             E [lo3crn.']

    Figure 56. The first diffusive hand in the photoabsorption spectra of H,S and D,S
obtained experimentally by Lee et al. [225].The band is due to the electronic states ' B , and
' A , as explained in [62].Here, (r is the photoabsorption cross-section.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 291

-Em

i

     0  20  40  60  80  100

            T [fs]

   Figure 57. Fourier transforms T x 6 ( T ) with 6 defined by Eq. (11.4) of the first

diffusive bands of H,S and D,S of Fig. 56.

discussion in Section IX, we must consider, from the semiclassical point
of view, the periodic orbits of each surface of the diagonalized potential
separately. The lower surface is antibonding and may sustain unstable
periodic orbits on its ridge. The diffusiveness of the band reflects the
instability of the periodic orbit. It is interesting to note that the period is

in the ratio I6 for one isotopomer with respect to the other, which

corresponds to the doubling of the mass of the hydrogen nuclei.

                                     3. Remarks

From the vibrograms presented in this section, we see that the periodic
orbits emerging from the quantum dynamics are experimentally observ-
able in absorption spectra.

   In Section XII, we will discuss in detail the quantum dynamics of the
molecular transition complex and of its metastable states. In particular,
we will show that there are scattering resonances underlying the vi-
brational oscillatory structures of the diffuse bands. The scattering
resonances can be calculated semiclassically in terms of the unstable
periodic orbits that are trapped in the region of the molecular transition
complex. In this context, the lifetime of the transition complex is
determined by the Lyapunov exponents of the periodic orbits. This
dynamical aspect was neglected until recently when femtosecond laser
techniques became available to measure the decay times of the molecular
transition complex.
292  P. GASPARD ET AL.

     XII. THE MOLECULAR TRANSITION STATE AND
                            ITS RESONANCES

The molecular transition state is a fundamental concept in our under-
standing of chemical reactions. If the transition state was first considered
in a statistical context in the classical work of Eyring [228], recent works
have focused on its relationship to scattering theory and its foundation
within quantum dynamics. In this regard, the transition state is described
naturally by the set of metastable states associated with scattering
resonances, that is, the poles of the S-matrix or equivalently of the Green
function associated with the potential surface where the reaction dy-
namics takes place.

   Different methods have been proposed and used to calculate scattering
resonances, such as the complex rotation method [229], the coupled-
channel approach [230], the R-matrix method [231], and the wavepacket
propagation approach with absorbing boundaries [80]. Our purpose in
this section is to apply the semiclassical method of periodic-orbit quanti-
zation as well as of equilibrium point quantization. These semiclassical
methods are very well adapted for the calculation of the resonances of the
molecular transition state in many circumstances. They turn out to be
extremely efficient, and they provide relations with the classical and
statistical approaches. In this sense, the semiclassical approach has a
unifying role in the description of reaction dynamics, as was pointed out
recently by Marcus [51].

   This section is organized as follows. In Sections XI1.A-F, we present a
detailed analysis by Burghardt and Gaspard [21] of the transition complex
in the photodissociation process of HgI,, which has been the object of
recent femtosecond laser experiments by Zewail and co-workers [232-
2341. In a collinear model, we analyze the phase-space geometry of the
classical repeller, as well as the bifurcations leading to classical chaos and
the formation of a three-branch Smale horseshoe. Thanks to this result,
we can list all the periodic orbits needed to describe the dynamics in the
chaotic regime. Subsequently, we carry out equilibrium point and
periodic orbit quantization to obtain the scattering resonances, which are
compared with a quantum mechanical calculation by wavepacket propa-
gation. The results are discussed in Section XI1.F. In Section XII.G, we
compare the classical repellers of symmetric ABA and asymmetric ABC
triatomic molecules. The following Sections XI1.H-K present extensions
toward and inclusion of bending and rotation, as well as toward higher-
dimensional systems in the framework of equilibrium point and periodic-
orbit quantization.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 293

                        A. The HgI, System

We present a detailed analysis of the transition complex in the photo-
dissociation process

' E l ) + hv + Hg12(X   + [ I . . - H g . .*I]'+HgI(X2E+) I(2Z'3,2) (12.1)

This study has been motivated by the femtosecond laser experiments on
mercuric iodide (HgI,), which have recently been reported by Zewail and
co-workers [232-2341. Our analysis is based on the potential energy
surface (p.e.s.) proposed in [233,234], that is, a damped Morse potential
for two degrees of freedom (the two interatomic distances), assuming that
the transition state is collinear. The dynamics of the HgI, system is
modeled according to the following two-degree-of-freedom Hamiltonian

                           1           1
                        -(&   &) - - p * g 2
+ %   +                                       + V(rl, r2)
=  f                Q=  2kgI                                              (12.2)

                              mHg

with the potential

                    I} e-yrl(rl - r e ) / r e+ e-yr2(r2- r e ) / r e  -D  (12.3)
                              e-Y'l + e-YrZ

where the parameters D, p, and re have further dependencies on r1 and r2

according to

with the parameters given in Table 11. This potential is depicted in Fig.
58.

   In terms of the semiclassical methods introduced above, the molecular
transition complex is closely related to the classical repeller, that is, the
ensemble of unstable periodic orbits in a hyperbolic system. If the
repeller is composed of a single periodic orbit (the symmetric-stretch
orbit), the lifetime of the metastable resonance states will be directly
294                  P. GASPARD ET AL.

                                                 TABLE I1
Set of Parameters for the Dissociative Potential Energy Surface [Eqs. (12.3) and (12.4)] of

                                               HgI, [233,234]

Do = 2800 cm-I  D , = -1000 cm-'        u,=lA

re,,= 2.8A      rrl = 0.2 A             ure= 1A
                p, = 5.5A               up= 0.75 A , up+= 2.5 8,
p, = 7.1

y =2.3A-'

related to the Lyapunov exponent of this orbit, as pointed out in Section
XI. This is the situation prevailing at low energies in the HgI, system,
before a transition to a chaotic regime occurs. The chaotic, nonseparable
regime at high energies is characterized by an infinite number of periodic
orbits, and an individual periodic orbit is no longer related to a regular
family of resonances. As we explained in Sections V and VI, the spectrum
of resonance states then cannot be assigned in terms of "good" quantum
numbers, such that perturbation expansions are not applicable.

   In Section XII.D, we present the results of the periodic-orbit quantiza-
tion in the low- and high-energy regimes. Note that in the regular regime,
at low energies, a quantization condition can be derived by periodic-orbit
quantization of the symmetric-stretch orbit or, alternatively, by the
method of equilibrium point quantization, as described in Section XII.C.

   The transition between the regular and chaotic regimes in the HgI,
system is brought about by a series of bifurcations in classical phase

     II                                 I I1000

                                        j -2000

     0.25       0.3               0.35  0.4

                             r2 [nml

    Figure 58. View in perspective of the potential surface [Eqs. (12.3)-(12.4)] of [I

Hg . . .I]*.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 295

space. Over a narrow energy band, the symmetric-stretch periodic orbit is
stable, and is associated with an elliptic island in phase space. The area of
the elliptic island is too small, though, to support a quantum state, such
that its presence is mainly reflected in an enhanced lifetime of the nearby
resonances in the low- and high-energy regimes.

   The basic features of the classical dynamics in the HgI, system may be
understood by constructing a Hamiltonian mapping, which makes use of
an effective one-dimensional potential. By varying the parameters per-
taining to this potential, one can model the features of the Hamiltonian
flow in dependence on the overall energy. In particular, the chaotic
dynamics at high energies corresponds to the phase-space structure of a
Smale horseshoe, from which a symbolic dynamics can be derived. The
classification of periodic orbits in terms of this symbolic dynamics is at the
basis of the cycle expansion method [161], which can be applied to obtain
the semiclassical resonances in the chaotic regime,

   In the first of the following sections, we will introduce the Hamiltonian
mapping, on the grounds of which we interpret the main features of the
classical dynamics in the HgI, system. Section XI1.E will be devoted to a
quantum mechanical analysis of the HgI, system, which proceeds by a
numerical integration of the Schrodinger equation for a wavepacket on
the excited-state p. e. s. The autocorrelation function associated with the
evolving wavepacket yields, by Fourier transformation, a spectrum from
which the energies and widths of the resonance states may be deduced.
The quantum mechanical results are compared with the semiclassical
analysis.

B. Classical Dynamics and a Hamiltonian Mapping for the HgI, System

                       1. From the Flow to the Mapping

The classical dynamics of the HgI, system is modeled according to the
Hamiltonian [Eqs. (12.2-12.4)]. The dynamics generated by this
Hamiltonian is characterized by a variety of behavior, ranging from
regular to chaotic. On increasing the total energy of the system,
pronounced discontinuities occur in the classical dynamics, which are
brought about by phase-space bifurcations due to the anharmonicity of
the potential.

   Three different energy regimes may be distinguished. In the first
regime, the classical dynamics is regular, and there is one isolated,
unstable periodic orbit, the symmetric-stretch trajectory. The second
regime, which covers a very narrow energy bandwidth, is characterized by
quasiperiodic motion in the transition state region. The third energy
regime, which is delimited by the total dissociation threshold, corre-
296                                 P. GASPARD ET AL.

 v                m E = 400cm-'

                                                       I

2.4 A             5.0 A

              '1

    Figure 59. Trajectories with initial conditions slightly different from the symmetric

+ stretch: rl0= r Z o ,p l o= p o Fp, (with 6p, = lo-$,), and p 2 , being adjusted to meet the

energy constraint. The energy is defined relative to the saddle point; the total dissociation
threshold is at 1800cm-I. At 400 cm-I, there is a single unstable periodic orbit of symmetric
stretching. At 535 cm-', a stable elliptic island surrounds the symmetric stretching periodic
orbit. At 700 cm-', the main elliptic island has been destroyed by a period doubling and the
motion is mostly chaotic.

sponds to fully chaotic dynamics, with an infinite number of unstable and
isolated periodic orbits. Figure 59 shows trajectories characteristic of the
different energy regimes.

   We have studied the linear stability of the symmetric-stretch periodic
orbit according to the methods of Section 1II.A. Figure 60 shows how this
periodic orbit changes from hyperbolic without reflection, to elliptic, and
then to hyperbolic with reflection, as energy increases. This behavior is a

I/- '-        i                                                  Re A+

   1000 cm-'    P                                      520 cm-'  15 cm-'

                     550 cm-'

    Figure 60. Stability properties of the symmetric-stretch orbit, varying from hyperbolic
to elliptic to hyperbolic with reflection as a function of energy. The eigenvalue A, is plotted
in the complex plane. For the first and third stability regimes, a few representative values
are indicated; in the elliptic region, between 523 and 548cm-', the points are equally
spaced at 5 cm-I.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 297

result of the bifurcations that occur in the classical dynamics close to the
symmetric-stretch motion.

   The phase-space structures of the HgI, Hamiltonian can be studied by

+ the phase portraits in a PoincarC surface of section transverse to the

symmetric-stretch orbit (e.g., using the section plane rl r , = 2req,where

req= 3 A is the saddle equilibrium point at E, = -1800 cm-'). It turns out

that the PoincarC mapping induced by the Hamiltonian flow in this
surface of section is qualitatively similar to a Hamiltonian mapping
defined in Section 111, with an effective potential of the form [21]

V(q)=(a+y$)exp(-$)  with a , y > O (12.5)

and with T = 1 in Eq. (3.38). In this model, the position q corresponds to
the position along the reaction path of the original system. The parame-
ters a and y are control parameters. Increasing the energy above the
saddle equilibrium point in the flow corresponds to increasing the
parameter y while keeping a constant. Variation of these parameters
induces bifurcations in the phase portraits. Depending on the choice of a
and y, the potential V(q) will then represent a barrier, or a local well
embedded in a barrier, such that locally bound dynamics may occur.
(Note the similarity to vibrationally adiabatic models [235].) We observed
in our simulations of the HgI, system that the sequence of bifurcations
encountered as the energy increases is faithfully reproduced by the
Hamiltonian mapping for a = 1 as y increases [21]. This observation can
be interpreted by noting that an increase in the energy renders the motion
more anharmonic, which goes along with an increase of the amplitude of
the kicks in the mapping [Eq. (12.5)].

                          2. Properties of the Mapping

We start with the analysis of the fixed points and of their linear stability.
Let us recall that the fixed points of the PoincarC mapping of a flow
correspond to periodic orbits in the flow. The mapping [Eq. (12.5)]
admits one or three fixed points depending on the parameter values.

   By symmetry, the origin ( q = 0, p = 0 ) is always a fixed point (labeled
by the symbol 0), which corresponds to the symmetric-stretch orbit of the
flow. This fixed point is the only one, and is hyperbolic (without

reflection) as long as y < a . At y = a , it becomes elliptic, that is, a center

with stability eigenvalues on the unit circle: A, = exp( k i 2 5 ~ p ) .
   At this critical value, y = a , an antipitchfork bifurcation occurs (see

also Section X1I.G) and two new hyperbolic fixed points appear at
298  P. GASPARD ET AL.

q = a q m y . These new fixed points (labeled by the symbols 1 and 2)

correspond to two fundamental periodic orbits of the flow that always
remain on the same side of the symmetric-stretch orbit during their

period [ r l ( t )> r 2 ( t ) for p = 1 and r l ( t )< r 2 ( t ) for p = 21. This pair of

periodic orbits, which were particularly studied by Pollak and Pechukas
[236,237] (and will in the following sometimes be referred to as the
"off-diagonal" periodic orbits), borders the main elliptic island surround-
ing the symmetric-stretch orbit (see Fig. 59 at E = 535 cm-'). Since the
fixed points 1 and 2 are hyperbolic, they have stable and unstable
manifolds, which form a thin chaotic zone around the elliptic island due
to their homoclinic intersections [238]. Smaller subsidiary elliptic islands
may be present in this chaotic zone. Figure 61 illustrates the phase-space
structure around the fixed points (at parameter values that refer to the
discussion of the next paragraph).

   As y increases, the center fixed point 0 successively undergoes m :n =
1:4, 1:3, 1 : 2 bifurcations, where its rotation number takes the values
p = m/n.At the m :n = 1:4 bifurcation, a chain of four subsidiary elliptic
islands separates from the main island. The area of the main island

+ decreases in size on average till the period-doubling bifurcation m :n =

1:2 at y = a 4, where the fixed point becomes hyperbolic with reflec-
tion. The main elliptic island begins to split into two smaller islands at this
period doubling, which initiates a cascade of further period doublings.
Figure 61 gives examples of the phase-space structures that mark the
transition between the quasiperiodic and chaotic regimes.

  + Since the three fixed points 0, 1, and 2 are hyperbolic above y = a 4,

they all have stable and unstable manifolds. Small subsidiary islands may
subsist in phase space as long as these manifolds have not undergone their

+ last homoclinic tangency at some critical value y = y, > a 4. For a = 1,

this last homoclinic tangency occurs at yc =9.5.
   Above this value (y = yc), the dynamics is purely chaotic and all the

trapped trajectories are hyperbolic. The trapped trajectories are then in
1:1 correspondence with a symbolic dynamics (without constraint) based
on the three symbols {0,1,2}, which label the three fundamental fixed
points of the mapping (or fundamental periodic orbit of the flow). Figure
62 schematically shows that the dynamics is then similar to the horseshoe
but with three branches as envisaged by Smale in 1967 [116]. The trapped
orbits then form a fractal and chaotic repeller that controls the classical
escape dynamics with respect to the molecular transition complex.

   In Figure 63, we plotted an estimation of the topological entropy per
iteration of the mapping [Eq. (12.5)] as a function of y for a = 1. The
figure shows how the topological entropy, which gives us the rate of
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 299

                          y= 6

                            v=2

    Figure 61. Initial conditions in the ( q ,p ) plane of the orbits trapped at finite distance
for the Hamiltonian mapping [Eq. (12.5)] for (Y = 1 and increasing values of y. In the
left-hand column, the trapped orbits are represented by the initial conditions of the orbits
that have survived 10 forward and 10 backward iterations (some trajectories are drawn in
white inside the elliptic islands); in the right-hand column, trapped orbits are represented by
those that have survived 2 forward and 2 backward iterations. Beyond y, = 9.5, the trapped
orbits form a three-branch Smale horseshoe.

proliferation of periodic orbits, increases from the value zero taken below
y = a = 1 up to its maximum value In 3 above yc.

                                3. Back to the Flow
A numerical study shows that the same scenario applies to the flow,
which allows us to classify the set of periodic orbits in the chaotic regime.
300  P. GASPARD ET AL.

    Figure 62. Schematic drawing of a three-branch Smale horseshoe as it appears in a
Poincart section transverse to the classical dynamics of the molecular transition state at high
energies. The shaded intersections indicate regions where phase-space areas visited in a
forward and a backward crossing in the PoincarC section. The partition that is thus
generated may be labeled according to a symbolic dynamics, with a 2n-symbol sequence for
n forwardibackward iterations. For a bi-infinite sequence, the intersections will correspond
to single orbits of the transition state. These then represent the invariant set of the dynamics
and are in 1:1 correspondence with the periodic orbits of the Hamiltonian flow.

In Fig. 64 we depict several of the periodic orbits and their corresponding
symbolic sequences. The asymmetric-stretch orbit evidenced by Schinke
and Engel [223] turns out to be assigned to sequence 12. There exist two
further periodic orbits with a two-symbol sequence, namely, 01 and 02,
which should be treated on the same footing as the asymmetric stretch
orbit 12. According to the symbolic dynamics, the periodic orbits 0, 1,
and 2 are the fundamental periodic orbits in the sense that they generate
all the other periodic orbits, in terms of their topological combinations.
By contrast, the asymmetric-stretch periodic orbit 12 is of higher period
since it is topologically composed of 1 and 2. The orbits corresponding to
the symbolic sequences 012 and 0102 have also been found in the CO,
system [223]. We note that the periodic orbits 0, 02, 022, and 0222 have
been identified in a two-degree-of-freedom model of the Hartley band of
ozone by Johnson and Kinsey [239] who, moreover, made a tentative
comparison with peaks in a Fourier transform of the spectrum of this
band. Thanks to the three-branch horseshoe of Fig. 62 and the associated
    NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 301

C             .a ......  .*... a     . .L--log3
             .
 0  0.4 -
'3
BE

  p. 0.2 -

  B
I:

    0o-B-z'  "I  '  ""'              "'

       0     5                   10              15

                    Y

    Figure 63. Topological entropy per iteration versus the parameter y of the Hamiltonian
mapping [Eq. (12.5)] with a = 1. The topological entropy starts to be positive above y = 1,
which is the threshold of chaos. The topological entropy increases until the last homoclinic
tangency occurs at y, = 9.5. Beyond this last bifurcation, the invariant set is a full three-
branch Smale horseshoe which is structurally stable with h,,, = log,,3.

symbolic dynamics, we see that different and fragmentary results that are
dispersed in the literature can be understood in a unified way. As we will
show below, the classification in terms of symbolic sequences is an
essential step before the application of the semiclassical method of
quantization in the chaotic regime.

        C. Equilibrium Point Quantization of the Transition State

We applied the method of Section V to the saddle equilibrium point of
the potential surface of HgI,. The cubic and quartic derivatives of the
potential have been calculated in order to obtain the coefficients [Eqs.
(5.5-5.7)] of the Dunham expansion. For the present two-degree-of-
freedom system, the Dunham expansion truncated at order fz is given by

The scattering resonances are labeled by two quantum numbers: n , k =

0,1,2, . . . . The quantum number n corresponds to symmetric-stretching

     We note that Coriolis interactions are ignored in this collinear model.
302     P. GASPARD ET AL.

     I  J 021  0102

    Figure 64. Periodic orbits of the HgI, system, at an energy of 1200cm-'. The symbolic
sequences that are in correspondence with Fig. 62 are indicated. The first row gives the
fundamental orbits, associated with one symbol w, = 0, 1, or 2 (where the symbols w, refer to
bi-infinite sequences {q},+==a-nJd,that correspond, respectively, to the symmetric stretch
and the two off-diagonal orbits of the Hamiltonian flow. The second row gives all orbits that
correspond to a two-symbol sequence, among them the asymmetric-stretch orbit 12. The last
row gives examples of orbits corresponding to three- and four-symbol sequences. These
orbits are very difficult to localize, due to their high instability, and, for the purpose of
illustration, have been composed of the low-order orbits (while the other figures correspond
to actual trajectories).

excitations of frequency o,which are stable and, therefore, lead to an
increase in energy. On the other hand, the quantum number k corre-
sponds to asymmetric-stretching excitations of Lyapunov exponent A,
which are unstable and lead to shorter and shorter lifetimes. The
numerical values of the coefficients are given in Table I11 for the
Hamiltonian [Eqs. (12.2-12.4)].
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 303

                                             TABLE I11
Coefficients of the Dunham Expansion [Eq. (12.6)] for the Scattering Resonances of HgI,

Scattering Resonances     Values (cm-')

           E,              - 1800
           AE2                 - 0.66393
            ho                 91.84768
                               - 1.22733
                  XI1          - 1.16763
                               49.06510
                     x22
                             + 1.70899
           hh

                     *
                X,,

   We observe a difference of more than one order of magnitude between
the first- and second-order coefficients, which justifies the application of
the Dunham expansion. The anharmonic zero-point energy AE, turns out
to have a very small value. The coefficient x l l is negative so that the
spacings decrease between the energies of the resonances, which is the
behavior expected for a Morse-type potential. On the other hand, the

coefficient flZis positive so that the imaginary parts of the complex

energies increase with excitation of the quantum number n. Accordingly,
the lifetimes also increase. Table IV contains the energies and lifetimes of
the resonances of HgI, predicted by the Dunham expansion [Eq. (12.6)].
These resonances are also depicted in the complex energy plane as
crosses in Fig. 65.

           D. Periodic-Orbit Quantization of the Transition State

In Section VII, we derived a periodic-orbit formula [Eq. (7.15)] for the
photoabsorption cross-section, which allows in principle a direct com-
parison with an experimental UV absorption spectrum. In our analysis for
HgI, [21], we will focus, though, on the expression for the density of
states [Eq. (6.13)], which provides no information about the intensity
distribution in the spectrum, but which is equivalent to K,,, as far as the
information about the positions and widths of the resonances is
concerned.

                           1. The Low-EnergyRegime

To localize the resonances in the low- and high-energy regimes, we use
the zeta function of Eq. (6.21). In the low-energy regime, where the
classical dynamics is regular, the semiclassical quantization of the un-
stable symmetric-stretch orbit alone yields the resonances.
304                           P. GASPARD ET AL.

                                                 TABLE IV
Scattering Resonances of the Two-Degree-of-Freedom Hamiltonian [Eqs. (12.2-12.4)] of

                                                     HgI,"

n     Equilibrium Point       Periodic Orbit          Quantum Mechanical

      E (cm-')  7 (fs)        E (cm-')        7 (fs)  E (cm-')  7 (fs)

0     44.7      110.1             45.7        110.3       47.8  111.1
                114.2            135.3        115.6      136.9  117.6
   1  134.1     118.5            222.2        120.8      225.2  117.3
                123.2            306.6        132.3      308.6  129.5
2     221.0     128.3            388.3        149.4      391.5  144.9
                133.8            466.1        202.0      472.2  160.8
3     305.5     139.9                                    551.2  163.8
                146.5            639.6        473.9      624.7  164.1
4     387.5     153.7            709.2        340.7      708.2  176.8
                161.7            779.7        271.6      777.9  186.2
5     467.1     170.6            851.0        220.8      846.9  213.0
                                 921 .O       183.0      915.2  219.7
6     544.2                      989.0        158.7      981.1  203.3
                               1055.7         150.7    1045.8   175.1
7     618.9                    1119.5         165.5    1109.9   168.2
                               1178.9         189.6    1168.0   150.2
8     691.1                    1234.7         208.1    1233.9   162.3
                               1287.3         215.1    1284.7   213.2
9     760.8                                            1329.0   219.7
                               1337.2         213.5    1338.8   239.2
10    828.1                    1384.9         208.5    1378.3   191.4
                               1430.6         207.9    1434.2   161.1
11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19
20

    a The first pair of columns contains the resonances calculated by equilibrium point
quantization with the Dunham expansion [Eq. (12.6)]. The second pair of columns contains
the resonances obtained by periodic-orbit quantization. In the low-energy regime, the
resonances were calculated as the zeros of the periodic-orbit quantization condition [Eq.
(12.8)] by a Newton-Raphson method. In the high-energy regime, the resonances are
obtained as the zeros of the periodic-orbit quantization condition [Eq. (12.14)]. The third
pair of columns contains the quantum mechanical resonances calculated by fitting spectra
obtained by wavepacket propagation (see Section XI1.E) by a rational fraction f,(E) =

P,(E)/Q,(E), with Pm(E)and Q,(E) being polynomials of order rn = 220 [21]. The poles
of f,(E) (i.e., the zeros of [f,(E)]-') were identified by a Newton-Raphson method,

combined with an algorithm for rational function extrapolation [245], which we extended to
complex data. We remark that, for the resonance n = 18, the fitting by a rational function of
high order m = 220 is giving a spurious value. The energies E and lifetimes T of the
resonances are given for each pair of columns.

   For a single periodic orbit in a two-degree-of-freedom system (f = 2),
Eq. (6.21) reduces to

                fi { Z(E)=         exp[(i/h)S(E) - i(.rr/2)p]   (12.7)
                              1-
                              (A(E)~"~A(E)~
                         k=O
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 305

    Figure 65. The scattering resonances of the molecular transition state of HgI, (collinear
model) of Table IV. The quantum mechanical values (filled circles) are derived from
wavepacket propagation. The equilibrium-point quantization values (crosses) are calculated
from the Dunham expansion [Eq. (12.6)] with the coefficients of Table 111. The periodic-
orbit quantization values (dotted circles) are calculated from Eq. (12.8) at low energies but
from the zeta function [Eq. (12.14)] at high energies. The imaginary part of the complex
energies is given in units of inverse lifetime.

The zeros of Z ( E ) are given by the zeros of its factors, which results in
the condition

n1  57           (12.8)
-S(l?)-i~p-u(E)

where u ( E ) = In h ( E ) . The product in Eq. (12.7) associated with the
quantum number k reffects that we use a harmonic approximation with
respect to the potential transverse to the periodic orbit. The second
quantum number n appearing on the right-hand side of Eq. (12.8) refers
to the quantization in the direction parallel to the periodic orbit. The
Morse index was found to be y = 2. (Note that the Morse index is even in
the hyperbolic case, and odd in the hyperbolic-with-reflection case.)

   In the harmonic case, where the action is given by S = TOEand the
eigenvalues of the stability matrix are energy independent, u = AT,, we
obtain the following energy expression:
306  P. GASPARD ET AL.

     $) i) Enk= E, + no ( n + - ihA( k +  (12.9)

where o = 27r/ To.These complex energies define a progression of equally
spaced resonances in the complex energy plane (in the lower one half of
the second Riemann sheet), which correspond to scattering resonances. It
is evident that the quantum number n defines the "stable" mode
(corresponding to the symmetric-stretch vibration, in the harmonic
approximation), while the quantum number k corresponds to the "un-
stable" mode (dissociation along the "reaction coordinate") as in Section
X1I.C. The latter quantum number k is associated with the lifetime,
which is the inverse of the Lyapunov exponent A , 7 = A - l . The Lyapunov
exponent gives a measure of the exponential escape of trajectories from
the vicinity of the periodic orbit, and it is intuitively clear that the lifetime
of a quantum state corresponding to this repeller with a single periodic
orbit should be inversely proportional to the classical escape rate (see also
Heller [1901). This discussion establishes the relationship to Section
XI1.C. Equation (12.9) is equivalent to the truncation of the Dunham
expansion [Eq. (12.6)] at the harmonic approximation, that is, at first
order in h , since the Maslov index here equals p = 2.

   In the anharmonic case, one may express the energy dependence of
the action and stability eigenvalues in terms of a Taylor expansion about
the saddle point (at E = 0):

     S ( E )= TOE+ S2E2+ S,E3 + .         (12.10)
     + u ( E )= AT, + u,E + u,E2 * *

In principle, these expansions can be used to obtain the eigenenergies
beyond the harmonic approximation [Eq. (12.9)]. However, we would
not recover the complete Dunham expansion [Eq. (12.6)] because the
motion transverse to the periodic orbit is treated harmonically in the zeta
function [Eq. (12.7)], which is restricted to the leading approximation of
the &expansion [Eqs. (6.41) and (6.42)]. Note that the coefficient x22
describing anharmonicities in the motion transverse to the periodic orbit
cannot be derived from Eq. (12.8). On the other hand, the anhar-
monicities in the direction Farallel to the periodic orbit are taken into
         NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 307

account by the energy dependence of the action S ( E ) and the stability
parameter u ( E ) . ~

   In order to calculate the scattering resonances, we have numerically
determined the coefficients of the expansion [Eq. (12.10)],by using a
polynomial fit to the classical action obtained by integration (see Fig. 66)
[21]. In the analysis based on Eq. (12.8), we have considered only the
leading resonances (longest lifetimes), which are located close to the real
axis (corresponding to k = 0 ) . The resonances that have thus been
derived for the low-energy regime (below the formation of stable islands
and the onset of chaos) are listed in Table IV and reported in Fig. 65.

                          2. The Intermediate Regime

Between 523 and 548 cm-' above the saddle point, the symmetric-stretch
orbit is stable and the phase space contains a main elliptic island. The
periodic-orbit quantization becomes difficult in this regime because the
stability eigenvalues are close to the value 1, which may cause the
presence of small denominators in the trace formula [Eq. (6.13)].

   Some insight is provided by the following qualitative argument.
According to the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization, an elliptic island of
area A in the PoincarC surface of section can support a number of
quantized states equal to A/2.rrh. If A S- 2rrh, the quantized states are
long-lived but metastable because of dynamical tunneling out of the
elliptic island, as explained in Section VI.D.2. On the other hand, if the
area A is much smaller than 2 ~ ha,s it turns out to be the case here, the
island cannot be the support of any long-lived metastable state. If a
metastable state subsists its lifetime may be expected to be short since it is
determined by the dynamics in an area of the order of 2 d i around the
elliptic island where the dynamics is unstable (see Section V1.F). Compar-
ing different triatomic molecules, it seems that the main elliptic island is
of small area in light-heavy-light molecules as is already the case with
HgI,, where the mass ratio is not extreme. On the other hand, the island
has a large area and may sustain many metastable states in heavy-light-
heavy complexes, such as ClHCl [240], IHI [241], or the muonic (Mu)

     More precisely, S ( E ) depends on w , x l l , ylI1,z l l l l , .. . , while u ( E ) depends on these

same coefficients together with A , xl,, ylIz, z I l l 2 , .. . . However, the coefficients x,,, ylzz,

y,,,, . r . , concern the nonlinear stability of the periodic orbit and, therefore, they do not

enter into Eq. (12.10) and are absent from the leading approximation of the Gutzwiller
trace formula. Nevertheless, these further coefficients contribute to the fi-corrections of the
Gutzwiller trace formula so that we can recover the results of equilibrium point quantization
in this way, which shows consistency between the equilibrium point and the periodic-orbit
quantization in the low-energy regime.
308                                   P. GASPARD ET AL.

             1000                           I     ~     "     '     I  "     "

                            . (0)

-
%
   500 -
+

   "       0                             500                        I000                 1500

                                                  E [ctn-'l

   0.012i' 1                       I  '  I     "     I     ,     ,        ~     '  I  ,  I

   0.008

   0.004

   0

           0                             500                        1000                 1500

                                                  E [cm-'1

   25

       20

.-c 15

v,

       10

   5

   0

           0                             5 00                       1000                 1500

                                                  E Lciii-']

Figure 66. (a) Periods, (b) Lyspunov exponents, and (c) reduced actions for the three

fundamental orbits 0, 1, and 2 of the HgI, Hamiltonian system.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 309

molecule HMuH [242], which is the six-body system [(p', e-), ( p ' , e-),
(p', e-)] (see also [243]).

                          3. The High-Energy Regime

In the high-energy regime, the phase-space dynamics is described by a
symbolic dynamics based on the three symbols {0,1,2} labeling the three
periodic orbits we called fundamental. As these periodic orbits generate
the whole repeller by topological combination, the number of periodic
orbits increases exponentially with a period, so that the so-called
topological entropy per crossing of the PoincarC section is equal to In 3.

   Under these circumstances, the cycle expansion described in Section
VI.C.4 may be applied to calculate the resonance states. As in Section
XI1.D.1,we only consider the dominant resonances with longest lifetimes
that are given by the factor k = m, = 0 of the Selberg zeta function [Eq.
(6.21)]. Accordingly, we consider the inverse of the first Ruelle zeta
function

       = 1- to- t , - t, - (to,- tot,)- (toz- tot,) - (tlZ- t't,) - * * *
                                                                            (12.11)

where

                   exp[(i/h)S,(E) - i(r/2)pp]              (12.12)

       t p ( E )=                IAp(E)11'2

At high energies, the periodic orbits with periods higher than 1 are very
well approximated as combinations of the fundamental periodic orbits.
According to the discussion of this shadowing mechanism in Section VI.
C.4, we have

       . to,= tot, to, = tot, t,, 2t,t,, . .               (12.13)

so that our approximate quantization condition reduces to

0 = 1- t o ( E )- t,(E) - t,(E)

,', I I = I - exp[(i/h)S,(E) - i(r/2)pO]- 2 exp[(i/h)S,(E) - i(r/2)p1]
       lAo(Er2                               A1 (El

                                                           (12.14)
310  P. GASPARD ET AL.

where we took into account the rl * r 2 symmetry, which implies t , = t,.
    As in Section XII.D.1, the quantities S,(E) and A,(E) were fitted to

polynomials (see Fig. 66). The Morse indexes are po = 3 and p, = 2. Note
that the index for the symmetric-stretch orbit is odd, as this orbit is
hyperbolic with reflection above the quasiperiodic zone (cf. Section
X1I.B).

    The semiclassical resonances are given in Table IV as well as in Fig. 65.
Note that an analysis based only on the symmetric-stretch orbit would
yield lifetimes that are shorter than those obtained by taking into account
the "off-diagonal'' orbit. Part of this effect is due to the fact that the
off-diagonal orbits have a smaller Lyapunov exponent than the symmet-
ric-stretch orbit. Another part has its origin in the interference between
the quantum amplitudes of the different fundamental periodic orbits of
the repeller. As we explained in Section VI.C.3 with Eq. (6.31), this
lengthening of the lifetimes predicted by Gaspard and Rice [114] occurs
in the presence of classical chaos and has similarities with the phenom-
enon of Anderson localization of a wave moving in a random potential
[ 2441.

   At this point of the analysis, we would like to return to the problem of
nonseparability. The validity of the Dunham expansion [Eq. (12.6)]
shows that the motion is effectively separable just above the saddle
equilibrium point. This result is supported by the periodic-orbit quantiza-
tion in the low-energy regime, where a unique unstable periodic orbit
constitutes the (nonfractal) repeller. In Section X1I.D.1, we showed that
the quantization in terms of the action and the linear stability parameter
of the unstable periodic orbit is equivalent to an effective separability
between the motions parallel and transverse to the periodic orbits. Thus,
a repeller with a single orbit is intrinsically separable.

   However, as soon as the repeller is chaotic and generated by several
fundamental periodic orbits, the system in general becomes nonsepar-
able. Indeed, the progression of the resonances given by the zeros of a
function such as Eq. (12.14) will in general be very complicated with a
mixing of different families of resonances. Let us point out that there is
nevertheless a limiting situation where an effective (partial) separability
may be recovered in the presence of a chaotic repeller. This is the case of
a degeneracy in the sense that all periods become nearly equal to each

+ other so that S,(E) = Spo T E , while A , ( E ) = A,, for all periodic orbits

p , such that the zeros of the zeta function are regularly spaced as in

En= E , + 2.rrhn/T - Z / 2 . We will return to this discussion later.

                             E. Wavepacket Propagation

The results obtained from the semiclassical analysis may be verified by a
quantum mechanical approach using wavepacket propagation, by a
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 311

numerical integration of the Schrodinger equation. This approach pro-

vides a precise description of the experimental situation where the

ground-state wavepacket is "transported" to the excited-state potential

energy surface by a laser pulse. We use an approximative treatment in so
far as we neglect the effect of the pump pulse (which will slightly broaden

      the ground-state wavepacket [233,234]), and simply monitor the time
      evolution of the wavepacket on the excited-state surface.

         In Sections I1 and VII we outlined how the experimentally observable

      absorption spectrum K, can be related to the energy Green's function.

Thus, the spectrum may be obtained by a Fourier transform of the

), +1;time-correlation function for the excited-state wave function I@(t))=

        [cf. Eq. (7.11)]. Note that time-reversal symmetry implies the

property ( @ ( O ) l @ ( t ) ) = ( @ ( O ) l @ ( - t ) ) * (this is similar to the statement of

time-reversal symmetry for the S-matrix). Thus, if we integrate only over

positive times, with the observation of the physical system starting at

      t = 0, the spectrum will be given by

             s,+so                                (12.15)

                     0

        K, =-3hCE, Re e i w teiEo"h(@(0)~@(dtt))

where Re denotes the real part of the integral.
   The numerical integration of the Schrodinger equation is based on the

split-time propagation scheme introduced by Feit et al. [246], combined
with the Fourier technique by Kosloff [80,247] to calculate the effect of
the kinetic-energy operator in momentum space. Figure 67(a) shows the
(real part of the) time correlation function for a wavepacket that is
initially centered in the vicinity of the saddle point [21]. A rapid decrease
of ( @ ( O ) l @ ( t ) ) is observed within the first 100fs, followed by four
recurrences, spaced at an interval of about 430fs. This interval agrees
well with the period of the classical fundamental orbits, that is, the
symmetric-stretch and "off-diagonal" orbits at an energy just above the
quasiperiodic zone. (The classical periods at an energy of 550cm-' are
441 fs for the symmetric-stretch orbit, and 435 fs for the off-diagonal
orbit; these periods tend to diverge at higher energies, as may be inferred
from Fig. 66). At this energy, the spectral intensity for the chosen initial
conditions is close to the m a x i m ~ m A. ~fter the fourth recurrence, the
amplitude of the autocorrelation function has approximately dropped to
zero.

   * The average energy (@I&l@) of the wavepacket is below the total dissociation

threshold, which does not correspond to the experimental situation described in [232-2341,
where the wavepacket has a large excess energy on excitation from the ground state, and
which may be an explanation why the resonance structure had not been observed [248].
312               P. GASPARD ET AL.

   1.0

        0  t If4  2190

    Figure 67. (a) Autocorrelation function ( @ ( O ) l @ ( t ) ) , corresponding to the time
evolution of the transition state of the HgI, molecule. The recurrences are of low intensity,
as may be inferred from the fact that most of the wavepacket has left the transition state
region at t = 3 5 0 f s (Le., at a time that is smaller than the period of the classical
fundamental orbits). The lower part of the figure shows the details of the recurrences on a
larger scale. ( b ) The real part of the spectrum obtained by Fourier transformation of the
autocorrelation function (a).

   Figure 67(b) shows the real part of the Fourier transform of the
autocorrelation function. The overall envelope of the spectrum is de-
termined by the rapid initial decay of ( @ ( O ) l c D ( t ) ) , while the fine
structure, which is typical of a vibrational progression, is due to the
recurrences [61,190,224]. The spectrum appears very regular, and in its
overall appearance resembles the spectrum of a Morse oscillator, with
lines broadened due to the finite lifetime. The lifetimes associated with
the individual lines have been determined approximately as described in
the caption of Table IV, the frequencies and lifetimes associated with the
individual lines are listed in this table. According to the semiclassical
formula [Eq. (7,15)], the spectrum is the sum of different contributions.
The background contribution is quasiclassical due to the microcanonical
average of the observable corresponding to I@(O)) (cD(0)l. When super-
posed on this background, the contribution from the periodic orbits
produces the oscillatory structures of vibrational origin, which are related
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 313

to the underlying scattering resonances of the molecular transition
complex. In the HgI, system, the different periods characteristic of the
classically chaotic regime are not apparent in the spectrum, in contrast to
other molecules like ozone (0,)or CO,, where distinct periodic orbits
seem to emerge from the vibrogram of the photoabsorption spectra
[223,239]. The apparent regularity of the HgI, spectrum seems to be due
to the fact that the classical properties of the symmetric-stretch and
off-diagonal orbits are, on the whole, very similar, such that their
contribution to the recurrences of the quantum-mechanical autocorrela-
tion function are not well separated; thus, the fundamental orbits do not
give rise to interleaved progressions of resonances in the energy domain,
but rather generate a sequence of resonances that still resembles the
progression due to a single periodic orbit.

          F. Discussion of the Transition State Dynamics of HgI,

One of the main results obtained in the above sections is that the lifetimes
of the molecular transition complex of HgI, are found to have values
between 100 and 200 fs, which are comparable with the experimental
results by Zewail et al. [232-2341.

   According to Table IV and Fig. 65, the semiclassical and quantum
mechanical results are in close agreement at low energies. At high
energies, the agreement is reasonable. The quantum spectrum does
feature a tendency towards enhanced lifetimes, as predicted semiclassical-
ly. Remember that, according to Section XII.C.3, this tendency is due to
the fact that the off-diagonal orbits contribute to the resonances and
given rise to an interference effect, as discussed above.

   Between 500 and 800cm-l, a marked discrepancy exists between the
quantum mechanical and the periodic-orbit results in the vicinity of the
classically quasiperiodic zone, where the periodic-orbit quantization
predicts a very marked line-narrowing effect. In fact, the quantum
dynamics has a smoothing effect not only on the narrow quasiperiodic
zone but also on its neighborhood, which is classically of weak instability.
As a result, the quantum dynamics is more unstable than expected from
the periodic-orbit quantization. As explained in Section VLF, the period-
ic-orbit quantization, which is applicable to isolated, unstable orbits, will
encounter the problem of small denominators close to a bifurcation, and
will break down when the periodic orbit becomes stable, such that the
amplitude factor diverges. An effect of this kind can be felt even as
bifurcation is approached, which results in an increase of the predicted
lifetimes. The periodic-orbit quantization can be modified in the vicinity
of the classical bifurcations by deriving an amplitude factor that goes
beyond the linear stability of the orbit, as discussed in Section V1.F. We
314  P. GASPARD ET AL.

intend to extend our analysis along these lines in a future publication [21].
On the other hand, the equilibrium point quantization seems to be more
successful in this intermediate region for the following reason. The
Dunham expansion [Eq. (12.6)] has a domain of validity that is restricted
to the vicinity of the saddle-point energy. Therefore, Eq. (12.6) cannot
reproduce all the effects of the bifurcations that occur at a higher energy
falling outside the immediate vicinity of the saddle point. Accordingly,
the equilibrium point quantization describes the aforementioned quantum
smoothing of the classical dynamics with more success than periodic-orbit
quantization.

   However, if we attempted a "naive" continuation of equilibrium point
quantization (i.e., disregarding the occurrence of bifurcations) into the
nonseparable regime at high energies, its accuracy would deteriorate. In
this classically chaotic regime, it is the periodic-orbit quantization that
provides an accurate description of the energies of the resonances while
the corresponding lifetimes show fluctuations that are also described but
with a lower accuracy.

   In conclusion, we observed that the semiclassical method adequately
explains the main features of the transition complex of this model of

HgI, , particularly with regard to the nonseparable classically chaotic

regime, where new phenomena arise such as the Gaspard-Rice lengthen-
ing [114]. In the following sections, we will see how the semiclassical
method extends to more general situations.

G. Comparison of the Classical Repellers of ABA and ABC Molecules

In this section, we would like to generalize the Hamiltonian mapping [Eq.
(12.5)] to the case of an asymmetric triatomic molecule ABC. We are still
concerned with the two-degree-of-freedom dynamics of a triatomic
molecule with a fixed angle of bending. The motion takes place on a
dissociative potential with a saddle equilibrium point. We may expect that
the scenario is very similar to the case of a symmetric ABA molecule.
Indeed, the works by Pollak et al. [236,237] show the existence of three
disymmetric fundamental orbits in the transition complexes of FH, and
HCI,.

   On these grounds, we generalize the potential [Eq. (12.5)] by inclusion
of a new term breaking the r 1f f r , or q - f, q symmetry characteristic of
ABA molecules

     ( $) 8) + + V(q>= (Y pq y  with P Z 0 (12.16)
     exp( -

which now applies to the transition complex of asymmetric ABC mole-
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 315

cules. The Hamiltonian is then given by Eq. (3.36) with T = 1. Here, y is
taken, as before, as the bifurcation parameter.

   For nonvanishing values of p, the bifurcations of this new mapping are

very similar to those of the symmetric one, with some differences. In Fig.
68 we see that the hyperbolic fixed point at q = 0 (corresponding to the
symmetric-stretch periodic orbit) becomes a center through an antipitch-

fork bifurcation at y = (Y >0, when p = 0. At the antipitchfork bifurca-

tion two new fixed points emerge that correspond to the two off-diagonal
periodic orbits.

   The symmetry of this bifurcation is broken for /3 # 0, as shown in Fig.

69. The hyperbolic fixed point remains hyperbolic but is displaced on the
side. A saddle-center bifurcation occurs on the other side. Above the
bifurcation, the center is lying between two hyperbolic fixed points as in

the case /3 = 0. This scenario explains the numerical observations of

Pollak et al. [236,237].At higher values of y, that is, at higher energies in
the corresponding flow, there is also a last homoclinic tangency leading to
the formation of a three-branch Smale horseshoe with a triadic symbolic

1 (a>  I,,,

0'     0     2
 -2

       4

    Figure 68. (a) Bifurcation diagram in the ( q ,y ) plane of the trapped orbits of initial

conditions p = 0 for the Hamiltonian mapping [Eq. (12.16)] of an ABA molecule with p = 0

and cx = 1. ( b ) Phase portrait in the ( q ,p ) plane at y = 0.8 before the antipitchfork

bifurcation. (c) Same as (b) but at y = 2 slightly after the antipitchfork bifurcation. (d) Same

as ( b ) and (c) but at y = 12 when the three-branch Smale horseshoe is formed.
316  P. GASPARD ET AL.

                                       4

   Figure 69. (a) Same as Fig. 68 but for an ABC molecule with p = 0.05 and a = 1in Eq.

(12.16). ( b ) Phase portrait in the ( q ,p ) plane at y=O.8 before the saddle-center
bifurcation. (c) Same as ( b ) but at y = 2 slightly after the saddle-center bifurcation. ( d )

Same as ( b ) and (c) but at a = 1, p = 3, and y = 15 when an asymmetric three-branch Smale

horseshoe is formed.

dynamics of topological entropy In 3. For large values of p , which would

correspond to a very asymmetric molecule, this last homoclinic tangency
may never occur.

   This analysis shows that the mapping [Eq. (12.16)] qualitatively
describes the two-degree-of-freedom classical dynamics along the reaction
coordinate for dissociating triatomic molecules whether they are symmet-
ric or not. If the potential is bonding, the parameter y should be taken
negative. In this case, the same mapping would describe classical
dissociation taking place on a bonding potential above the energy of
dissociation. However, the bifurcation scenario is then qualitatively
different as we may expect for a bonding potential.

H. Inclusion of Bending and Extension to Larger Molecules: Equilibrium
                                   Point Quantization

As the preceding analysis of the classical dynamics has shown, the
classical repeller is composed of a single periodic orbit at energies just
above the saddle in the two-degree-of-freedom model. This single
periodic orbit can be described by the Hamiltonian developed in Taylor
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 317

series around the equilibrium point. In this separable regime, the
periodic-orbit analysis is equivalent to an equilibrium point analysis.
Therefore, we can obtain the scattering resonances of the transition
complex using the equilibrium point quantization of Section V. While the
search for periodic orbits may be cumbersome in high-dimensional
systems, the equilibrium point quantization is, by contrast, straight-
forward.

   Near a saddle equilibrium point with s stable directions of frequencies
{ w i } and u unstable directions of Lyapunov exponents { A j } ,the applica-
tion of successiveVan Vleck contact transformations reduces the Hamilto-
nian to the form

                                      2              @; - q;

                        i          2         i             2

C. c ; ~ +                         +  q  2    A2        2
                                         i,  Pi,
                                                  + qi,

                           X"lli2  2              2

                 ilCi2

                                                                  (12.17)

The scattering resonances are obtained by the quantization rules

                 +); A2       2

                 p i + q i+h(ni
                        2
                                                                  ( 12.18)
                 +) Si"- q;
                    2 4-ih(kj                +

In Section V we showed that this method is equivalent to the equilibrium
point quantization. Accordingly, the scattering resonances are given by

Enl...n,kl...k,            1

                                                     I
318  P. GASPARD ET AL.

     5 )+; - i tL2zij(ni+ i ) ( k j + B(h3) (12.19)

We obtain the resonances including the anharmonic corrections to the

lifetimes. Note that the coefficients x" are identical to the coefficients x of

Eqs. (5.4-5.6) modulo factors +1 or ki.
   For a nonlinear triatomic molecule, we may consider different types of

equilibrium points depending on the stability of the symmetric stretching,
asymmetric stretching, and bending modes, as summarized in Fig. 70. Let
us label the three normal modes of symmetric stretching, bending, and
asymmetric stretching, respectively, by 1, 2, and 3. In the case of a stable
minimum of the potential, the energy eigenvalues are given by

                                                                                                      (12.20)

                                                     -w                                                      i

                                                     E

                                                                                                             1

                                                                          Re E

                                                         . ..........,....................

                                                            x x x X%%%

    Figure 70. Energy eigenvalues for 3F har-                  x x x XIo(%Zx
monic potentials with different kinds of
stabilities: (a) eigenenergies [Eq. (12.20)] for a                            Re E
minimum-type potential with frequencies
(q,w 2 ,03)(;b )eigenenergies [Eq. (12.21)] for a        !?. (c)
saddle-type potential with frequencies (q,w2, -
iA3); (c) eigenenergies [Eq. (12.22)] for a saddle-        ......................................................................
type potential with frequencies (q,-Liz, - A 3 ) .
                                                         x  X                               x      X      x

                                                         ,:, : XX                           X      X      X

                                                         ,:. ,!. , ,  ,,  ,:,                  ,,     ,,

                                                                          Re E
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 319

in the case of a saddle with stable bending, by6

   + + + + + E = E, hw,(n, 1/2) hw,(n, 112) - ihA,(k, 1/2) + O'(h')

                                                                                   (12.21)

and, in the case of a saddle with unstable bending, by

   + E = E, + h ~ , ( n , 112) - ihh,(k, + 112) - ihh,(k, + 1/2) + 6 ( h 2 )

                                                                                   (12.22)

The case of three unstable modes is not considered.
   In the harmonic approximation of Eqs. (12.20-12.22), the scattering

resonances are clustered on lines in the complex energy surface. We see
that each new unstable mode decreases the imaginary part of the
resonances as well as the lifetimes. If the maximum imaginary part is
given by Im E = -hh,/2 for the case of a saddle with a stable bending,
then it will decrease to Im E = -hh,/2 - hh,/2 if the bending becomes
unstable.

   The bending motion can also be taken into account in the periodic-
orbit quantization with similar effects on the resonances as described by
Fig. 70. The zeta function Eq. (6.24) should be used instead of Eq. (6.21)
if the bending motion is stable. In this case, a phase factor is added to
each amplitude of the periodic orbits and the scattering resonances are
shifted. Moreover, each previous scattering resonance is replaced by a
family of resonances corresponding to the excitation of bending. If, on
the other hand, the bending motion is unstable, the lifetimes will be
modified and the families of scattering resonances due to bending
excitations would progress downward in the complex energy surface. In
both cases, there is an effect of the quantum mechanical zero-point
energy that influences the energy levels even in the absence of classical
bending [loll. For the dissociative potential surface of HgI,, the bending
is supposed to be stable with a period of about 1ps. The consequence
would be that the density of resonances may double or triple in Fig. 65
leading to strong overlapping of the resonances. This overlapping may be
another reason why distinct peaks do not appear in the experimental

photoabsorption spectrum of HgI, .

      Such a model has very recently been used to interpret the Hartley absorption band of
ozone [254] with the result that the lifetime of the transition state is A;' = 3.2 fs.
320  P. GASPARD ET AL.

   I. Inclusion of Rotational Motion: Equilibrium Point Quantization

We may always apply successive Van Vleck contact transformations to the
full molecular Hamiltonian including the rotational degrees of freedom in
the separable regime above a saddle equilibrium point. In this way,
Sepulchre and Gaspard obtain the rotational structure of each vibrational
state described hereabove. In the present context of the molecular
transition state, the vibrational states are understood as the metastable
states given by the poles of the Green function at complex energies. For a
saddle-type potential of a linear molecule where the symmetric stretching
and bending modes are stable while the asymmetric stretching mode is
unstable, Sepulchre and Gaspard [249] obtained

     E =E, + f i ~ ~ (+n11, 2) + hw2(n2+ 1) + vibr. anh.

     + higher orders                                      (12.23)
     + + - ihA,(k, 1/2) - iG,J(J l)(k, + 1/2)
     + + vibr. anh. higher orders

In this equation, the vibrational quantum numbers take the values n,, n2

k , = 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . . The quantum number of total angular momentum is

denoted by J , and B is the molecular rotational constant given by the
inverse of the moment of inertia of the molecular complex at the saddle
equilibrium point. The bending-type vibrational angular momentum

projected along the molecular axis is supposed to be vanishing t2= 0,

otherwise J(J + 1) should be replaced by [J(J + 1) - ti].The constants

a l , a2, G, describe the vibrational-rotational interaction of the reso-
nances and are given in terms of the frequencies wl, w 2 , A,; of the
moments of inertia; and of the cubic derivatives f j k of the potential with
respect to the normal mode positions; each quantity being evaluated at

the saddle equilibrium point [250]. When the asymmetric stretching
motion becomes unstable, one of the constants, ai,becomes imaginary,
producing a vibrational-rotational interaction on the lifetimes of the
scattering resonances.

   Whether the vibrational-rotational interaction has a stabilizing or
destabilizing effect on the molecular complex depends on the sign of G3.
Figure 71 shows the rotational structure of the resonances in two different

cases. We may expect that the rotational structure of the resonances
would be of the same order of magnitude as in discrete energy spectra of
stable molecules. For triatomic hydrides such as HAH, where the
         NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 321

w                      L Re E

E

H

         Re E

    Figure 71. Rotational structure of a resonance of the molecular transition state. The

vibrational resonance is resolved into a series of rovibrational resonances according to Eq.
(12.23). The cases of rotational stabilization (&, < 0) and of rotational destabilization

(G3 >0) are shown as inserts.

- rotational constants are large and of the order of B 10 cm-' and
-oi 0.5 cm-' , we may expect rotational families J = 0-20 of resonances
- to extend over an energy range of A R e E-4000cm-' and of AIm E

- - 100cm-', which corresponds to changes of lifetimes of the order of

A r 4 fs around r 10fs for 0 < J <20. On the other hand, for a heavy
molecule such as HgI,, the rotational constants are of the order of
- - B 0.01cm-' and ai
                       cm-l, which would give rotational families
- J = 0-20 extending over an energy range of A R e E 4 cm-I and life-
- times with extremely small variations of A r 0.008 fs around T = 100 fs
[ 2491.

          J. Resonances in Nonseparable and Statistical Regimes

The preceding considerations are based on the existence of a single saddle
equilibrium point in the potential. Note that it is already surprising to find
as complex behavior as classically chaotic motions at high energies in such
a system. We have seen that, in a nonseparable regime, the equilibrium
point quantization is no longer valid and we must use the periodic-orbit
quantization because the eigenenergies start to interfere with each other.
In such regimes, we observed in the context of the three-disk scatterer
that the resonances may form complicated structures, which obey statisti-
322  P. GASPARD ET AL.

cal laws, such as Eq. (8.42). Therefore, the widths of the resonances are
expected to fluctuate in nonseparable regimes.

   In general, the potential may be complicated with several saddle
equilibrium points playing the role of bottlenecks and delimiting a region
of classical trajectories where chaotic and quasiperiodic motions are
mixed. In two-degree-of-freedom systems, the formation of quasiperiodic
islands may lead to long-lived metastable states determined by dynamical
tunneling. In higher-dimensional systems, Arnold diffusion complicates
the classical picture, but the quantum resonances should still be expected
to be long-lived in potentials that would produce globally stable
quasiperiodic motions when restricted to two degrees of freedom. This
reasoning is based on the fact that the diffusion time of Arnold diffusion
is very long compared to the quantum mechanical lifetimes [108]. In such
systems, the scattering resonances should be distributed as predicted by
random matrix theories [142, 1941.

   We suppose that the molecular complex can decay into different

channels c = 1 , 2 , . . . , v at the energy of the resonance E, = E, - Z , / 2 of

velocity u,. According to the Breit-Wigner theory, each channel contri-

butes to r, by a partial half-width r,, so that the total half-width is the
sum of the partial half-widths over all the open channels: r, = C, r,,

[251]. The average number of open channels at an energy E above the
energy threshold of dissociation, E * , is given in the harmonic approxi-
mation by

     .(&) = C(E - E y   (12.24)

which may be interpreted as the integrated density of states transverse to
the reaction coordinate if the system is assumed to be at a molecular
transition state with f degrees of freedom. The parameter C is a positive

constant while f- 1 is the number of degrees of freedom that are

transverse to the reaction coordinate. According to the RRKM statistical
theory, all the partial half-widths are assumed to take approximately the

same value r,, = 1 / [ 2 ~ p , ~ ( ~w)h]e,re pa,(&) is the average level density of

the reactant species, which is supposed to be a quasibounded system.
Therefore, the average value of the total half-widths at the energy E is
given by

                        (12.25)

where A is another positive constant and E,,<E' is the ground-state
energy. This equation is at the basis of statistical reaction rate theories,
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 323

which are of application in large molecules where the number of degrees
of freedom is so large that a detailed analysis, as seen in this section, is
impossible in practice [65].The average reaction rate would then be given

by the basic RRKM formula E ( E ) = i ? ( ~ ) /=hv ( E ) / [ ~ ~ , , ( E ) ] .

   Nevertheless, the detailed semiclassical analysis can help us to clarify
certain points and connections. In particular, the three-disk scatterer

- studied in section VIII has scattering resonances with half-widths growing

like I?, fi with energy E . This result can be recovered by following the
preceding reasoning. Indeed, in the disk billiards, the wavepacket escapes
from the scatterer through the holes between the disks. Therefore, the

- - number of open channels is given by the width w of these holes divided

by the de Broglie wavelength, h l / f i so that we obtain V ( E ) w f i .

On the other hand, the average level density of the bounded system
obtained by closing the exit channels is given by Eq. (6.3) and is

therefore constant. Hence, by interpreting r, as a total half-width in the
Breit-Wigner theory we recover the behavior of r, for the disk scatterers

by using Eq. (12.25). In this regard, the disk scatterers provide examples
were the RRKM theory can be compared with an exact treatment of the
reaction rate. In contrast, the saddle-type potential surfaces studied in
Sections XI1.A-I have properties differing from those predicted by the
RRKM theory (although energy-independent rates may be formally
obtained in Eq. (12.25) by setting E~ = E * ) . These differences may be
attributed to the fact that the resonances sustained by saddle-type
potential surfaces describe ultrafast reactions rather than the slower
reactions usually treated with RRKM theory.

   Thanks to random matrix theories, information is also available
concerning the fluctuations of the half-widths around their average value
[Eq. (12.25)]. Following random matrix theories, the reduced total
half-widths I'f = I',/u, are expected to have a ,y2-distribution with a
number of parameters equal to the number of open channels v, namely,
Eqs. (8.42) and (8.43). This gross behavior has been recently improved
after comparison with resonance data on formaldehyde [252]. In Section
VIII we showed that these fluctuations may obey a gap law in some
semiclassical regimes. The semiclassical and random matrix approaches
therefore complete our knowledge of reaction rates in a consistent way.
(See [253] for further information on the statistical approach.)

                               K. General Discussion

In Section XII, we have seen applications of the equilibrium point and
periodic-orbit quantization methods to the resonances of the molecular
transition state. In the preceding sections, we already considered different
possible systems where resonances can be obtained by semiclassical
324  P. GASPARD ET AL.

methods, and which may be important in the context of the molecular
transition state. One of them is the matrix Hamiltonian of Section IX,
describing a conical intersection where the geometrical phase introduces
half-integer quantum numbers. In this case, the resonances are long-
lived, as determined by tunneling. In contrast, on a single potential
surface with a saddle point, the dissociation is classically allowed and the
resonance lifetimes are much shorter, taking values in the range of
1-2OOfs from light molecules such as, 0,, H,O, or CO,, to heavier
molecules, such as HgI,. We presented a detailed analysis in the case of

HgI, , which features a transition between separable and nonseparable

regimes [21]. We described in detail the classical repeller, its bifurcations
towards chaos, and its ternary symbolic dynamics. These results are very
general and we may reasonably suppose that they extend to other
dissociating triatomic molecules. We also considered how to include the
effects of rotation in separable regimes [249]. For nonseparable systems,
we showed the relevance of our work on the three-disk scatterers, which
is a simplified model of unimolecular dissociation dynamics. In the
nonseparable regimes, statistical features appear in the structure formed
by the resonances that are partially described by semiclassical quantiza-
tion of classically chaotic systems and by random matrix theories. For
larger molecules, we briefly envisaged how statistical considerations may
become essential to establish the connection between the resonances of
the molecular transition complex and the unimolecular reaction rates. In
the following section, we will turn to highly excited states in atomic and
solid-state systems.

XIII. SEMICLASSICAL ELECTRONIC REGIMES IN ATOMIC AND
                             SOLID-STATE SYSTEMS

                       A. Highly Excited Electronic States

Close below their ionization thresholds, atoms and molecules are found in
highly excited electronic states where one or several electrons are in
semiclassical motion at large distances from the nuclei. The UV photo-
absorption spectrum of CO, illustrates the generality of this phenomenon
(see Fig. 53).

  Excited states with a single electron at a large distance are called
Rydberg states. Such atomic and molecular states have been the object of
many studies [33-35,37,210]. When the electron moves far from the
nuclei and the other electrons, its motion in the absence of external fields
is governed by an effective field due to the ionic core. This effective field
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 325

is a perturbed Coulomb force field, with the perturbations due to
medium-range interactions determined by the multipole moments of the
ionic core. Moreover, fast crossing of the electron through the ionic core
may occur, which involves important interactions that also have to be
taken into account. In this picture, the semiclassical motion of the
electron is composed of a succession of segments of Coulomb-type orbits,
separated by scattering events with the ionic core [37]. The energy levels
of the Rydberg states form perturbed hydrogen-like series

                                                                                    (13.1)

where Ei is the energy of the ionization threshold, n is the principal

quantum number, and pn is the so-called quantum defect [255], which
depends on other quantum numbers, such as angular momentum. The
calculation of the quantum defect pn in terms of the perturbing interac-
tions is the purpose of quantum defect theories, which are discussed at
length in the literature [255]. In the absence of an external magnetic field,
in which case the unperturbed quantum Coulomb problem is exactly
solvable, the periodic-orbit approach does not provide a great advantage
over conventional wave function methods.

   In contrast, the periodic-orbit method has proved to be both con-
ceptually and technically important, over the last years, for Rydberg
states in strong external electric and magnetic fields [34,35,210]. In
particular, the dynamics of the hydrogen atom in a magnetic field is
classically chaotic. Phase space portraits and the periodic orbits of such
systems have been studied by different groups [18,34,210]. Methods
have been proposed to Fourier transform the energy spectra into
periodic-orbit spectra, especially by Wintgen [18]. Since then, such
methods have been applied to experimental spectra obtained in several
laboratories, which revealed not only how the classical periodic orbits
emerge from the quantum wave dynamics but also how nonlinear
properties typical of classical dynamics, such as bifurcations and PoincarC
resonances, have their roots in long and complex series of quantum
energy eigenvalues [34,35].

   Highly excited states of atoms or molecules, where two electrons are
excited (the so-called doubly excited states), have also been the object of
recent studies [23,36,99-1011. Such doubly excited states are particularly
important in two-electron atomic systems, which are isoelectronic with

helium: H - , He, Li', Be2+,B3+,C 4 + ,. . . . The Hamiltonian of these
326                        P. GASPARD ET AL.

three-body systems is given by

                                                          (13.2)

which has been studied by different groups [99-101,256-2591. The
properties of several families of classical orbits are known for this
Hamiltonian (see Fig. 72). The classical motion is known to be chaotic
and ionizing in some cases while it is quasiperiodic in others. The linear
stability of these periodic orbits revealed important features (see Table V)
[259]. This information on the classical dynamics was used to carry out
periodic-orbit quantization, which showed that accurate values of the
eigenenergies can be obtained for helium and the hydrogen negative ion.
In some respect, the three-body Coulomb systems have similarities with
the triatomic molecular systems. Nevertheless, important differences have
been discovered, which have their origin in the essential singularity of the
Coulomb potential at three-body collisions. As a consequence, the
Wannier symmetric stretching motion is infinitely unstable at zero angular
momentum and the most important periodic orbit corresponds to the
antisymmetric stretching motion [259], contrary to the situation in
triatomic molecules as analyzed in the preceding section. Here, we will
focus on the case of the H- ion that was studied by Gaspard and Rice
[loll. Let us also mention that exotic three-body Coulomb systems have
been or may be envisaged from the semiclassical point of view, such as

     L = 0 configurations

                                eZe orbits

     Z.-+e -+* e                Zee planetary orbits

                                Langmuir orbit (rl = r2)

     L # 0 configurations

    Figure 72. Different families of classical orbits of the two-electron atomic species for

vanishing or nonvanishing orbital angular momentum L.
         NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 327

                                                 TABLE V
Spectrum of the Nontrivial Lyapunov Exponents of the Classical Orbits for the Different

   Atomic Species Isoelectronic with He at Zero Angular Momentum, L = 0 [loo, 2591"

Species  eZe Orbits  Fundamental  Langmuir Orbit
                     Zee Orbit

H-       (+,O)       3            (0,+)
He       (+>O)
Li +     (+>O)       (0,O)        (03 0)
BeZA     (+,O)       (0,O)
B3'      (+SO)       (0,O)        (0, + I
C4+      (+>O)       (0,O)
N5+      (+>O)       (0,O)        (0,+)
06+      ( + >0 )    (0,O)
F7+      (+,O)       (020)        (0, +I
Ne8+                 (0,O)
Na9+     (+,O)       (02 0)       (0,+I
Mg'"     (+,O)       (090)
A1"+     (+,O)       (0,O)        (0,+)
Si"+     (+>O)       (02 0 )
         (+>O)       (0,O)        (+,+I
p13+
         (+,O)       ( + >0 )     ( + >+)
Sl4+     (+,O)
cii5+                ( + >0 )     (+>+I
Ar l6 +              ( + >0 )
                                  + ) ( + 2

                                  (+,+I

                                  ( + >+)

                                  (+,+I

                                  +) ( + 2

                                  ( + >+)

                                  +) ( + ?

                                  ( + >+)

                                  ( + >+ I

    "For the eZe and Zee collinear orbits, (sgnA,,sgnA,) is given, where A, is the
Lyapunov exponent for perturbations in the hyperangle between rl and r , , tan (Y = rl i r , ,
such that the collinear configuration is maintained, while A, is the Lyapunov exponent for
the bending-type perturbation in the bending angle 0 between the vectors r , and r,. For the
Langmuir orbit, we give (sgn A,, sgn A,) where A, is the Lyapunov exponent for perturba-
tions perpendicular to the orbit and to the hyperangle (Y, with A, the same as before. The
collinear eZe orbits are conjectured to form a fully chaotic repeller along the whole
isoelectronic series.

the positronium negative ion (e-e'e-); the antiprotonic species,
(p'p-e-) or (p+p-p+);and the muonic species (Zp-e-), (p+p-p+), or
(t+p-d+) [23,260,261].

                           B. Hydrogen Negative Ion

The hydrogen negative ion (H-) is isoelectronic to helium, but differs
from helium in a number of important respects. For example, the H- ion
has many autoionizing states and only one bound state, which lies very
close to the ionization threshold, whereas the helium atom has many
bound states. The stability of the hydrogen negative ion was first
established, theoretically, by Bethe and Hylleraas in 1929-1930
[262,263]; earlier studies of H- using the Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization
328  P. GASPARD ET AL.

conditions failed to predict the stability of H-. The modern semiclassical
quantization methods have overcome the difficulties met in the earlier
attempts, in particular thanks to the obtention of the correct Maslov
indexes, and thanks to our understanding of the way the different
periodic orbits interfere in the zeta functions to produce the quantum
spectrum [23,99, 1011.

   First, we will describe the classical dynamics of H- and then we will
turn to its semiclassical quantization.

                          1. Classical Dynamics of H -

The classical motion of the ion may be considered in the different
configurations of Fig. 72.

   1. Consider the collinear motion in which both electrons are on
       opposite sides of the nucleus (the eZe configuration). This eZe
       collinear motion is classically unbounded and fully chaotic for H -
       as well as for He. In the course of this motion, the electrons
       undergo collisions with the nucleus. If such a collision occurs
       between one electron and the nucleus while the other electron is
       close to the nucleus, the latter electron may acquire enough energy
       to escape and ionize. In fact, for eZe collinear motion there is no
       barrier to prevent ionization and most trajectories ionize, except for
       the zero measure fractal set of trajectories forming the repeller (and
       their stable manifolds). All the periodic orbits turn out to be
       unstable with respect to collinear perturbations. The fractal repeller
       is therefore fully chaotic and can be described by a binary symbolic
       dynamics [99]. Note that this is different from the fully chaotic
       repeller of the transition state of triatomic molecules, where the
       symbolic dynamics is ternary rather than binary. This difference has
       its origin in the infinite instability of the Wannier symmetric
       stretching motion in the case of the Coulomb potential, which
       becomes singular at short distances during three-body collisions.
       The long range of the Coulomb potential has the other effect that
       the orbits of the repeller extend over large distances away from the
       nucleus. This long-range effect can be observed in Fig. 73, which
       depicts a combined Poincart section in the planes rl = r2 and r2 = 0
       of the phase space. The crosses are the intersections of the periodic
       orbit with the plane while the lines are the invariant manifolds. Let
      us mention that, by contrast with collinear perturbations, the eZe
       motion is stable with respect to perturbations of the bending type,
       in which the electrons move away from a line.

   2. There is another possible collinear configuration, with both elec-
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 329

1             /il ' ' '               1

      0.5                             0.5
                                      0 '51
+i;: 0
                                      -0.5
ne

     -0.5

-1                                    -1

           2  1          0      2  3

              rl = r2       rl

    Figure 73. Combined Poincart sections r l = rz (left-hand side) and rz = 0 (right-hand
side) of the phase space. The crosses are the intersections of the first 22 periodic orbits with
the section surfaces. The solid (dashed) line is the unstable manifold of the fixed point at
infinity. We see that they delimit the region occupied by the fractal repeller. The sets of
points { a , } and { b k } are the successive intersections of two homoclinic orbits with the
section surfaces. The curve C is the border of the classically allowed region in the ( r , = r z ,

PI + P A plane.

       trons on the same side of the nucleus, the Zee configuration.
       However, no such trapped orbit exists in the case of H - , contrary
       to He and positive ions where a stable quasiperiodic island appears
       in phase space.

   3. For H-, the Langmuir orbit shown in Fig. 72 is stable for in-plane
       motions but unstable with respect to perturbation in the hyperangle
       a = arctg(r, lr2).

   Next, we also consider the H- ion in a weak magnetic field, where the
orbits are only slightly perturbed with respect to the zero-field situation
[loll. Let us remark that the line of collinear eZe motion may point in all
possible directions of the sphere since the corresponding quantum state is
rotationally invariant and described by an S wave if the angular momen-
tum is assumed to vanish (L = 0).

   We now turn to the classical equations of motion for the H- ion in a
magnetic field. As we mentioned in Section X, Coulomb systems obey an
important scaling law, which allows us to reduce the study of the classical
motion to the energy E = -1 according to

                                          (13.3)
330               P. GASPARD ET AL.
with

                                                                (13.4)

where 8 = (Eh')/(me4)is the energy expressed in Hartrees and a , = h2/
(me') is the Bohr radius.

   For the eZe configuration of the electrons with respect to the nucleus,
the rescaled Hamiltonian is given by

                  + P : + P ; 1 1               1

                  2 xc,=--------- rl r2 Z(r1 + r 2 )            (13.5)

                  + -b2 L,  +  b'            +  r:)  =  -1
                               - 8 sin2e(r:

where L, is the angular momentum and the parameter b is given by

and 6 is the angle between the direction of the magnetic field and the line
of motion of the electrons.

   For a given periodic orbit, the reduced action S and the_period T can_

now be expressed in terms of the rescaled reduced action S and period T
as

                               and T = y?                       (13.7)

Since we know that the period of an orbit is given by the derivative of the

reduced action with respect to the energy, T = &S/aE,we infer from the

scaling law that            ,., -

                            T=+ S                               (13.8)

Note that the semiclassical limit occurs when the energy reaches the

double ionization threshold, that is, for 18140. Since 8 is negative, the

limit 8 - 0 is consistent with the increase of energy that is generally

expected for the transition toward classical behavior.

In Coulomb systems, the numerical integration of the equations of

- motion is plagued with difficulties due to two-body collisions, since then
rl or r2 (t -     while p 1 = i , or p , = i, diverges as (t -  This
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 331

problem can be overcome by use of regularization methods developed in
celestial mechanics [264]. Setting

ra = R2a P a =2PRa , u = l , 2  (13.9)

     with dt = R:Ri d r

the new variables have analytic behavior when two-body collisions occur

J 3 since ~ - ~ ~ - ( ( t - ,t R~ , or R,-r - T ~ ,while P , or P, reach the

constant values 2 8.
   The motion of the variables r , and r2 is classically chaotic. As

compared with helium, the motion in the H- ion is more unstable since
escape to infinity usually occurs more rapidly.

   We have carried out a search for periodic orbits and obtained a set that
is in 1 :1 correspondence with the binary symbolic dynamics {+, - }
defined by Ezra et al. [99]. In this respect, the H- ion turns out to behave
like helium. In Fig. 74 we show the 23 first periodic orbits of H- in the
plane of the positions rl and r2.

   The classical dynamics of ionization can be understood in terms of
phase-space transport across the partial separatrices formed by the stable
and unstable manifolds of the fixed point at infinity [1011. This fixed point
is defined by assuming that the electron at infinity is at rest while the
bounded electron carries all the energy with E = -1. In Fig. 73, we have
drawn some periodic orbits of the fractal repeller together with the stable
and unstable manifolds of the fixed point at infinity. At the intersections
between the stable and the unstable manifolds, we find the homoclinic
orbits associated with the fixed point at infinity; two of these are
identified in Fig. 73 as {a,} and {b,}. The stable manifold (dashed line) is
composed of several successive parts, the last of which is the dashed line
joining the intersections b,, u 5 , b,, and u6 of the homoclinic orbits with
the section plane at positive values of the momentum p , . This last part of
the stable manifold constitutes a separatrix for the trajectories in its
neighborhood. Trajectories above the separatrix have a momentum p 1
large enough to escape to infinity and ionize. However, during motion
below the separatrix, the position r1 increases for a while at positive p ,
before decreasing until the next collision on the nucleus. Therefore,
trajectories below the separatrix do not have enough momentum to
escape immediately and they remain bounded till the next return near the
nucleus. The stable (as well as the unstable) manifold therefore forms a
partial separatrix for the escape dynamics.

   The linear stability analysis carried out with the methods of Section I11
332  P . GASPARD ET AL.

   Figure 74. The 23 shortest periodic orbits of H- for the eZe configuration up to

symbolic period 6. They are depicted in the fundamental domain of the position space

      rz).
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 333

shows that the motion of the electrons is unstable with a positive
Lyapunov exponent for perturbations that maintain the collinear configu-
ration, On the other hand, perturbations of the bending type are stable
with imaginary stability eigenvalues and corresponding rotation numbers.
The bending motion can be considered as a doubly degenerate oscillator.

                     2. Semiclassical Quantization of H -

We have carried out a semiclassical quantization on the basis of the
classical collinear eZe orbits. Accordingly, the average of the cosine of
the angle 012 between the vectors rl and r2 would take the value
(cos(@,,))= -1 for the corresponding electronic eigenfunctions. Since
the classical motion is chaotic for such a configuration, the semiclassical
quantization can be performed thanks to the zeta function formalism of
Section V1.C. Since the linear stability of the eZe orbits shows positive as
well as vanishing Lyapunov exponents, we have to use the Zeta function
[Eq. (6.24)] with u = 1 and s = 2 . Indeed, the bending motion is

+ equivalent to a doubly degenerate oscillator of quantum number u = n 1

n 2 , where each level u has a degeneracy equal to u + 1. The degenerate

levels u are labeled by the quantum number C of angular momentum

projected on the line of collinear motion ( 4 = u , u - 2, . . . , -u).

   At the leading semiclassical approximation, the eigenenergies are thus
given by the zeros of the following zeta function

P k=O  I exp[(i/h)Sp(S) - i ( r / 2 ) p p s- 2 r i p p ( u + 1)J
                     IA, Ili2npk

                                      (13.10)

in terms of the reduced actions [Eq. (13.7)] of the periodic orbits and of
the Maslov indexes. Since the present system contains two indistinguish-
able Fermions, the Maslov indexes depend on the spin quantum number
S

       Pps = ff*           for S = 1

       + P P S = ap 2vi-I  for s = o  (13.11)

vI-' where cyp is the Morse index while is the number of crossings of the

diagonal rl = r2 during the period. The parameter vi-) is also equal to the

number of symbols (-) in the symbolic dynamical code of the periodic

orbit p . The result [Eq. (13.11)] has its origin in the Pauli principle

postulating the antisymmetry of the total wave function of an assembly of
334    P. GASPARD ET AL.

Fermions. Consequently, the wave function must be antisymmetric in
space for singlet states ( S = 0 ) so that there is a Dirichlet boundary
condition on r1 = r 2 . As a consequence, the phase of the path acquires a
minus sign at each crossing of r1 = r 2 besides the phase (-7i-/2) acquired
at each new conjugate point. Conversely, the wave function must be
symmetric in space for triplet states ( S = 1) with a Neumann boundary
condition on rl = r 2 , so that the phase does not change at crossings of
r1 = r2 and increases only by ( - ~ / 2 )at each new conjugate point.

   The effect of a weak magnetic field on the eigenenergies can be studied
thanks to the semiclassical perturbation method described in Section VII.
The action is modified to take into account the perturbation of the
magnetic field according to [loll

                           (13.12)

where

       aP= (r: + r t ) dt  ( 13.13)
                   fP

is evaluated in the rescaled variables.
   In order to calculate the energy eigenvalues in the presence of a

magnetic field, we have to insert these actions in the zeta function [Eq.
(13.10)]. For each zero of the zeta function we can then define the
susceptibility x,, according to

                                                                                   (13.14)

which gives an estimate of the size of the doubly excited state (see Fig.
75).

   We calculated by periodic-orbit quantization the eigenenergies of the
families ISeand 3 S e of autoionizing states restricted to the case u = 0,
L = 0, and M , = 0 [loll. Table VI compares the results of the periodic-
orbit quantization with those of conventional wave function methods for
the ' S e states. The ground state is the lowest IS' state and is the only
bound state with an energy well below -0.5, which is the single-electron
ionization threshold. We see that the H- ion is stable according to our
semiclassical calculation and that the energy is obtained with a precision
of 5 % . At higher excitations, the precision increases up to 1%. More-
over, the periodic-orbit quantization provides us with new eigenenergies
we could not find in the literature [265-2691.
   m] 1oj
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 335

   lo6                      '
i i *PI           0  I         '"7-r-

+  1o4                                                 3Se H-

                                                                        I

A 10'

iV                                           X

-

   10'

   1100        '  '*11111'     ' '*,,,,,'    ''..l.."  1oo    X

                                                            ' 'J

        I 0.'        lo-?              10.'                       10'

                               -E ( a. u . )

  + Figure 75. Log-log plot of the semiclassical averages ( r : r : ) versus energy -E for

the 'Se (solid circles) and ' S P(triangles) states of H- compared with the 'Se (crosses) states

of He.

   The energies of the other ' S e states are above -0.5, so that these
states are all autoionizing and have a finite lifetime. The semiclassical
calculation also gives an imaginary part of the order of 10-6-10-3 to the
zeros of the Selberg zeta function for high quantum numbers. These
imaginary parts are very small and are in rough agreement with the
known quantum mechanical orders of magnitude. However, they are too
small with respect to the error on the real parts to be reliable.

   The semiclassical formulation provides us with several important
scaling laws. In the presence of a weak magnetic field, Eqs. (13.12)-
(13.14) imply that

                                                                           (13.15)

where the constant takes the value C, = 4.7. This value does not seem to

depend on whether the states are singlets or triplets. In terms of the

- principal quantum number N , the energy scales according to 1% 1 N - ' ,
- + so that we recover the known scaling law (Y: r i ) N 4 (see Fig. 7 5 )

[267].
   Furthermore, in spite of the difficulty in getting reliable numerical

results for the lifetime at the leading semiclassical approximation, we can
336               P. GASPARD ET AL.

                                      TABLE VI
                  Energy Levels of the ISe States of H- (a.u.)

( N t ,N ' e ' )  -Re gWFn           -Re gpob

 lsls             0.5259"            0.557
 2s2s             0.14879            0.150
 2s3s             0.12585            0.119
 3s3s             0.06960            0.0688
 3s4s             0.05765            0.0573
 4s4s             0.039925           0.0399
 4s5s             0.03353            0.0337
 5s5s             0.026015           0.0257
 5s6s             0.02224            0.0222
 6s6s             0.018205           0.0179
 6s7s                                0.0158
 7s7s             0.01353d           0.0134
 7s8s             0.01195            0.0118
 8s8s             0.01042            0.0102
 8s9s             0.00935            0.00912
 9s9s             0.008265           0.00832
 9~10s                               0.00808
1os1os            0.0066807"         0.00670
llslls            0.005537f          0.00552
12s12s            0.004663           0.00462
13~13s                               0.00392
14~14s                               0.00337
15~15s                               0.00293
16~16s                               0.00259

     gWFE:nergies obtained by standard wave function methods.
     gp0;Energies obtained by the periodic-orbit method by Gaspard and Rice [loll.
     Reference [265].
     Reference [266].
     Reference [267].
     Reference [268].

obtain the scaling law of the half-widths of the scattering resonances
[270]. For the present Coulomb system the lifetimes are large and

- correspond to shar resonances with small widths. Because the actions

scale like S, /El-'2, we infer from the general form of the zeta function
[Eq. (13.10)] that the widths scale as

                  r-1813'2                                      (13.16)

- - or as r N 3in terms of the principal quantum number N 18

Therefore, the small widths of the resonances are typical of Coulomb

systems near the ionization threshold, where 1'8I +0 and N + a.
NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 337

This general behavior of the resonances is in contrast with resonance

behavior in other systems which also have a classically chaotic repeller,

for example, the hard disk scatterers and the Hamiltonian mappings that

we studied elsewhere. For the disk scatterers the actions increase as
-S, E"' with the energy E+ + w in the classical limit. The consequence
r - is that the widths increase as
                                        while the reduced widths (defined

as the widths divided by the velocity u of the outgoing particle) remain
constant, r O = r / u - I ` I E 112 Cst. The value of this constant is de-

termined mainly by the Lyapunov exponents of the periodic orbits. In

these systems a gap in the spectrum is observed, which was related to the

absence of sharp resonances with a typical Fano profile in the scattering

cross-section (see Section VIII) [63].

                     C. Mesoscopic Semiconducting Devices

Scattering of electrons in semiconducting devices is an important process
at the origin of the property of conductance [45]. In ultrapure nanometric
devices at low temperatures, the motion of electrons is essentially ballistic
and slightly affected by scattering on impurities or phonons. Under these
conditions, the time evolution is governed by the one-electron Schroding-
er equation and semiclassical considerations are important. If the po-
tential felt by the electron is sharp at the border of the conducting circuit,
the smooth potential may be replaced by a hard wall and the circuit may
be modeled as a billiard [40-43,481.

   Assuming that the leads of the circuit are electronic waveguides
extending to large distances, the conductance can be formulated as a
scattering problem of the electronic wave in the circuit [43]. In this
respect, the electronic conductance problem is very similar to the
problem of a molecular reaction involving a collinear triatomic complex.
Landauer [271] showed that the conductance at energy E is given by

                                        (13.17)

in terms of the transmission matrix f ( E )of a wave through the scattering
potential. The transmission matrix is itself directly related to the scatter-
ing matrix so that this problem can be reduced to the aforementioned
calculation of total cross-sections. Fluctuations in the conductance g ( E )
are the object of many current studies [40,41,43,45].In this context, it is
worthwhile to mention that similar fluctuations may exist in the cross-
sections of molecular collisions, but they are more difficult to observe
experimentally. The semiclassical approach is particularly important here
because the properties of these fluctuations appear to be related to the
338  P. GASPARD ET AL.

chaotic or nonchaotic behavior of the classical motion of the electron

[431.
   In typical devices, the classical motion is often chaotic so that the

question of the consequences of classical chaos on the properties of
electronic conductance turns out to be important. In this context,
different billiard models have been considered particularly by Smilansky,
Stone, and others [42,43,272]. Experiments have been carried out on an
open stadium billiard as well as on a four-arm circuit closely related to the
four-disk scatterer, as shown in Fig. 76 [40,41].

   This circuit is interesting in view of a comparison with molecular
reactions, and we would like to describe its symbolic dynamics. Figure 76
shows that a quarter of the four-arm circuit looks like a sharp potential
model of a chemical reaction with two exit channels. Moreover, we can
use the symmetry by the diagonal to fully reduce the billiard to its
fundamental domain. Like the four-disk scatterer, the four-arm billiard
has a classically chaotic fractal repeller that is invariant under the C,,
symmetry group [273]. When the disks are not too close to each other, all
the trapped orbits are in 1 : l correspondence with a symbolic dynamics
based on the four symbols { a , b , c, d } , which are the labels of the four
disks. There is a constraint that two successive symbols cannot be equal
so that the symbolic dynamics is actually ternary with a topological

                                                                 U2

    Figure 76. Definitions of the symbolic dynamics in the       0   1
case of C,, billiards and the corresponding symmetry-reduced
                                                                 k
billiards: (a) Four-disk billiard; ( b ) Four-arm billiard; (c)
                                                                 0 -+
Billiard obtained by reduction of the four-arm billiard using

the horizontal and vertical reflections; ( d ) Fundamental

domain of the four-arm billiard obtained from (c) using a (4

further diagonal reflection.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 339

entropy of In 3 per symbol. By using horizontal and vertical reflections,
we can reduce the symbolic dynamics { a , b , c , d } to the symbolic
dynamics with the three symbols {0,1,2} of the molecular transition state
of HgI, in Section XII, which can equivalently be used in the quarter of
the original billiard, as shown in Fig. 76. In these new symbols (0, 1,2},
the symbolic dynamics is free of constraint. The translation rules from
{ a , b , c, d } to {0,1,2} are derived by using horizontal and vertical
reflections to fold the full orbit onto an orbit of the quarter of the billiard.
A part of the orbit is assigned to a particular symbol of {0,1,2} if the
corresponding path is followed. Table VII gives the translation rules.

  We can further reduce the symbolic description to the symbols ( 0 , +,

-} by using a further reflection through the diagonal to go to the
fundamental domain formed by an eighth of the plane. The translation
rules are given in Table VIII. In a sequence of symbols {0,1,2}, the

symbols 0 remain unchanged. The symbol 1 (resp. 2) is replaced by + if,

ignoring the symbols 0, it is preceded by 1 (resp. 2). Conversely, 1 (resp.
2) is replaced by - if it is preceded by 2 (resp. l),here again ignoring the
symbols 0 of the sequence. Accordingly, the three symbolic dynamics
schemes are equivalent. We would like to emphasize the generality of this

                            TABLE VII
Translation Rules between the Symbolic Dynamics
{ a , b , c , d } with the Constraint w,, Z w , , , of the Four-
Disk Scatterer and the Symbolic Dynamics (0, 1 , 2 }
without Constraint of the Quarter of Billiard Reduced by
Horizontal and Vertical Reflections As Well As of the

                   Molecular Transition State

{ a ,b , c, d l  {O, 1,2}
ac, ca, bd, db       0
ad, da, bc, cb
                     1
ab, ba, cd, dc
                     2

                           TABLE VIII
Translation Rules between the Symbolic Dynamics
{0,1,2} without Constraint and the Symbolic Dynamics

+, ( 0 , - } without Constraint of the Fundamental Domain

Reduced by a Further Diagonal Reflection in the Billiard
       As Well As in the Molecular Transition State

                               0("0+, +, -1

                                               0" -
340  P. GASPARD ET AL.

symbolic description in two-degree-of-freedom systems: It is encountered
in fourfold symmetric billiards [273], in the hydrogen atom in a magnetic
field [274], as well as in the molecular transition state [21].

   The semiclassical quantization of classically chaotic billiard models of
electronic circuits can be carried out with the zeta function formalism
presented in Section V1.C along lines that are similar to those developed
in Section VIII on quantum billiards [273]. In open circuits, those
methods allow us to obtain the scattering resonances. Such metastable
states with varying lifetimes also arise here, and can be studied by
femtosecond laser excitation of the device. A simple calculation shows
that the lifetimes would be in the range of 500-1000 fs for a device with a
size of the order of 100nm [97]. These considerations may be particularly
important if we are interested in producing ultrafast devices. In this
context, the characteristic time taken by the electronic wave to exit the
device is determined by the lifetimes of the scattering resonances.

   Here, let us also mention the very recent work on scattering of
electronic surface waves by artificially placed surface impurities, which
can be observed thanks to the electron tunnel microscope [46]. In this
context, semiclassical methods may also be of importance in the modeli-
zation of such processes.

   Another application of periodic-orbit quantization concerns the mag-
netic equilibrium properties of mesoscopic systems such as quantum dots
considered as tiny billiards for electrons [275-2781. Superlattices with up
to lo5 copies of the same quantum billiard can be built by lithographic
methods, which allows the observation of its magnetic susceptibility. The
consequences of the transition between regular and irregular energy
spectra due to classically chaotic behavior have been studied, particularly
by Nakamura and Thomas [275,276]. The magnetic susceptibility has
been expressed within the semiclassical approximation in terms of the
periodic orbits of the classical motion of the electron [277]. This periodic-
orbit theory explains oscillatory structures observed in the magnetic
susceptibility as a function of the Fermi energy controlled by the bias
voltage [278].

   In a related field, periodic-orbit theory has also been applied to explain
nonconventional magnetoresistance oscillations in mesoscopic conductors
formed by GaAdAlGaAs antidot square superlattices (with a lattice
period of 200-300 nm) [279]. At low temperatures, spurious oscillations
in the behavior of the resistance p,,, as a function of the applied magnetic
field, have been attributed to electrons trapped on quantized periodic
orbits whirling around one antidot or within a unit cell of the lattice [279].
(See also [280].)

   These different directions of research show that the number of
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 341

potential applications of semiclassical effects are large in the field of
mesoscopic devices.

                  XIV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this chapter, we reviewed and illustrated several new and recent
developments in the semiclassical quantization method. A chart is given
in Fig. 77 showing the different pathways we followed in this chapter. The
principle of semiclassical quantization is to perform an h-expansion of the
trace of the resolvent of the quantum Hamiltonian around classical orbits.
Accordingly, a knowledge of the classical motion is required. The
discovery that classically chaotic dynamics is typical of nonlinear Hamil-
tonian systems has thus been a challenge for the traditional semiclassical
methods. The latter essentially assumed separability between the differ-
ent degrees of freedom of the system, which is equivalent to integrability
of the classical motion. However, separability is precluded in classical
chaos where the trajectories are found wandering among unstable
periodic orbits over large regions of phase space.

        A. Classical Chaos, Periodic Orbits, and Quantum Spectra

This difficulty has been partially overcome thanks to the Gutzwiller trace
formula, which expresses the trace of the resolvent as a sum over periodic
orbits. The Gutzwiller trace formula has been reformulated in terms of a
zeta function, with the great advantage that quantum eigenvalues are
given as zeros of the zeta function, as we explained in Section VI. We
showed that zeta functions are directly related to the determinant of the
semiclassical transfer operator, which contains the quantum probability
amplitudes of the transitions between the different semiclassical states of
motion. The introduction of the transfer operator is required as soon as
the classical motion can be decomposed into a succession of transitions
between phase-space cells. This branching process is controlled by a
symbolic dynamics defined by an alphabet and grammatical rules. The
classical trajectories should be unambiguously associated with infinite
sequences of symbols taken from the alphabet and assembled according
to the grammatical rules. This symbolic dynamics helps us to list all the
unstable periodic orbits of phase space. At the same time, we need to
study the phase-space geometry of classical motion in order to establish
the correspondence to a symbolic dynamics. The Smale horseshoe is the
phase space object that plays the central role in this geometrical
construction. We illustrated the central role of the Smale horseshoe and
of symbolic dynamics in a number of examples in this chapter, in
particular the three- and four-disk scatterers, the H- ion, as well as other
                                       several coupled
                                       potential surfaces:

                                       matrix Hamiltonian

                                       potential surface:

                        . ( Is.+ .O.)  (0 norbits)

(distribution                                            (0 orbits)          (smtionary phase
 approach)                                                                      approach)
                                       w u GO
                                                                             periodic-orbit
equilibrium-pint

- penurbation theory                                        isolated

-Van Vleck method                                                            (e. g. classically
                                                                             ntegrable systems
(restricted to effect-                                                       or systems with
ivcly scparablebut
anharmonic systems)                                                                                geometric
                                                                                                 phases in p. o

                        trace formula                        race formula    quantization
                         condition
                                                            xRuelle

                                                             zeta functions

                                                             functional eq.

                                                             Bq-Keating
                                                              quantization
                                                               condition
    Figure 77. Chart of the relationships betwecn the different Hamiltonians, classical orbits, and
corresponding semiclassical formulas, which are discussed in this chapter.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 343

two-electron atomic species, and the dissociating triatomic molecule.
Even tunneling in a multiwell potential is described by a semiclassical
transfer operator and its related zeta functions, which are constructed on
the symbolic dynamics controlling the complex classical orbits.

   At the semiclassical level, the zeta function formalism provides a clear
answer to the question of the correspondence between the quantum-
mechanical eigenvalues and the periodic orbits. In a system with a single
unstable periodic orbit, such as the two-disk scatterer or the antibonding
molecular potential at an energy just above its saddle equilibrium point,
the single periodic orbit (and its repetitions) determines a whole family of
complex energy eigenvalues, as shown in Sections VIII and XII. This
result is natural in view of the Fourier-type relationship between the

- energy and time domains, and of the time-energy Heisenberg uncertainty

relation AE At h. Accordingly, a single periodic orbit with a precisely
defined period cannot be associated with a particular energy eigenvalue
and vice versa. However, the zeta function shows that a family of energy
eigenvalues is associated with a periodic orbit (and its repetitions). Now,
classical flows contain a countable family of periodic orbits of increasing
periods in chaotic regimes. As we explained, the higher periods turn out
to be approximate combinations of a small set of lower periods related to
the fundamental periodic orbits. In strongly chaotic systems, these
fundamental periodic orbits have the smallest stability eigenvalues and,
therefore, dominate the cycle expansion of the zeta function. The energy
eigenvalues then basically result from the interference between the
semiclassical quantum amplitudes associated with the fundamental per-
iodic orbits. In this way, the periodic-orbit quantization naturally extends
to nonseparable systems. The interference phenomenon explains, or at
least suggests, that the spectrum of the quantum eigenvalues may become
irregular in classically chaotic systems.

   It is important to note that the irregularity in the distribution of the
eigenvalues results from a dispersion in the periods of the periodic orbits
rather than from the instability of the periodic orbits. For instance, the
two-disk scatterer has a regular spectrum due to its single unstable
periodic orbit, while the spectrum of the many-disk scatterer becomes
more and more irregular because the variety of the possible periods
increases with the number of fundamental periodic orbits. We think that
this remark is relevant to the problem of the origin of the Wigner spacing
distributions in irregular discrete energy spectra of bounded quantum
systems. It is commonly assumed that a Wigner spacing distribution is a
signature of the quantum system being chaotic or, at least, dynamically
random in the semiclassical limit, h 0 ---f [281]. Counterexamples have
been found for the reverse statement that classical chaos in the sense of
344  P. GASPARD ET AL.

sensitivity to initial conditions would imply a Wigner spacing distribution
[282]. Moreover, there exist quantum systems showing a Wigner spacing
distribution, but which do not necessarily have a classical counterpart
[283]. The delicate and difficult question of the relationship between
irregular quantum spectra and classical chaos is still open today in spite of
the effort invested over the past years [284]. In this regard, important
questions still remain concerning the semiclassical quantization of
bounded quantum systems, although definitive advances have been made.

B. Scattering Systems and Applications to Chemical Reaction Dynamics

Actually, the situation is clearer for scattering systems, where the zeta
function formalism proved to be an effective method to determine the
complex energy eigenvalues that are the scattering resonances. This
chapter summarizes several results in this context, specifically, in Section
VIII. The semiclassical methods turn out to be extremely powerful not
only to calculate the scattering resonances but also to provide an
understanding of the distribution of the resonances and, in particular, of
semiclassical scaling laws between the half-widths and the energies, or
gap laws relating the half-widths and the lifetimes to the Lyapunov
exponents of the periodic orbits, as well as to the entropy of the classical
repeller. In classically allowed decay processes, the resonant metastable
states have short lifetimes (except in Coulomb-type potentials, due to the
long range of the interaction, as discussed in Sections X and XIII).
Therefore, the semiclassical method turns out to provide a very natural
framework to describe the ultrashort molecular dissociation processes
that are currently studied in femtosecond laser photochemistry [39].

   In Section XI1 we applied the semiclassical methods to the dynamics of
the molecular transition state. The case of HgI, has been treated in
detail. We presented results recently obtained by Burghardt and Gaspard
[21] on the three-branch horseshoe and the ternary symbolic dynamics
that controls the classical dynamics of the molecular transition complex of
triatomic molecules. We also described the bifurcations of the classical
dynamics that lead to the formation of the classically chaotic repeller.
This process seems to be very general on antibonding potential surfaces
and nicely explains a number of observations dispersed in the literature
over several decades. In particular, the three-branch horseshoe contains
as fundamental periodic orbits the famous PODS defined by Pollak and
Pechukas [236], while the antisymmetric stretching periodic orbit recently
emphasized turns out to be a higher period orbit. We illustrated our
discussion with simple Hamiltonian mappings describing the dissociation
process in symmetric ABA or nonsymmetric ABC molecules. Thanks to
the discovery of the three-branch horseshoe, all the periodic orbits of the
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 345

molecular transition complex can be rigorously listed at high energies,
and the periodic-orbit quantization can be carried out.

   Connections to the statistical and phase-space theories of chemical
reaction rates are possible at this point. In typical chemical reactions, the
classical dynamics is characterized not only by chaotic motion, with
unstable periodic orbits, but also by quasiperiodic motion [285]. The
unstable periodic orbits give rise to homoclinic tangles between their
stable and unstable manifolds. At their intersections, turnstiles are
formed that also contain several small subsidiary Smale horseshoes
according to a mechanism described by Poincar6 and, later, by Birkhoff
and Smale [286]. The turnstiles of the homoclinic tangles are known to be
at the origin of phase-space transport, which determines the chemical
reaction rates, as shown by Rice and co-workers [285]. In principle, the
unstable periodic orbits of the chaotic zones formed by the homoclinic
tangles can be used in the Gutzwiller trace formula to obtain the quantum
properties. Nevertheless, the situation is complicated by the presence of
the stable periodic orbits of the elliptic type, which are possibly sur-
rounded by elliptic islands. Complex orbit effects of dynamical tunneling
out of the vicinity of the stable orbits may be important in such cases.
Therefore, the scattering resonances of such systems may acquire long
lifetimes. The resulting large fluctuations in the half-widths may be
conveniently discussed in the framework of random matrix theories,
which open the way to statistical rate theories.

   In this context, semiclassical methods are important to treat systems
where the dynamics is dominated by particular molecular vibrational or
rotational motions in regimes that are intermediate between the statistical
regimes of RRKM theories and the regular regimes of simple scattering
systems. It is the purpose of the vibrograms introduced in Section XI to
extract from photabsorption energy spectra the possible periods of the
classical dynamics, which emerge from the quantum dynamics in highly
excited molecular systems. The application of vibrograms has been
illustrated for several discrete and continuous molecular spectra. Here,
we provided a semiclassical explanation of the stroboscopic effect de-
scribed by Pique et al. [216-2181 in terms of the selection of periodic
orbits that are used in the Berry-Tabor trace formula for the periodic-
orbit quantization of integrable systems [1801.

C. Periodic-Orbit Quantization versus Equilibrium Point Quantization

The connection between periodic-orbit quantization and equilibrium
point quantization has been discussed in detail. On a fundamental level,
the equilibrium point quantization appears as an h-expansion around the
346  P. GASPARD ET AL.

equilibrium points of classical dynamics. In the time domain, equilibrium
points as well as periodic orbits contribute to the semiclassical expression
of the trace of the propagator. It is only on going to the energy domain
that we face the necessity to follow one or the other of two alternative
quantization schemes, that is, either the periodic-orbit quantization based
on the stationary phase method, or the equilibrium point quantization,
which turns out to be identical with standard perturbation theory, as well
as with the Van Vleck contact transformation method. Here, we obtained
several results for a systematic development of the equilibrium point
quantization. In particular, we showed that there is a difference between
the standard perturbation method and the semiclassical quantization

9 based on Birkhoff normal forms at e uilibrium points. We explicitly

obtained this difference (AE,) at the ii -order. This difference can be
interpreted as a zero-point effect due to the anharmonicities of the
potential beyond the well-known zero-point effect at the harmonic
approximation, which shifts the ground state by h w / 2 . Furthermore, the
higher order terms of the perturbation series can be obtained as
diagrams, which may help to calculate them, at least in particular cases.
Moreover, we discussed the extension of the equilibrium point quantiza-
tion from minima of bonding potentials to saddle equilibrium points of
antibonding potentials, where this method can efficiently provide the
scattering resonances. For dissociating molecules, equilibrium point
quantization is also the method of choice to obtain the rotational
structure of the diffuse molecular bands 12491, including all the possible
vibrational stable or unstable normal modes around the saddle equilib-
rium points, as discussed in Section XII. However, the equilibrium point
quantization is restricted to the effectively separable regimes, where the
spectrum remains regular, as discussed in Section V. Indeed, the h-
expansion of the equilibrium point quantization involves the same kind of
transformations of the flow around the equilibrium point as the nonlinear
contact transformations used to obtain the classical Birkhoff normal form.
In such transformations, the nonseparable classically chaotic behaviors
like the splitting of the separatrices and the related homoclinic tangles are
removed from the &expansion into the nonanalytical rest of the series
resulting from an infinite sequence of contact transformations. Thus,
classical chaos and its effect on quantum dynamics cannot be described at
the level of equilibrium point quantization, because the local dynamics
around the equilibrium point has been reduced to the one of a separable
system. Periodic-orbit quantization is required as soon as the dynamics
becomes nonseparable and classically chaotic. In periodic-orbit quantiza-
tion, interferences between several periodic orbits may then result in
complex spectral structures related to irregular spectra as aforemen-
tioned.
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 347

        D. &Expansion and the Implications of Anharmonicities

The h-expansion extends from the equilibrium point quantization to the
periodic-orbit quantization where it allows us to obtain the energy
eigenvalues beyond Gutzwiller's leading approximation. In the equilib-
rium point quantization, the h-expansion goes beyond the harmonic
approximation around an equilibrium point and takes into account
anharmonicities, that is, of the cubic, quartic, and higher degree terms of
the potential. As we discussed above, the h-expansion applied to
equilibrium points treats the system as separable. Nevertheless, strong
anharmonicities can still be taken into account in such a framework, as is
the case for the Fermi resonance in the model by Pique et al. [216,217] of

CS,( 2 'C: ), where the two-degree-of-freedom Hamiltonian remains

integrable in spite of the strong 2 : 1 resonance. On the other hand, the
main feature of the periodic-orbit quantization is that nonseparable
systems, which typically emerge from a transition between regular and
chaotic classical regimes, can now be treated because periodic orbits are
global phase-space objects. The zeta function formalism can include the
effect of several different periodic orbits, thus capturing the dynamics in
the vicinity of different phase-space regions. At the leading order of the
h-expansion, the periodic-orbit quantization takes into account anhar-
monicities in the direction along each periodic orbit through the nonlinear
dependencies of the actions S,(E) on energy. However, the leading-order
periodic-orbit quantization treats the motion transverse to the periodic
orbit as harmonic, since the Gutzwiller trace formula uses the linear
stability eigenvalues A, of each periodic orbit. At the next-to-leading
orders of the h-expansion, the h-corrections incorporate in the trace
formula or the zeta functions the effects of nonlinear stability of the
periodic orbits, that is, of anharmonicities for the motion transverse to
the periodic orbits [19-211. In this way, the inclusion of h-corrections can
capture dynamical effects around each periodic orbit that extend over a
larger phase-space region than at the leading order of the h-expansion.
We illustrated the application of the h-expansion for the theoretical
models of the disk scatterers, where we observe very significant improve-
ments of the accuracy of the method, sometimes by more than one order
of magnitude [19,20]. Moreover, new effects of diffraction type are
described, which may lead to a lengthening of the resonances' lifetimes,
as we showed for the two-disk scatterer in SectionVIII.G.2 [19, 20].7 The

    'Let us now mention recent works on diffraction effects in billiards, such as the disk
scatterers, due to creeping orbits partially circling on the border of the disks, and which are
at the origin of very short-lived scattering resonances lying at small Re K with Im K deeper
in the complex plane than the first row of scattering resonances given by Eq. (8.44)[287].
348  P . GASPARD ET AL.

h-expansion can be applied to other systems such as the autoionization
states of H- or He in order to improve the accuracy of the method and,
possibly, to obtain the lifetimes that are inaccessible at the leading

h-order . These results show the importance of anharmonicities around

each periodic orbit, an aspect that has been previously overlooked.
   In a larger context, we may expect anharmonicities to become essential

for periodic orbits undergoing bifurcations, with the linear stability of the
orbits passing through neutrality. In these circumstances, the nonlinear
stability controls the motion in the vicinity of the bifurcation. It is
remarkable that recent experimental works on Rydberg hydrogen-like
atoms in electric and magnetic fields have reached the point where such
bifurcations can be observed in the Fourier-type transform of the energy
spectra [34,35]. Indeed, bifurcations are typical nonlinear phenomena of
classical dynamical systems, while the atoms and molecules obey the
linear Schrodinger equation. However, due to the accumulation of energy
levels, the classical nonlinear properties start to emerge from the linear
wave dynamics. In this sense, it is remarkable that we are today able to
see in microscopic systems this emergence of typical nonlinear behaviors
like bifurcations, which were long believed to be restricted to the
macroscopic world. We may expect important developments in this
direction in the future, particularly for electronically excited atomic or
molecular species.

   In our section on matrix Hamiltonians, we showed that a semiclassical
treatment of such systems is possible and that an h-expansion is already
necessary to perform an effective separation between the different
potential energy surfaces. In the same way as chaotic behaviors are
globally removed in equilibrium point quantization via the use of an
infinite sequence of Van Vleck contact transformations, surface hopping
transitions are removed into nonanalytical terms, which shows that
surface hopping amplitudes are exponentially small in h. As in the
Landau-Zener model [201], such amplitudes can be obtained at the
superadiabatic level by using complex classical orbits that connect the
different adiabatic potential surfaces through excursions into complex
phase space, as in tunneling. As a consequence, the decay of the
metastable states is classically forbidden, and they may acquire long
lifetimes due to the exponentially small hopping amplitudes. Fundamen-
tal phenomena, such as gauge structures and geometric phases, appear
when two or more potential surfaces form a conical intersection. A new
phase must be taken into account in the semiclassical treatment for
periodic orbits encircling the conical intersection, which gives rise to the
assignment of half-integer quantum numbers to energy eigenstates as we

discussed in Section 1X.C.Moreover, we showed that the upper surface
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 349

of a conical intersection can sustain long-lived scattering resonances,
which is a result we have not seen mentioned in the literature. At the
classical level, another new result is that the dynamics on the upper cone
may become weakly chaotic if the conical intersection becomes aniso-
tropic.

           E. Other Problems Related to the Semiclassical Limit

Despite the extension of this chapter, there are many topics closely
related to semiclassical methods that we did not mention. In particular,
the semiclassical methods are very successful in the calculation of atomic
and molecular scattering cross-sections, as in rainbow scattering
[288,289]. Of more recent interest, there is the problem of cross-sections
in irregular scattering; here important new results have been obtained on
the statistical properties of the S-matrix elements and eigenvalues,
particularly by Smilansky and co-workers [290,291]. Besides the observa-
tion of irregular caustic-like structures in the angular dependency of the
cross-sections in irregular scattering, the S-matrix elements and eigen-
values have been shown to fluctuate according to the predictions of
random matrix theories on circular unitary ensembles. We were surprised
[291] that the eigenvalues show a Wigner repulsion even for scattering
systems that do not have a classically chaotic set of trapped orbits, such as
the two-disk scatterer. The reason for this apparently paradoxical result is
that the S-matrix is determined by scattering orbits rather than by
periodic orbits. The eigenvalues of the S-matrix are determined by
iterating the scattering PoincarC map rather than by iterating the internal
dynamics on the classical repeller. Consequently, classical chaos may
arise by this iterating process of the transient scattering orbits, leading to
statistical properties of the quantum S-matrix [291]. Moreover, important
work is in progress concerning the energy dependence of irregular
fluctuations in the scattering cross-sections [40-451. The interest in the
phenomenon of Ericson fluctuations, originally observed in neutron-
nuclei scattering at medium and high energies, has been revived by the
numerical observation of similar fluctuations in classically chaotic scatter-
ing [42]. Although the main activity focuses on electronic conductance in
semiconductor devices and in nuclear reactions, molecular scattering
analogs of this phenomenon should also become manifest.

   Among the problems that we did not discuss, are the applications of
semiclassical methods to many-body systems of statistical mechanics [50].
The time evolution of such systems is ruled by the Landau-von Neumann
equation for the density matrix, p(x, x') = $*(x')$(x) or C i~ , $ * ( X ' ) + ~ ( X > .
In the semiclassical limit ( h+0) and using the Weyl-Wigner representa-
tion of Section II.D, the Landau-von Neumann equation is known to
350  P. GASPARD ET AL.

reduce to the classical Liouville equation of nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics [292]. Recent works have been concerned with finding the
eigenvalues and the spectral decompositions of the classical Liouville
operator [121,293-2961. In chaotic classical systems, the Liouville eigen-
value equation also involves a zeta function, which we briefly mentioned
in Section 1II.D. This other zeta function is related to the classical
probabilities rather than to the quantum probability amplitudes associ-
ated with each unstable periodic orbit. It is important to understand that
the classical zeta function is also the eigenvalue equation of the semiclas-
sical limit (h+ 0) of the quantum Landau-von Neumann operator.
Indeed, we have seen that the probability amplitude associated with an
unstable periodic orbit is given by

                        (14.1)

which corresponds to the deterministic level of the Schrodinger equation.
At the statistical level of the Landau-von Neumann equation, the
probability associated with the unstable periodic orbit is given by an
expression that is quadratic in the amplitudes as for a density matrix [297]

for two different energies, E and E', separated by the eigenvalue of the
Landau-von Neumann equation. These eigenvalues are the Bohr fre-
quencies, or the corresponding rates in the case where the frequencies

become complex, since we have for 6 = exp(st)(E)(E'I

                                                                                    (14.3)

with s = ( E - E ' ) / i h as the eigenvalue. Therefore, the two energies, E
and E', are separated by a quantity that is proportional to A: E' = E -
ins. Using Tp= a E S p ,we get the expansion

         S,,(E') = Sp(E- ins) = S p ( E )- insT,(E) + B(R2s2) (14.4)

and the probability associated with the unstable periodic orbit becomes

                                                                                    (14.5)
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 35 1

which is precisely the weight of the periodic orbit in the classical zeta
function [Eq. (3.58)] for the classical exponent /3 = 1. The preceding
reasoning establishes the connection between the level of the quantum
wave function and the statistical level of transport and rate processes,
which are the subject of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics. At the
classical level, highly significant results have been obtained, which show
that irreversibility in transport phenomena like diffusion can be rigorously
understood in terms of classical Ruelle resonances, which are the zeros of
the classical zeta function, and in terms of the associated spectral
decomposition [121,293-2961. The preceding semiclassical reasoning
suggests important connections between quantum and classical statistical
mechanics, the understanding of which is still at the beginning.

   To conclude, the new developments in the semiclassical methods that
we exposed and illustrated in this chapter highlight their ability to provide
a unified approach to the understanding of many phenomena. This
applies particularly to reaction processes, and thus responds to the need
for such a unified approach, which has been recently emphasized by
Marcus [51]. We expect further progress in these directions in this rapidly
advancing field of research.

                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

It is our pleasure to thank Professors G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine for support in this research
as well as to Professor S. A. Rice for his invitation to write this chapter. We also thank
Professors E. Heller, M. Herman, R. Jost, and J.-P. Pique for fruitful discussions and
contacts. The authors are financially supported, respectively, by the National Fund for
Scientific Research (F'NRS Belgium) for P. G., by a NATO postdoctoral grant obtained
from the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) as well as by a EEC postdoctoral
fellowship No. ERBCHBICT 930852 for I. B., and by a EEC doctoral fellowship No.
ERBCHBICT920097 for D. A. The research is financially supported by the SADOVEM
Project under EEC contract No. SC1-CT91-0711, as well as by the Quantum Keys for
Reactivity ARC Project of the CommunautC FranGaise de Belgique.

                             NOTE ADDED IN PROOF

    Since this manuscript was completed, several works have come to our knowledge, and
new results have been obtained.

    In Section II.C.2, we should add that the distinction between overlapping and
nonoverlapping scattering resonances has been discussed many times, in particular in Refs.
[42, 114,2531, as well as in Refs. [298,299]. We believe that the distinction is a delicate
problem, especially at the level of the consequences on the cross-sections or in the time
domain. Furthermore, the relationship between the scattering resonances and the energy
dependence of the reaction probabilities has been discussed by Truhlar and coworkers [300].

    Concerning the &expansion of the propagator in Section II.F.5, we would like to
mention the recent work of Ref. [301] where a fi-expansion of the propagator has been
obtained within a phase-space formulation rather than a position-space formulation.
352  P. GASPARD ET AL.

    About the shift in the zero-point energy due to the anharmonicities in Section V.A, its
presence has recently been pointed out in the context of spectroscopic analysis [302]. We
remark that our calculation [Eq. (5.7)] thus confirms previous works [137,299,302].

    Concerning the vibrograms in Section XI, let us mention that Fourier transforms with a
scanning Blackmann-Harris window function have previously been considered in Ref.
[303], which came to our knowledge after the completion of the present work. Very recently,
we constructed and analyzed the vibrogram of C,HD, which has been modeled by a pure
Dunham expansion leading to a classically integrable Hamiltonian [304]. In this analysis, we
used the function

instead of Eq. ( l l h ) , with the advantage that the amplitudes of the peaks remain
approximately constant with energy. Moreover, the role of periodic orbits embedded in
lower-dimensional subsystems has been clarified both in C,HD and in CS,, as will be
reported elsewhere [305,306].

    In our analysis of the CS, molecule in Section XI.B.2, we would further like to point out
that the transformation between the Hamiltonians (11.20) and (11.21) introduces a factor of
four in the Jacobian of the angle variables. Consequently, the Hamiltonian (11.21)
generates four times more periodic orbits than the original one. This extra feature has also
to be taken into account in the interpretation of the vibrogram of Fig. 50.

    In the present chapter, we did not mention the numerous current works on the
properties of the eigenfunctions of classically chaotic systems. We refer the reader to the
literature on this fundamental problem [6,15,307]. The question of the limit of validity of
semiclassical propagation in time is also of importance, which has been discussed by
TomsoviC and Heller [308] (see also [309]). We think that the inclusion of &corrections that
we described in this chapter can significantly enlarge the time interval of validity of the
semiclassical approximation. In a related context, Berry and Howls showed very recently
how the asymptotic series in R representing the Weyl-Wigner level density is controlled by a
Stokes mechanism involving the shortest periodic orbits [310].

                                   REFERENCES

  1. R. D. Levine and R. B. Bernstein, Molecular Reaction Dynamics and Chemical
      Reactivity, Oxford University Press, New York, 1987.

  2. A . J. Lieberman and A. J. Lichtenberg, Regular and Stochastic Motion, Springer, New
      York, 1983.

  3. R. S. MacKay and J. D. Meiss, Eds., Hamiltonian Dynamical Systems: A Reprint
      Selection, Adam Hilger, Bristol, 1987.

  4. J.-P. Eckmann and D. Ruelle, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 617 (1985).
  5. G. Casati and J. Ford, Eds., Stochastic Behavior in Classical and Quantum Hamilto-

      nian Systems, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 93, Springer, Berlin, 1979.
  6. M.-J. Giannoni, A. Voros, and J. Zinn-Justin, Eds., Chaos and Quantum Physics,

      North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991.
  7. A. M. Ozorio de Almeida, Hamiltonian Systems: Chaos and Quantization, Cambridge

      University Press, 1988.
       NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 353

 8. M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, New
     York, 1973.

 9. B. L. van der Waerden, Sources of Quantum Mechanics, Dover, New York, 1967.
10. J . Dalibard, Y. Castin, and K. Molmer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 580 (1992); N. Gisin and

     I. C. Percival, J . Phys. A: Math. Gen. 25, 5677 (1992); H. J. Carmichael, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 70, 2273 (1993).
11. M. C. Gutzwiller, J . Math. Phys. 8, 1979 (1967); 10, 1004 (1969); 11, 1791 (1970); 12,
     343 (1971); 18, 806 (1977).
12. R. Balian and C. Bloch, A n n . Phys. 60, 401 (1970); 63, 592 (1971); 64, 271 (1971);
     Errata 84, 559 (1974).
13. R. Balian and C. Bloch, A n n . Phys. 69, 76 (1972); 85, 514 (1974).
14. M. C. Gutzwiller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 150 (1980); M. C. Gutzwiller, in R. L. Devaney
     and Z. H. Nitecki, Eds., Classical Mechanics and Dynamical Systems, Marcel-Dekker,
     New York, 1981; M. C. Gutzwiller, J . Phys. Chem. 92, 3154 (1988).
15. M. C. Gutzwiller, Chaos in Classical and Quantum Mechanics, Springer, New York,
     1990.
16. P. CvitanoviC, Ed., Periodic Orbit Theory, Chaos,Vol. 2, Nos. 1-4 (1992).
17. G . Casati, I. Guarneri, and U. Smilansky, Eds., Quantum Chaos, Proceedings of the
     International School of Physics "Enrico Fermi," Varenna, Italy, 1991, North-Holland,
     Amsterdam, 1993.

18. D. Wintgen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 1589 (1987).
19. P. Gaspard and D. Alonso, Phys. Rev. A 47, R3468 (1993); P. Gaspard, in G. Casati

     and B. V. Chirikov, Eds., Quantum Chaos, Cambridge University Press, UK, 1994.

20. D. Alonso and P. Gaspard, Chaos 3, 601 (1993); Erratum, ibid. 4, 105 (1994).
21. I. Burghardt and P. Gaspard, J . Chem. Phys. 100(9), 6395 (1994); I. Burghardt and P.

     Gaspard, J . Phys. Chem. (1995) in press; I. Burghardt and P. Gaspard, in preparation.

22. V. P. Maslov and M. V. Fedoriuk, Semiclassical Approximation in Quantum Mechanics,
     Reidel, Boston, MA, 1981.

23. D. Wintgen, K. Richter, and G. Tanner, Chaos 2, 19 (1992).
24. H. PoincarC, Les Mkthodes Nouvelles de la Mtcanique Ckleste, 3 Vols., Paris,

     Gauthier-Villars, 1899, Dover, New York, 1957, AIP, New York, 1993; J. Moser,
     Stable and Random Motions in Dynamical Systems, Princeton University Press, New
     Jersey, 1973.
25. A . Einstein, Verh. Deut. Phys. Ges. 19, 82 (1917).
26. P. Ehrenfest, Verh. Deut. Phys. Ges. 15, 451 (1913); Proc. Kon. A k a d . Amsterdam 16,
     591 (1913); Ann. der Phys. 51, 327 (1916).
27. W. Pauli, General Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Springer, Berlin, 1980.
28. G . Wentzel, Z . Physik 38, 518 (1926); H. A. Kramers, Z. Physik 39, 828 (1926); L.
     Brillouin, C. R . Acad. Sci. Paris 183, 24 (1926).
29. E. P. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 40, 749 (1932).
30. L. H. Thomas, Proc. Cambridge Philos. SOC.23, 542 (1927); E. Fermi, Rend. Accad.
     Naz. Lincei 6, 602 (1927); E. H . Lieb, Rev. Mod. Phys. 53, 603 (1981).
31. J. K. G. Watson, M. Herman, J. C. Van Craen, and R. Colin, J . Mol. Spectrosc. 95,
     101 (1982); J. Vander Auwera, T. R. Huet, M. Herman, C. D. Hamilton, J. L. Kinsey,
     and R. W. Field, ibid. 137, 381 (1989); E. Abramson, R. W. Field, D. Imre, K. K.
     Innes, and J. L. Kinsey, J . Chem. Phys. 80, 2298 (1984).
32. G. E. Ewing, 1978, Chem. Phys. 29, 253 (1978); G. E. Ewing, J . Chem. Phys. 71,
354  P. GASPARD ET AL.

     3143 (1979); K. E. Johnson, L. Wharton, and D. H . Levy, ibid. 69, 2719 (1978); J. E.
     Kenny, K. E. Johnson, W. Sharfin, and D. H. Levy, ibid. 72, 1109 (1980); R. J. Le
     Roy and J . S . Carley, Adv. Chem. Phys. XLII, 353 (1980).

33. M. G. Littman, M. L. Zimmerman, T. W. Ducas, R. R. Freeman, and D. Kleppner,
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 36,788 (1976); M. L. Zimmerman, M. G . Littman, M. M. Kash, and
     D. Kleppner, Phys. Rev. A 20, 2251 (1979); C. Iu, G . R. Welch, M. M. Kash, D.
     Kleppner, D. Delande, and J. C. Gay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 145 (1991); A.
     Buchleitner, B. GrCmaud, and D. Delande, J . Phys. B: A t . Mol. Opt. Phys. 27, 2663
     (1994).

34. A. Holle, J. Main, G. Wiebusch, H. Rottke, and K. H. Welge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 161
     (1988); J.-M. Mao and J. B. Delos, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1746 (1992); T. van derVelt, W.
     Vassen, and W. Hogervorst, Europhys. Lett. 21, 903 (1993); J. Main, G. Wiebush, K.
     Welge, J. Shaw, and J. B. Delos, Phys. Rev. A 49, 847 (1994).

35. J.-M. Mao, K. A. Rapelje, S. J. Blodgett-Ford, J. B. Delos, A. Konig, and H.
     Rinneberg, Phys. Rev. A 48, 2117 (1993).

36. U. Eichmann,V. Lange, and W. Sandner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 21 (1992); R . P. Wood
     and C. H. Greene, Phys Rev. A 49, 1029 (1994).

37. M. Lombardi, P. Labastie, M. C. Bordas, and M. Broyer, J . Chem. Phys. 89, 3479
     (1988); M. Lombardi and T. H. Seligman, Phys. Rev. A 47, 3571 (1993).

38. R. Blumel et al., Nature (London) 334, 309 (1988); J. Hoffnagle and R . G. Brewer,
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1828 (1993); D. Farrelly and J . E. Howard, Phys. Rev. A 49, 1494
     (1994); and references cited therein.

39. A. H . Zewail, Science 242, 1645 (1988); M. Gruebele and A. H. Zewail, Phys. Today,
     24-33 (1990); L. R. Khundkar and A . H. Zewail, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 41, 15
     (1990); A. H. Zewail, J . Phys. Chem. 97, 12427 (1993).

40. C. W. J. Beenakker and H. van Houten, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1857 (1989); M. L.
     Roukes and 0. L. Alerhand, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1651 (1990).

41. C. M. Marcus, R. M. Westervelt, P. F. Hopkins, and A. C. Gossard, Chaos 3, 643
     (1993); and references cited therein.

42. R. Blumel and U. Smilansky, Phys. Rev. Left. 60, 477 (1988); 64, 241 (1990); B.
     Eckhardt, Chaos 3, 613 (1993).

43. R. A. Jalabert, H. U. Baranger, and A . D. Stone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2442-2445
     (1990); H. U. Baranger, R. A. Jalabert, and A. D. Stone, Chaos 3, 665 (1993).

44. J. Main and G. Wunner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 586 (1992).

45. H . A. Weidenmuller, Physica A 167, 28 (1990).

46. M. F. Crommie, C. P. Lutz, and D. M. Eigler, Science 262, 218 (1993); G. P. Collins,
     Phys. Today, Nov. 1993, pp. 16-19; E. J. Heller, M. F. Crommie, C. P. Lutz, and
     D. M. Eigler, Nature 369, 464 (1994).

47. K. E. Drexler, Nanosystems, Wiley, New York, 1992.

48. E . Doron, U. Smilansky, and A. Frenkel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3072 (1990); Physica D
     50, 367 (1992); H. D. Graf, H. L. Harney, H . Lengeler, C. H . Lewenkopf, C.
     Rangacharyulu, A. Richter, P. Schardt, and H. A. Weidenmuller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69,
     1296 (1992).

49. J. W. Young and J. C. Bertrand, J . Acoust. SOC.Am.58, 1190 (1975); F. Mortessagne,
     0. Legrand, and D. Sornette, Chaos 3, 529 (1993).
       NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 355

50. A. J. Leggett, S . Chakravarty, A . T. Dorsey, M. P. A. Fisher, A. Garg, and W.
     Zwerger, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 1 (1987); G. A. Voth, D. Chandler, and W. H . Miller,
    J . Phys. Chem. 93,7009 (1989); G . A. Voth, D. Chandler, and W. H. Miller, J . Chem.
     Phys. 91, 7749 (1989); G . A. Voth, J . Phys. Chem. 97, 8365 (1993).

51. R. M. Marcus, Faraday Discuss. Chem. SOC.91, 479 (1991).
52. L. I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, Tokyo, 1968.
53. C. Cohen-Tannoudji, J. Dupont-Roc, and G . Grynberg, Processus d'interaction entre

    photons er atomes, InterEditionsiEditions du CNRS, Paris, 1988.
54. C. J. Joachain, Quantum Collision Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
55. J. Humblet and L. Rosenfeld, Nucl. Phys. 70, 1 (1965).
56. A . Bohm, Quantum Mechanics: Foundations and Applications, 3rd ed., Springer, New

     York, 1993.
57. A . Bohm, The Rigged Hilbert Space and Quantum Mechanics, Lecture Notes in

     Physics,Vol. 78, Springer, Berlin, 1978; A. Bohm and M. Gadella, Dirac kets, Gamow
     vectors, and the Gel'fand triplets, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 348, Springer, Berlin,
     1989.
58. W. Thirring, Quantum Mechanics of Atoms and Molecules, Springer, New York, 1981.
59. R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1983; W. H.
     Louisell, Quantum Statistical Properties of Radiation, Wiley, New York, 1973.
60. D. A. McQuarrie, Statistical Mechanics, Harper & Row, New York, 1976; J. H . Van
     Vleck and D. L. Huber, Rev. Mod. Phys. 49, 939 (1977).

61. E. J. Heller, J. Chem. Phys. 68,2066 (1978); S.-Y. Lee and E. Heller, J . Chem. Phys.

     71, 4777 (1979); E. J. Heller and S. Tomsovic, Phys. Today, Jul. 1993, pp. 38-46.
62. R. Schinke, Photodissociation Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, UK, 1993.
63. U. Fano and A. R. P. Rau, Atomic Collisions and Spectra, Academic, Orlando, FL,

     1986.
64. E. P. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 98, 145 (1955); F. T. Smith, ibid. 118, 349 (1960); H.

     Narnhofer, Phys. Rev. D 22, 2387 (1980); H. Narnhofer and W. Thirring, Phys. Rev.
     A 23, 1688 (1981); E. H. Hauge and J. A. Stovneng, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, 917 (1989).
65. P. J. Robinson and K. A. Holbrook, Unimolecular Reactions, Wiley-Interscience,
     London, 1972; W. Forst, Theory of Unimolecular Reactions, Academic, New York,
     1973; H. 0. Pritchard, The Quantum Theory of Unimolecular Reactions, Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge, 1984; H. 0. Pritchard, J . Phys. Chem. 89, 3970 (1985).

66. W. H . Miller, A d v . Chem. Phys. XXV, 69 (1974); XXX, 77 (1975).

67. H. Weyl, Z . Phys. 46, 1 (1927); K. Imre, E. Ozizmir, M. Rosenbaum, and P. F.
     Zweifel, J . Math. Phys. ( N . Y . )8, 1097 (1967).

68. J . L. Dahl, Phys. Scripta 25, 499 (1982); N . L. Balazs and B. K. Jennings, Phys. Rep.
     104, 347 (1984).

69. P. Carruthers and F. Zachariasen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 55, 245 (1983).
70. H . Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA 1950.
71. V. I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Springer, New York,

     1978.
72. M. Morse, The Calculus of Variations in the Large, Colloquium Publication, Vol. 18,

     American Mathematical Society, New York, 1934.
73. J. B. Delos, J . Chem. Phys. 86, 425 (1987).
74. V. P. Maslov, Thtorie des Perturbations et Mithodes Asymptotiques,DunodiGauthier-

     Villars, Paris, 1972.
356  P . GASPARD ET AL.

 75. M. V. Berry and K. E. Mount, Rep. Prog. Phys. 35, 315-397 (1972).
 76. J. H. Van Vleck, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 14, 178 (1928).
 77. C. Morette, Phys. Rev. 81, 848 (1951).
 78. S. Levit and U. Srnilansky, A n n . Phys. 103, 198 (1977); W. Dittrich and M. Reuter,

      Classical and Quantum Dynamics: From Classical Paths to Path Integrals, Springer,
      Berlin, 1992.

 79. R. P. Feynman and A. R. Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals, McGraw-
      Hill, New York, 1965.

 80. R. Kosloff, J . Phys. Chem. 92, 2087 (1988).

 81. N. Bleistein and R. A. Handelsman, Asymptotic Expansion of Integrals, Dover, New
      York, 1986.

 82. L. S. Schulrnan, Techniques and Applications of Path Integration, Wiley, New York,
      1981.

 83. C. DeWitt-Morette, A n n . Phys. 97, 367 (1976); C. DeWitt-Morette, A. Maheshwari,
      and B. Nelson, Phys. Rep. 50, 255 (1979).

 84. B. DeWitt, Supermanifolds, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, 1992.

 85. J. Iliopoulos, C. Itzykson, and A. Martin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 47, 165 (1975).
 86. R. F. Dashen, B. Hasslacher, and A. Neveu, Phys. Rev. D 10, 4114 (1974).
 87. G. Parisi, Statistical Field Theory, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1988.
 88. G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Exploring Complexity: An Introduction, Freeman, New

      York, 1989.

 89. V. I. Oseledec, Trans. Moscow Math. SOC.19, 197 (1968)
 90. D. Ruelle, Ann. N . Y . Acad. Sci. 316, 408 (1978).

 91. V. I. Arnold, Ed., Dynamical Systems III, Springer, Berlin, 1988.
 92. B. Eckhardt and D. Wintgen, J . Phys. A: Math. Gen. 24, 4335 (1991).
 93. S. A. Rice, P. Gaspard, and K. Nakarnura, A h . Class. Traj. Meth. 1, 215 (1992).
 94. K. R. Meyer, Trans. A m . Math. SOC.149, 95 (1970); J. M. Greene, R. S. MacKay, F.

      Vivaldi and M. J. Feigenbaum, Physica D 3, 468 (1981); both reprinted in [3].
 95. S. Wiggins, Global Bifurcations and Chaos, Springer, New York, 1988; S. Wiggins,

      Chaotic Transport in Dynamical Systems, Springer, New York, 1992.
 96. Ya. G . Sinai, Ed., Dynamical Systems: Collection of Papers, World Scientific,

      Singapore, 1991.
 97. P. Gaspard, in Quantum Chaos, G. Casati, I. Guarneri, and U. Srnilansky, Eds.,

      Proceedings of the International School of Physics "Enrico Ferrni," Varenna, Italy
      1991, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1993, pp. 307-383.
 98. J. P. Dahl and M. Springborg, J . Chem. Phys. 88, 4535 (1988); and references cited
      therein.
 99. G. S . Ezra, K. Richter, G. Tanner, and D. Wintgen, J . Phys. B: A t . Mol. Opt. Phys.
      24, L413-L420 (1991).
100. K. Richter, G. Tanner, and D. Wintgen, Phys. Rev. A 48, 4182 (1993).
101. P. Gaspard and S. A . Rice, Phys. Rev. A 48, 54 (1993).
102. M. Htnon and C. Heiles, Astronom. J . 69, 73 (1964); R. C. Churchill, G. Pecelli, and
      D. L. Rod, in [5], pp. 76-136.
103. B. Barbanis, Astronom. J . 71, 415 (1966); G . Contopoulos, Physica D 8, 142 (1983);
      G. Contopoulos, Astron. Astrophys. 161, 244 (1986).
104. M. V. Berry, N. L. Balazs, M. Tabor, and A . Voros, A n n . Phys. 122, 26 (1979).
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 357

105. S. H. Tersigni, P. Gaspard, and S . A . Rice, J . Chem. Phys. 92, 1775 (1990).
106. B. V. Chirikov, Phys. Rep. 52, 265 (1979).
107. M. Henon, Q. J . Appl. Math. 27, 291 (1969).
108. P. Gaspard and S. A. Rice, J . Phys. Chem. 93, 6947 (1989).
109. L. A . Bunimovich and Ya. G. Sinai, Commun. Math. Phys. 98, 247, 479 (1980); .I.

      Machta and R. Zwanzig, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1959 (1983).
110. G. D. Birkhoff, Acta Math. 50, 359 (1927); in [3] pp. 154-174.
111. D. Alonso and P. Gaspard, Quantization of the Circle Billiard, in preparation.
112. L. A. Bunimovich, Commun. Math. Phys. 65, 295 (1979).
113. B. Eckhardt, J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 20, 5971-5979 (1987); B. Eckhardt, Physica D

      33, 89 (1988).
114. P. Gaspard and S. A . Rice, J . Chem. Phys. 90, 2225, 2242, 2255 (1989); 91, E3279

      (1989).
115. P. CvitanoviC and B. Eckhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 823 (1989).
116. S. Smale, The Mathematics of Time, Springer, New York, 1980.
117. E. Ott, Chaos in Dynamical Systems, Cambridge University Press, UK, 1993.
118. R. Artuso, E. Aurell, and P. CvitanoviC, Nonlinearity 3, 325, 361 (1990).
119. P. Walters, A n Introduction to Ergodic Theory, Springer, Berlin, 1981
120. S. Bleher, C. Grebogi, and E. Ott, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 919 (1989); Physica D 46, 87

      (1990).
121. P. Gaspard and D. Alonso Ramirez, Phys. Rev. A 45, 8383 (1992).
122. Ya. G . Sinai, Russ. Math. Surveys 27, 21 (1972).
123. R. Bowen, Equilibrium States and the Ergodic Theory of Anosov Diffeomorphisms,

      Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 470, Springer, Berlin, 1975.
124. D. Ruelle, Thermodynamic Formalism, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1978.
125. Ya. B. Pesin, Math. USSRIzv. 10(6), 1261 (1976); Ya. B. Pesin, Russ. Math. Surveys

      32(4), 55 (1977); H. Kantz and P. Grassberger, Physica D 17, 75 (1985).
126. P. Szepfalusy and T. Til, Phys. Rev. A 34, 2520 (1986); T. Til, Phys. Lett. A 119, 65

      (1986); Phys. Rev. A 36, 1502 (1987); T. Bohr and D. Rand, Physica D 25, 387
      (1987); D. Bessis, G. Paladin, G . Turchetti, and S. Vaienti, J . Stat. Phys. 51, 109
      (1988).
127. D. Ruelle, Invent. Math. 34,231 (1976); J . Stat. Phys. 44,281 (1986); Commun. Math.
      Phys. 125, 239 (1989).
128. J. Chazarain, Invent. Math. 24, 65 (1974); A . Voros, Suppl. Prog. Theor. Phys. 116, 17

    ' (1994).

129. R. Balian, G . Parisi, and A. Voros, Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1141 (1978); in S. Albeverio et
      al., Eds., Feynman Path Integrals, Lecture Notes in Physics,Vol. 106, Springer, Berlin,
      1979, pp. 337-360; A. Voros, Nucl. Phys. B 165, 209 (1980).

130. B. Grammaticos and A. Voros, Ann. Phys. 123, 359 (1979).
131. R. G. Littlejohn, J . Math. Phys. 31, 2952 (1990).
132. M. V. Berry, Ann. Phys. 131, 163 (1981).
133. D. Alonso and P. Gaspard, J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 27, 1599 (1994).
134. D. Papousek and M. R. Aliev, Molecular Vibrational-Rotational Spectra, Elsevier,

      Amsterdam, 1982.
135. I. M. Mills, in Molecular Spectroscopy: Modern Research, K. N. Rao and C. W.

      Mathews, Eds., Academic, New York, 1972, pp. 115-140.
358  P. GASPARD ET AL.

136. H. H. Nielsen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 23, 90 (1951).
137. W. H . Miller, R. Hernandez, N. C. Handy, D. Jayatilaka, and A. Willetts, Chem.

      Phys. Lett. 172, 62 (1990).

138. T. Seideman and W. H. Miller, J . Chem. Phys. 95, 1768 (1991).
139. J. L. Dunham, Phys. Rev. 41, 721 (1932).

140. G. D. Birkhoff, Dynamical Systems, Colloquium Publication, Vol. 9, American
      Mathematical Society, New York, 1927; F. G. Gustavson, Astronom. J . 71, 670
      (1966).

141. V. I. Arnold, Geometric Methods in the Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations,
      Springer, New York, 1983.

142. C. E. Porter, Statistical Theories of Spectra: Fluctuations, Academic, New York, 1965.
143. R. T. Swimm and J. B. Delos, J . Chem. Phys. 71, 1706 (1979); C. JaffC and W. P.

      Reinhardt, J . Chem. Phys. 71, 1862 (1979); 77, 5191 (1982).
144. T. Uzer and R. A. Marcus, J . Chem. Phys. 81, 5013 (1984).
145. L. E . Fried and G . S. Ezra, J . Phys. Chem. 92, 3144 (1988).
146. M. Robnik, J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 17, 109 (1984); ibid. 25, 5311 (1992).
147. H. A . Weidenmuller, Phys. Rev. A 48, 1819 (1993).
148. H. P. Baltes and E. R. Hilf, Spectra of Finite Systems, Bibliographisches Institut-

     Wissenschaftsverlag, Mannheim/ Wien/ Zurich, 1976.

149. M. C. Gutzwiller, in [6], pp. 201-249.
150. J. M. Robbins, Nonlinearity 4, 343 (1991).
151. S. C. Creagh, J. M. Robbins, and R. G. Littlejohn, Phys. Rev. A 42, 1907 (1990).
152. A. Selberg, J . Indian Math. SOC. 20, 47 (1956).

153. W. H. Miller, J . Chem. Phys. 56, 38 (1972); 63, 996 (1975); 83, 960 (1979).
154. A. Voros, J . Phys. A: Math. Gen. 21, 685 (1988).
155. B. Eckhardt and E. Aurell, Europhys. Lett. 9 , 509 (1989).
156. C. GCrard and J. Sjostrand, Commun. Math. Phys. 108, 391 (1987); 116, 193 (1988);

      J. Sjostrand, Duke Math. J . 60, l(1990).
157. M. Ikawa, Osaka J . Math. 22, 657 (1985); 27, 281 (1990); A n n . Inst. Fourier, 38(2),

      113 (1988).
158. B. Eckhardt and G . Russberg, Phys. Rev. E 47, 1578 (1993).
159. D. Wintgen, A. Burgers, K. Richter, and G. Tanner, Suppl. Prog. Theor. Phys. 116,

      121 (1994).
160. P. CvitanoviC, P. E. Rosenqvist, G. Vattay, and H. H. Rugh, Chaos 3, 619 (1993); P.

      Cvitanovid and G . Vattay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4138 (1993).
161. P. CvitanoviC, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2729 (1988).
162. E. Bogomolny, Chaos 2, 5 (1992).
163. T. Szeredi, J. H. Lefebvre, and D. A . Goodings, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 2891 (1993); T.

      Szeredi and D. A. Goodings, Phys. Rev. E 48, 3518, 3529 (1993); G . Tanner and D.
      Wintgen, Classical and semiclassical zeta functions in terms of transition probabilities,
      to be published in Chaos, Solitons, and Fractals (1994).

164. M. V. Berry and J. P. Keating, J . Phys. A 23, 4839 (1990); Proc. R. SOC.Lond. A 437,
      151 (1992); 0. Agam and S. Fishman, J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 26, 2113 (1993).

165. M. Sieber and F. Steiner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 1941 (1991); C. Matthies and F. Steiner,
      Phys. Rev. A 44,R7877 (1991); R. Aurich, C . Matthies, M. Sieber, and F. Steiner,
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1629 (1992).
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 359

166. E. Bogomolny, Comm. A t . Mol. Phys. 25, 63 (1990).
167. G. Tanner and D. Wintgen, Chaos 2, 53 (1992).
168. G. Tanner, P. Scherer, E. B. Bogomolny, B. Eckhardt, and D. Wintgen, Phys. Rev.

      Lett. 67, 2410 (1991).
169. P. Gaspard, Suppl. Prog. Theor. Phys. 116, 59 (1994).
170. M. S. Child, Semiclassical Mechanics with Molecular Applications, Clarendon, Oxford,

      1991.
171. W. G . Harter and C. W. Paterson, J . Chem. Phys. 80, 9 (1984); J. M. Robbins, S. C.

      Creagh, and R. G. Littlejohn, Phys. Rev. A 39, 2838 (1989); 41, 6052 (1990).
172. W. T. Strunz, J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 25, 3855 (1992); W. T. Strunz, G. Alber, and J.

      S. Briggs, J . Phys. B: Math. Gen. 24, 5091 (1991); J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 26, 5157
      (1993).
173. T. C. Bountis, Int. J . Bif. Chaos, 2, 217 (1992).
174. S. Destrain, Quantification Semiclassique d'Applications Hamiltoniennes presque
      Inttgrables et Faiblement Chaotiques: Etude Numtrique des Quasi-Energies, MBmoire
      de Licence, ULB, 1990.
175. S. Adachi, Ann. Phys. (N.Y.)195, 45 (1989).
176. A . Shudo and K. Ikeda, Suppl. Prog. Theor. Phys. 116, 283 (1994).
177. J. M. Greene and I. C. Percival, Physica D 3, 530 (1981); I. C. Percival, Physica D 6,
      67 (1982).
178. V. G. Gelfreich,V. F. Lazutkin, C. Simo, and M. B. Tabanov, Int. J . Sif. Chaos 2, 353
      (1992).
179. W. H. Miller, J . Chem. Phys. 62, 1899 (1975); W. H. Miller, S . D. Schwartz, and J. W.
      Tromp, J . Chem. Phys. 79, 4889 (1983).
180. M. V. Berry and M. Tabor, Proc. R . SOC.Lond. A 349, 101 (1976); J . Phys. A : Math.
      Gen. 10, 371 (1977).
181. S. C. Creagh and R. G . Littlejohn, Phys. Rev. A 44, 836 (1991); S . C. Creagh,
      Semiclassical Mechanics of Symmetry Reduction, preprint.
182. P. Gaspard, in Quantum Chaos-Quantum Measurement, P. CvitanoviC, I. Percival and
      A. Wirzba, Eds., Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1992, pp. 19-42.
183. M. KuS, F. Haake, and D. Delande, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 2167 (1993).
184. A . M. Ozorio de Almeida and J. H. Hannay, J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 20, 5873 (1987).
185. M.V. Berry and C. Upstill, Progress in Optics,Vol., 18, E. Wolf, Ed., North-Holland,
      Amsterdam, 1980, pp. 257-348.
186. T. Poston and I. Stewart, Catastrophe Theory and its Applications, Pitman, London,
      1978.
187. L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon Press, New York, 1958.
188. M. L. Du and J. B. Delos, Phys. Rev. A 38, 1896, 1913 (1988).
189. B. Eckhardt, S . Fishman, K. Muller, and D. Wintgen, Phys. Rev. A 45, 3531 (1992);
      B. Eckhardt, in [17], pp. 77-112.
190. E. Heller, A d v . Class. Traj. Method. 1 165 (1992).
191. M. V. Berry and M. Wilkinson, Proc. R. Soc. London A 392, 15 (1984).
192. T. Harayama and A. Shudo, Phys. Lett. A 165, 417 (1992).
193. B. Lauritzen, Phys. Rev. A 43, 603 (1991); P. CvitanoviC and B. Eckhardt, Nonlineari-
      ry 6, 277 (1992).
360  P. GASPARD ET AL.

194. C. E. Porter and R. G. Thomas, Phys. Rev. 104, 483 (1956); P. A . Moldauer, Phys.
       Rev. B 136, 947 (1964); T. A. Brody, J. Flores, J. B. French, P. A . Mello, A . Pandey,
       and S. S. M. Wong, Rev. Mod. Phys. 53, 385 (1981).

195. A. Wirzba, Chaos 2, 77 (1992); A. Wirzba, private communication.

196. J.-W. Turner, unpublished results.

197. H. A. Bethe and R. W. Jackiw, Intermediate Quantum Mechanics, Benjamin, New
      York, 1968; G . Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, Benjamin, New York, 1969;
      C. J. Ballhausen and A. E. Hansen, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 23, 15 (1972).

198. S. Weigert and R. G. Littlejohn, Phys. Rev. A 47, 3506 (1993).

199. R. G. Littlejohn and S. Weigert, Phys. Rev. A 48, 924 (1993).
200. T. A. Stephenson and S. A. Rice, J . Chem. Phys. 81, 1083 (1984); W. D. Sands, L. F.

      Jones, and R. Moore, J . Phys. Chern. 93, 6601 (1989); A . R. Tiller, A . C. Peet, and
      D. C. Clary, Chem. Phys. 129, 125 (1989).

201. C. Zener, Proc. R . SOC.London A 137, 696 (1932); L. Landau, Sov. Phys. 1, 89
      (1932); E. G. C. Stueckelberg, Helv. Phys. Acta 5, 369 (1932).

202. A . Shapere and F. Wilczek, eds., Geometric Phases in Physics, World Scientific,
       Singapore, 1989.

203. C. A. Mead and D. G. Truhlar, J . Chern. Phys. 70, 2284 (1979); in [202], pp. 90-103.

204. C. A. Mead, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 51 (1992).

205. M. V. Berry, Pruc. R . SOC.London A 392, 45 (1984); in [202] pp. 124-137.

206. M. Rosker, T. S. Rose, and A . H. Zewail, Chem. Phys. Lett. 146, 175 (1988); T. S.
      Rose, M. Rosker, and A. H. Zewail, J . Chem. Phys. 88, 6672 (1988).

207. J. von Neumann and E. Wigner, Phys. Z . 30, 467 (1929).
208. G. DelacrCtaz, E. R. Grant, R. L. Whetten, L. Woste, and J. W. Zwanziger, Phys.

      Rev. Lett. 56, 2598 (1986); in [202], pp. 240-246.

209. G. Stock and W. Domcke, J . Phys. Chem. 97, 12466 (1993).

210. D. Delande and J. C. Gay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2006 (1986); H. Friedrich and D.
      Wintgen, Phys. Rep. 183, 37 (1989).

211. J. K. G. Watson, Mol. Phys. 15, 479 (1968); ibid. 19, 465 (1970).
212. P. A. Braun, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 115 (1993).
213. G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure, Volume I l l , Krieger,

      Malabar, 1966.
214. E. Heller and P. Gaspard, unpublished results.
215. M. Gruebele, G. Roberts, M. Dantus, R. M. Bowman, and A . H . Zewail, Chem.

      Phys. Let?. 166, 459 (1990).
216. J.-P. Pique, M. Joyeux, J. Manners, and G. Sitja, J . Chem. Phys. 95, 8744 (1991).
217. J.-P. Pique, J. Manners, G. Sitja, and M. Joyeux, J . Chem. Phys. 96, 6495 (1992).
218. J.-P. Pique, private communication.
219. M. E. Kellman and E. D. Lynch, J . Chem. Phys. 85, 7216 (1986); 88, 2205 (1988); 2 .

      Li, X. Lin, and M. E. Kellman, ibid. 92, 2251 (1990).
220. R. S. Nakata, K. Watanabe, and F. M. Matsunaga, Sci. Light 14, 54 (1965).
221. S. Sato, J . Chem. Phys. 23, 592, 2465 (1955).
222. K. C. Kulander and J. C. Light, J . Chern. Phys. 73, 4337 (1980).
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 361

223. R. Schinke and V. Engel, J . Chem. Phys. 93, 3252 (1990).
224. R. T. Pack, J . Chem. Phys. 65, 4765 (1976).
225. L. C. Lee, X. Wang, and M. Suto, J. Chem. Phys. 86, 4353 (1987).
226. L. Butler, Chem. Phys. Lett. 182, 393 (1991).
227. B. Heumann, R. Diiren, and R. Schinke, Chem. Phys. Lett. 180, 583 (1991).
228. H. Eyring, J . Chem. Phys. 3, 107 (1935); K. J. Laidler, Chemical Kinetics, McGraw-

      Hill, New York, 1965.
229. B. Simon, Commun. Math. Phys. 27, 1 (1972); W. P. Reinhardt, Annu. Rev. Phys.

      Chem. 33, 223 (1982); Y . K. Ho, Phys. Rep. 99, 1 (1983); N. Moiseyev, in
      Resonances-Models and Phenomena, S. Albeverio, L. S. Ferreira, and L. Streit, Eds.,
      Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 211, Springer, Berlin, 1984, pp. 235-256; E. Brandas
      and N. Elander, Eds., in Resonances, Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 325, Springer,
      Berlin, 1987, pp. 459-474.
230. W. A . Lester, Jr., and R. B. Bernstein, J . Chem. Phys. 48, 4896 (1968); W. A . Lester,
      Jr., A d v . Quantum Chem. 9, 199 (1975).
231. E. P. Wigner and L. Eisenbud, Phys. Rev. 72, 29 (1947); A . M. Lane and R. G.
      Thomas, Rev. M o d . Phys. 30, 257 (1958); E. P. Wigner, in Dispersion Relations and
      their Connection with Causality, E. P. Wigner, Ed., Academic, New York, 1964, pp.
      40-67; P. G. Burke, I. Mackey, and I. Shimamura, J . Phys. B : A t . ,4401. Phys. 10,
      2497 (1977); cf. [63].
232. A . H. Zewail, Faraday Discuss. Chem. SOC.91, 207 (1991).
233. M. Dantus. R. M. Bowman, M. Gruebele, and A . H. Zewail, J . Chem. Phys. 91, 7437
      (1989).
234. M. Gruebele, G. Roberts, and A. H. Zewail, Philos. Trans. R . SOC.London A 332,
      223 (1990).
235. E. Pollak, J. Chem. Phys. 74, 5586 (1981).
236. E. Pollak and P. Pechukas, J . Chem. Phys. 69, 1218 (1978); E. Pollak, M. S. Child,
      and P. Pechukas, ibid. 72, 1669 (1980); E. Pollak and M. S. Child, Zbid. 73, 4373
      (1980).
237. E. Pollak and M. S. Child, Chem. Phys. 60, 23 (1981).
238. J. Guckenheirner and P. Holmes, Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems, and
      Bifurcations of Vector Fields, Springer, New York, 1983.
239. B. R. Johnson and J. L. Kinsey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1607 (1989).
240. 0. Hahn, J. M. Gomez-Llorente, and H. S. Taylor, J . Chem. Phys. 94, 2608 (1991).
241. R. T. Skodje and M. J. Davis, J . Chem. Phys. 88, 2429 (1988).
242. J. Manz, E. Pollak, and J. Romelt, Chem. Phys. Lett. 86, 26 (1982); E. Pollak, J .
      Chem. Phys. 76, 5843 (1982).
243. M. J. Davis, J . Chem. Phys. 86, 3978 (1987); R. Sadeghi and R . T. Skodje, ibid. 99,
      5126 (1993); D. C. Chatfield, R. S. Friedman, G . C. Lynch, D. G. Truhlar, and D. W.
      Schwenke, J . Chem. Phys. 98, 342 (1993).

244. J. M. Ziman, Models of Disorder, Clarendon, Oxford, 1979.
245. W. H. Press, B. P. Flannery, S. A. Teukolsky, and V. T.Vetterling, Numerical Recipes,

      Cambridge University Press, UK, 1986, p. 85 (subroutine RATINT).
246. M. D. Feit, J. A . Fleck, and A. Steiger, J . Comput. Phys. 47, 412 (1982).
247. D. Kosloff and R. Kosloff, J . Comput. Phys. 52, 35 (1983); 63, 363 (1986).
248. J. Maya, J . Chem. Phys. 67, 4976 (1977); H . Hofrnann and S. R . Leone, ibid. 69,3819

      (1978).
362  P. GASPARD ET AL.

249. J.-A. Sepulchre and P. Gaspard, Rotational effect on the lifetime of molecular
       resonances, to appear in J . Chem. Phys. (1995).

250. G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Structure, Volume I I , Krieger, Malabar, 1991.
251. G. Breit and E. P. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 49, 519, 642 (1936); cf. [187].
252. W. F. Polik, C. B. Moore, and W. H. Miller, J . Chem. Phys. 89, 3584 (1988); W. F.

       Polik, D. R. Guyer, W. H . Miller, and C. B. Moore, J . Chem. Phys. 92, 3471 (1990);
      W. H. Miller, R. Hernandez, and C. B. Moore, ibid. 93, 5657 (1990).
253. M. Desouter-Lecomte and F. Culot, J . Chem. Phys. 98, 7819 (1993); F. M. Izrailev,
      D. Saher, and V. V. Sokolov, Phys. Rev. E 49, 130 (1994); and references cited
       therein.

254. J. A. Joens, J . Chem. Phys. 100, 3407 (1994).
255. M. J. Seaton, Rep. Prog. Phys. 46, 167 (1983); C. H. Greene, A . R. P. Rau, and U.

       Fano, Phys. Rev. A. 26, 2441 (1982); cf. [63].
256. J. G. Leopold, I. C. Percival, and A . S. Tworkowski, J . Phys. B: A t . Mol. Phys. 13,

       1025 (1980); J. G. Leopold and I.C. Percival, 13, 1037 (1980).
257. R. Blumel and W. P. Reinhardt, in Directions in Chaos, B.-L. Hao, D. H. Feng, and

      J.-M. Yuan, Eds., World Scientific, Singapore, 1991.
258. J. Muller, J. Burgdorfer, and D. Noid, Phys. Rev. A 45, 1471 (1992); J. Muller and J.

       Burgdorfer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2375 (1993).
259. K. Richter and and D. Wintgen, J . Phys. B : A t . Mol. Opt. Phys. 23, L197 (1990); 24,

       L565 (1991).
260. K. Richter, J. M. Rost, R. Thunvachter, J. S. Briggs, D. Wintgen, and E. A . Solov'ev,

      Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 149 (1991).

261. G. Ferrante, R. Geracitano, and L. Lo Cascio, Phys. Rev. A 14, 558 (1976).
262. H. Bethe, 2. Phys. 57, 815 (1929).
263. E. Hylleraas, Z . Phys. 60, 624 (1930).
264. V. Szebehely, Theory of Orbits, Academic, New York, 1967.
265. N. Koyama, H. Fukuda, T. Motoyama, and M. Matsuzawa, J . Phys. B: A t . Mol.

      Phys. 19, L331 (1986).
266. H. Fukuda, N. Koyama, and M. Matsuzawa, J . Phys. B : A t . Mol. Phys. 20, 2959

      (1987).
267. J. M. Rost and J. S . Briggs, J . Phys. B : A t . Mol. Phys. 22, 3587 (1989).
268. J. M. Rost and J. S. Briggs, J . Phys. B: A t . Mol. Phys. 24, 4293 (1991).

269. Y.K. Ho and J. Callaway, Phys. Rev. A 34, 130 (1986); Y. K. Ho, Phys. Rev. A 41,

      1492 (1990).

270. U. Fano and J. W. Cooper, Phys. Rev. A . 137, 1364 (1965).

271. R . Landauer, Philos. Mag. 21, 863 (1970).
272. K. Nakamura and H . Ishio, J . Phys. Soc. Jpn. 61, 2649, 3939 (1992).
273. P. Gaspard, D. Alonso, T. Okuda, and K. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. E 50, 2591 (1994).
274. B. Eckhardt and D. Wintgen, J . Phys. B: A t . Mol. Phys. 23, 355 (1990).
275. K. Nakamura and H. Thomas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 247 (1988).
276. K. Nakamura, Quantum Chaos, Cambridge University Press, 1993.
277. 0. Agam, The magnetic response of chaotic mesoscopic systems, preprint Technion

      (1993).
278. D. Ullmo, K. Richter, and R. A. Jalabert, Orbital Magnetism in Ensembles of Ballistic

      Billiards, preprint Orsay (1993).
        NEW WAYS OF UNDERSTANDING SEMICLASSICAL QUANTIZATION 363

279. D. Weiss, K. Richter, A . Menschig, R. Bergmann, H. Schweizer, K. von Klitzing, and
      G . Weirnann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 4118 (1993).

280. R. Fleischmann, T. Geisel, and R. Ketzmerick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1367 (1992); T.
      Geisel, R. Ketzmerick, and 0. Schedletzky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1680 (1992).

281. 0. Bohigas, M. J. Giannoni, and C. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 1 (1984).
282. J. Bolte, G. Steil, and F. Steiner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2188 (1992).
283. P. van Ede van der Pals and P. Gaspard, Phys. Rev. E 49, 79 (1994).
284. J. Keating, in [17], pp. 145-185; N. Argarnan, F.-M. Dittes, E . Doron, J. P. Keating,

      A. Yu. Kitaev, M. Sieber, and U. Srnilansky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 4326 (1993).
285. S. K. Gray, S. A. Rice, and D. W. Noid, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 3745 (1986); M. Zhao

       and S . A. Rice, ibid. 96, 3542, 6654, 7483 (1992); 97, 943 (1992).
286. R. S. MacKay, J. D. Meiss, and I. C. Percival, Physica D 13, 55 (1984), reprinted in

       [3], pp. 606-632; D. Bensimon and L. P. Kadanoff, Physica D 13, 82 (1984).
287. G. Vattay, A . Wirzba, and P. E. Rosenqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 2304 (1994).

288. H. M. Nussenzveig, Diffraction Effects in Semiclassical Scattering, Cambridge Uni-
      versity Press, UK, 1992.

289. D. Beck, J . Chem. Phys. 37, 2884 (1962); cf. Chap. 3 in [l]; cf. [288].
290. D. W. Noid, S. K. Gray, and S. A . Rice, J . Chem. Phys. 84, 2649 (1986); U.

      Smilansky, in [6], pp. 371-441; V. Balasubrarnanian, B. K. Misra, A. Bahel, S.
      Kumar, and N. Sathyarnurthy, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 4160 (1991); K. Someda, R.
      Rarnaswarny, and H . Nakamura, ibid. 98, 1156 (1993); T. TC1 and E. Ott, Eds.,
       Chaotic Scattering, Chaos 3(4) (1993); and references cited therein.
291. R. Blumel, B. Dietz, C. Jung, and U. Smilansky, J. Phys. A : Math. Gen. 25, 1483
      ( 1992).
292. I. Prigogine, Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Wiley, New York, 1962.
293. P. Gaspard and G. Nicolis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1693 (1990); P. Gaspard, J . Stat. Phys.
      68 (1992) 673.
294. P. Gaspard, J. Phys. A : Math. Gen. 25, L483 (1992); P. Gaspard, Phys. Lett. A 168,
      13 (1992); P. Gaspard, Chaos 3, 427 (1993).
295. H. H . Hasegawa and W. C. Saphir, Phys. Rev. A 46, 7401 (1992).
296. S. Tasaki and P. Gaspard, in M. Yamaguti, ed., Towards the Harnessing of Chaos,
      Proc. 7th Toyota Conference, Mikkabi, Japan, Nov. 1993, Elsevier Science B.V.,
      Amsterdam, 1994, pp. 273-288.
297. P. Gaspard, Lecture Notes U L B (1991-1992, 1992-1993).
298. F. H. Mies and M. Krauss, J. Chem. Phys. 45, 4455 (1966).
299. R. Hernandez, W. H . Miller, C. B. Moore, and W. F. Polik, J . Chem. Phys. 99, 950
      ( 1993).
300. R. S . Friedman and D. G . Truhlar, Chem. Phys. Lett. 183, 539 (1991); D. C.
      Chatfield, R. S. Friedman, D. W. Schwenke, and D. G . Truhlar, J . Phys. Chem. 96,
      2414 (1992); D. C. Chatfield, R. S. Friedman, G . C. Lynch, D. G. Truhlar, and D. W.
      Schwenke, J . Chem. Phys. 98, 342 (1993).
301. F. H. Molzahn and T. A. Osborn, Ann. Phys. 230, 343 (1994).
302. M. J. Cohen, N. C. Handy, R. Hernandez, and W. H. Miller, Chem. Phys. Lett. 192,
      407 (1992).
303. B. R. Johnson and J. L. Kinsey, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 7638 (1989).
304. J. Lievin, M. Abbouti Temsamani, P. Gaspard, and M. Herman, Chem. Phys. 190,
      419 (1995).
364  P. GASPARD ET AL.

305. J.-P. Pique, G. Sitja, H. Ring, L. Michaille, and P. Gaspard, in preparation.
306. P. Gaspard, in preparation.
307. M. Srednicki, Phys. Rev. E 50, 888 (1994).
308. S . TomsoviC and E. J. Heller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 664 (1991); Phys. Rev. E 47, 282

      (1993).

309. L. S . Schulman, J . Phys. A : Math. Gen. 27, 1703 (1994).
310. M. V. Berry and C . J. Howls, High orders of the Weyl expansion for quantum billiards:

      Resurgence ofperiodic orbits, and the Stokes phenomenon, preprint submitted to Proc.
      Roy. SOC. Lond. (1994).
    Advances In Chemical Physics, VolumeXC
            Edited by I. Prigogine, StuartA. Rice

Copyright © 1995 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

AUTHOR INDEX

Numbers in parentheses are reference numbers and indicate that the author's work is
referred to although his name is not mentioned in the text. Numbers in italic show the pages
on which the complete references are listed.

Abbouti Temsamani, M., 351(304), 363       Balasubramanian, V., 349(290), 363
Abramson, E., 112(31), 353                 Balazs, N. L., 123(68), 159(104), 178(68),
Achiba, K., 89(171), 90(171), 103
Adachi, S . , 219(175), 359                     219(104), 355-356
Agam, O., 210(164), 340(277), 358, 362     Balian, R., 109(12-13), 119(13), 176(129),
Al-Joboury, M. I., 10-11(66), 100
Alber, G., 212(172), 214(172), 359              187(129), 196-197(12), 231-232(12),
Alerhand, 0. H., 113(40), 161(40), 337-         353, 357
                                           Ballhausen, C. J . , 247(197), 267-270(197),
     338(40), 349(40), 354                      360
Aliev, M. R., 192-193(134), 250(134), 357  Baltes, H. P., 196(148), 358
Allendorf, S. W., 10(77), 30(77), 100      Baranger, H. U., 113(43), 161(43),
Alonso Ramirez, D., 169(121), 350-              338(43), 349(43), 354
                                           Barbanis, B . , 159(103), 356
     351(121), 357                         Bauder, A . , 20(91), 101
Alonso, D., 109(19-20), 162(111),          Baym, G., 247(197), 267-270(197), 360
                                           Beck, D., 349(289), 363
     179(19), 183(19), 185-186(19,133),    Beenakker, C. W. J., 113(40), 161(40),
     198(19), 211(19-20), 222(133), 230-        337-338(40), 349(40), 354
     231(20), 233(133), 234(20), 238(20),  Ben-Nun, M., 3(38), 15(38), 99
     241(20), 243(19), 245-246(19), 338-   Bensimon, D., 345(286), 363
     339(273), 347(20), 353, 357, 362      Bergmann, R., 340(279), 363
Amos, R. D., 87(166), 103                  Bergmark, T . , 10(69), 100
Anderson, S. L., 30(103), 101              Berkowitz, J., 11(79), 71(157), 100, 103
Argaman, N . , 344(284), 363               Bernstein, R. B., 108(1), 292(230), 352,
Arnold, V. I., 125(71), 131(71),                360
     148(71,91), 151(71,91), 179(71),      Berry, M. V., 127(75), 159(104), 186(132),
     193(71,141), 355, 356, 358                  198(75), 210(164), 219(104), 220-
Artuso, R., 167(118), 170(118), 357             221(180), 223(185), 228(132,191),
Asbrink, L., 10(70), 84(162), 100, 103          229(191), 232(132), 252-253(205),
Aurell, E., 167(118), 170(118), 206(155),       345(1SO), 351(31O), 355-360, 364
     357-358                               Bersuker, I. B., 4(55), 99
Aurich, R., 210(165), 358                  Bertrand, J. C . , 114(49), 354
                                           Bessis, D., 173-174(126), 357
Baer, T., 11(78,81-82,84), 100             Bethe, H. A., 247(197), 267-270(197),
Baer, Y . , 10(69), 100                         327(262), 360, 362
Bahel, A , , 349(290), 363
Baker, A . D., 3(52), 10-11(52), 84(52),   Bey4 B., 3(8), 5(8), W ) , 16(8), 19(8),
                                                22-24(8), 28(8), 98
     99
Baker, C., 3(52), 10-11(52), 84(52), 99    Bieri, G., 84(162), 103
                                           Bigio, L., 71(152,156), 103

                                                                                    365
366  AUTHOR INDEX

Birkhoff, G. D., 161-162(110), 193(140),      Buchleitner, B., 112(33), 269(33), 324(33),
     357-358                                       354

Bleher, S., 168(120), 3.57                    Buma, W. G., 63(142), 69(142), 102
Bleistein, N., 130(81), 135(81), 230(81),     Bunimovich, L. A., 161(109), 162(112),

     356                                           357
Bloch, C., 109(12-13), 119(13), 196-          Bunker, P. R . , 21(96), 23(96), 101
                                              Burcl, R., 9(65), 91-94(65), 100
     197(12), 231-232(12), 3.53               Burgdorfer, J., 326-327(258), 362
Blodgett-Ford, S. J., 112(35), 219(35),       Burgers, A., 206(159), 3.58
                                              Burghardt, I., 109(21), 161(21), 169(21),
     324-325(35), 348(35), 354
Blumel, R., 113(38,42), 161(42), 326(257),         292(21), 295(21), 303-304(21),
                                                   307(21), 311(21), 314(21), 324(21),
     337-338(42), 349(42,291), 351(42),            340(21), 347-348(21), 3.53
     354, 362-363                             Burgi, T . , 89(175), 93-94( 175), 103
Blush, J. A., 19(89), 60(89), 101             Burke, P. G., 38(127), 39(127), 102,
Bogomolny, E., 209(162), 210(166, 168),            292(231), 360
     358-359                                  Butler, L., 290(226), 360
Bohigas, O., 343(281), 363
Bohm, A . , 118(56-57), 121(56), 269-         Callaway, J . , 334(269), 362
     270(56), 355                             Callomon, J. H., 20(90), 101
Bohr, T., 173-174(126), 357                   Campos, F. X., 71(153-154), 103
Bolte, J., 344(282), 363                      Carley, J. S . , 112(32), 353
Bondybey,V. E., 3(21,23,28), 4(56),           Carruthers, P., 123-124(69), 178(69),
     21(56), 24-26(56,99), 98-99, 101
Bordas, M. C., 112(37), 271(37), 324-              275(69), 355
     325(37), 354                             Casati, G., 108(5), 109(17), 154(97),
Born, M., 30(111), 101
Borne, T. B., 11(83), 100                          161(97), 228(97), 239(97), 340(97),
Bountis, T. C., 217(173), 359                      352-353, 356
Bowen, R., 172(123), 357                      Castin, Y., 108(10), 352
Bowman, R. M., 279(215), 292-294(233),        Cederbaum, L. S . , 83(160), 103
     311(233), 313(233), 360                  Chakravarty, S., 114(50), 354
Bradforth, S. E., 3(24), 95(24), 98           Chandler, D., 114(50), 354
Braun, P. A . , 217(212), 360                 Chandra, N., 38(127), 39(127), 102
Braunstein, M . , 30(114), 101                Chatfield, D. C., 309(243), 351(300), 360,
Breit, G., 322(251), 362                           363
Brewer, R. G., 113(38), 354                   Chazarain, J., 176-177(128), 357
Brewer, W. D., 10(72), 100                    Chen, P., 19(89), 60(89), 101
Briggs, J . S., 212(172), 214(172), 327(26),  Cherepkov, N . , 36-37(125), 40(125),
     334-336(267-268), 359, 362                    49(125), 51(125), 102
Brillouin, L., 112(28), 353                   Chewter, L. A., 3(11), 18(11), 30(11),
Brody, T. A., 241(194), 322(194), 360              47(11), 98
Brown, J. M., 35(123), 102                    Child, M. S . , 57(137-138), 102, 212(170),
Broyer, M . , 112(37), 271(37), 324-               296(236-237), 314-315(236-237),
     325(37), 354                                  344(236), 359-360
Bruhlmann, U., 32(119), 102                   Chilukuri, S., 69(149), 103
Brundle, C. R., 3(52), 10-11(52), 84(52),     Chirikov, B. V., 160(106), 356
     99                                       Chreagh, S. C., 200(151), 358
Bryant, G. P., 3(29), 47(145), 63(29),        Chupka, W. A., 3(36), 11(79), 15(36),
     64(145), 70(145), 71(155,158a-b),             63(36), 99-100
     74(158a), 76(158b), 79(158b), 81-        Churchill, R. C., 157(102), 159(102), 356
     83(158b), 99, 102-103                    Clary, D. C., 247(200), 360
AUTHOR INDEX                                367

Cockett, M. C. R . , 3(39), 8(62-63),       Desouter-Lecomte, M., 323(253),
     94(62), 99-100                              351(253), 362

Cohen, M. J., 351(302), 363                 Destrain, S . , 218(174), 359
Cohen-Tannoudji, C., 115(53), 355           DeWitt, B., 141-142(84), 144(84), 356
Colin, R., 112(31), 353                     DeWitt-Morette, C., 136(83), 141-142(83),
Collins, G. P., 114(46), 340(46), 354
Colson, S . D., 3(18), 8(18), 9(64),             144(83), 356
                                            Diercksen, G. H. F., 83(160), 103
     89(18,173-174), 90(64,176), 92(64),    Dietrich, H.-J., 96-97(184-186), 104
     98, 100, 103                           Dietz, B., 349(291), 363
Contopoulos, G., 159(103), 356              Dittes, F.-M., 344(284), 363
Cooper, J. W., 336(270), 362                Dittrich, W., 130(78), 136-137(78), 356
Cordes, E . , 91(177-178), 104              Dixit, S. N., 3(12,51), 18(12,88), 22(12),
COX,D. M., 3(17,33), 98-99
Creagh, S. C., 212(171), 221(181),               30(114-1 15), 36-37( 115), 40( 115),
     271(171), 359                               49(115), 51(115), 98-99, 101
Crommie, M. F., 114(46), 340(46), 354       Domcke, W., 26(101), 28(101), 29(102),
Culot, F . , 323(253), 351(253), 362             101, 267(209), 360
Cvitanovic, P., 109(16), 163-164(115),      Domenech, J. L., 24(97), 101
      167(118), 168(115), 170(118),         Dopfer, O., 3(18), 8(18), 9(64-65),
     206(160-161), 238(115,193), 295(160),       89(18,172), 90(64-65), 91(64-65,177-
     353, 357-359                                181), 92-94(64-65), 98, 100, 103-104
                                            Doron, E., 114(48), 227(48), 337(48),
Dahl, J . L., 123(68), 178(68), 355              344(284), 354, 363
Dahl, J . P., 155(97), 187(98), 356         Dorsey, A. T., 114(50), 354
Dalibard, J., 108(10), 352                  Drexler, K. E., 114(47), 354
Dantus, M., 279(215), 292-294(233),         Du, M. L., 225(188), 359
                                            Dubs, M., 32(119), 102
      311(233), 313(233), 360               Ducas, T. W., 112(33), 269(33), 324(33),
Dashen, R. F., 144(86), 356                      354
Davidson, E. R., 10(75), 30(75), 100        Dunham, J. L., 193(139), 358
Davis, M. J., 307(241), 309(243), 360       Dunn, T. M., 20(90), 101
de Beer, E., 30(111-113), 45(112), 53-      Dupont-Roc, J., 115(53), 355
                                            Duren, R., 290(227), 360
      54(112-113), 63(142), 69(142,146),    Duschinsky, F., 87(164), 103
      101-1 02                              Dyke, J. M., 8(63), 100
Dedonder-Lardeux, C., 3(42), 26(42),
      95(42), 99                            Ebata, T., 30(107), 101
de Lange, C. A , , 30(111-113), 63(142),    Eckhardt, B., 113(42), 149(92), 161(42),
      69(142,146), 101-102
Dehmer, J. L., 29(73), 30(105-106,108-            163(113,115), 164(115), 168(115),
      110), 100-101                              200(92), 206(155,158), 210(168),
Dehmer, P. M., 10(73), 30(105-106,108-           226(189), 238(115,193), 337-338(42),
      110), 100-101                              340(274), 349(42), 351(42), 354, 356-
Delacretaz, G., 259(208), 262(208), 360          359, 362
Delande, D . , 112(33), 222-223(183),       Eckmann, J.-P., 108-109(4), 173(4), 352
      269(33,210), 324(33,210), 325(210),   Edmonds, A. B., 33(121), 102
      354, 359-360                          Ehrenfest, P., 111(26), 353
Delos, J. B., 112(34-35), 126(73),          Eichmann, U., 112(36), 269(36), 325(36),
      194(143), 219(34-35), 225(188), 268-       354
      269(34), 324-325(34-35), 348(34),     Eiden, G. C., 88(167), 103
      354-355, 358-359                      Eiding, J . , 26(101), 28(101), 29(102), 101
                                            Eigler, D. M., 114(46), 340(46), 354
368  AUTHOR INDEX

Einstein, A., 111(25), 353                    Gantefor, G., 3(17,33), 98-99
Eisenbud, L., 292(231), 360                   Garg, A . , 114(50), 354
Engel, V., 288-289(223), 300(223),            Gaspard, P., 109(19-20), 151(93), 154(97),

     313(223), 360                                 156(101), 160(105,108), 161(21,93,97),
Even, U., 3(38), 15(38), 99                        162(111), 163(114), 169(21,121),
Ewing, G. E., 112(32), 353                         175(114), 179(19), 183(19,111),
Eyring, H., 292(228), 360                          185(19), 186(19,133), 198(19),
Ezra, G. S . , 156(99), 169(99), 194(144),         204(114), 206-207(114), 211(19-
                                                   20,169), 222( 133,182), 224( 101),
     325-327(99), 331(99), 356, 358                227(182), 228(97), 230-231(20),
                                                   232( 133), 234(20), 238(20,114),
Fano, U., 120(63), 325(255), 336(270),             239(93,97,114)], 240( 114),
     337(63), 355, 362                             241(20,114), 243(19,114), 245-
                                                   246(19), 269(182), 276(214), 278(214),
Farrelly, D., 113(38), 354                         292(21), 295(21), 303-304(21),
Fedoriuk, M. V., 110(22), 126(22),                 307(21), 311(21), 314(21,114),
                                                   319(101), 320-321(249), 322(log),
     131(22), 353                                  324(21,249), 325-328(101), 331(101),
Feigenbaum, M. J., 152(94), 356                    334(101), 338-339(273), 340(21,97),
Feit, M. D., 311(246), 360                         344(283), 346(249), 347(20-21),
Fermi, E . , 112(30), 268(30), 353                 348(21), 350(121,293-294,296-
Ferrante, G., 327(261), 362                        297,304-306), 351(114,121,293-
Feynman, R. P., 132(79), 179(79), 356              294,296-297,304-306), 353, 356-357,
Field, R. W., 112(31), 353                         359-360, 362-364
Fielding, H. H., 3(37), 99                    Gauyacq, D., 3(10), 18(10), 63(10), 98
Fischer, I., 3(21,23,28), 16(87), 17(21,28),  Gay, J. C . , 112(33), 269(33,210),
                                                   324(33,210), 325(210), 354
     98-99, 101                               Geisel, T., 340(280), 363
Fischer, T . , 89(175), 93-94( 175), 103      Gelfreich, V. G., 219(178), 359
Fisher, M. P. A., 114(50), 354                Gelius, K., 10(69), 100
Fishman, S . , 210(164), 226(189), 358-359    Geracitano, R., 327(261), 362
Flannery, B. P., 304(245), 360                Gerard, C . , 206(156), 358
Fleck, J. A., 311(246), 360                   Giannoni, M.-J., 108(6), 343(281), 352,
Fleischmann, R., 340(280), 363                     363
Flores, J., 241(194), 322(194), 360           Gianturco, F. A , , 38(127), 39(127), 102
Ford, J., 108(5), 352                         Gilbert, R. D., 57(138), 102
Forst, W., 122(65), 323(65), 355              Giusti-Suzor, A , , 3(50), 69(147), 99, 102
Fraser, G. T., 24(97), 101                    Goddard, W. A., 42(128), 102
Fredin, S., 3(10), 18(10), 63(10), 98         Goldstein, H., 125(70), 272(70), 355
Freeman, R. R., 112(33), 269(33),             Gomez-Llorente, J. M . , 307(240), 360
                                              Goodings, D. A , , 209(163), 358
     324(33), 354                             Gordon, R. J . , 69(149), 103
French, J. B., 241(194), 322(194), 360        Gossard, A. C . , 113(41), 161(41), 227(41),
Frenkel, A , , 114(48), 227(48), 337(48),          337-338(41), 349(41), 354
                                              Graf, H. D., 114(48), 227(48), 337(48),
     354                                           354
Fried, L. E., 194(145), 358                   Grammaticos, B., 178(130), 195(130), 357
Friedman, R . S . , 309(243), 351(300), 360,  Grant, E. R . , 3(20,29,31-32), 16(20),
                                                   25( loo), 30(20,140), 47-49( 140,145),
     363                                           54(31), 55-57(32), 62(140-141a),
Fujii, A , , 30(107), 101
Fuke, K., 89(171), 90(171), 103
Fukuda, H., 334(265-266), 336(265-266),

     362

Gadella, M . , 119(57), 355
Gallagher, T. F., 63(143), 102
AUTHOR INDEX                                 369

     63(29, 140-141a), 64(144), 65-          Harter, W. G., 212(171), 271(171), 359
     68(141b), 69(141a), 71(151-156),
     74(158a), 76(158b), 79(158b), 80(140),  Hasegawa, H. H . , 350-351(295), 363
     81-83(158b), 98-99, 101-103             Hasslacher, B., 144(86), 356
     259(208), 262(208), 360                 Hauge, E. H., 121-122(64), 178(64), 355
Grassberger, P., 173-174(125), 357           Heden, P. F., 10(69), 100
Grassi,, G., 20(91), 101                     Hedman, J., 10(69), 100
Gray, S. K., 345(285), 349(290), 363         Heiles, C., 157(102), 159(102), 356
Grebogi, C., 168(120), 357                   Heller, E., 227(190), 276(214), 278(214),
Greene, C. H . , 325(255), 362
Greene, J. M., 152(94), 219(177), 356,            306(190), 312(190), 351(308), 359-
     359                                          360, 364
Gremaud, B . , 112(33), 269(33), 324(33),    Heller, E. J., 114(46), 120(61), 162(61),
     354                                          290(61), 312(61), 340(46), 354-355
Gruebele, M., 113(39), 268(215), 292-        Henon, M., 157(102), 159(102), 160(106),
     294(233-234), 311(233-234), 313(233-         356
      234), 344(39), 354, 360                Henri, G . , 3(18), 8(18), 89(18), 98
Grynberg, G., 115(53), 355                   Hepburn, J. W., 3(47), 48-50(132),
Guarneri, I., 109(16-17), 154(97), 353,           95(47), 99, 102
     356                                     Herman, M., 112(31), 351(304), 353, 363
Guckenheimer, J., 296(238), 360              Hernandez, R . , 192(137), 323(252),
Gustavson, F. G., 193(140), 358                   351(299,302), 357, 362-363
Gutzwiller, M. C., 109(11,14-15),            Herzberg, G . , 4(53), 21(53), 23(53),
      199(11,149), 201(11), 353, 358              26(53), 99, 275-276(213), 286-
Guyer, D. R., 323(252), 362                       287(213), 289(213), 320(250), 360, 362
Guyon, P. M., 11(79,82), 100                 Heumann, B . , 290(227), 360
                                             Hibbs, A. R., 132(79), 179(79), 356
Haake, F., 222-223( 183), 359                Hilf, E. R., 196(148), 358
Habenicht, W., 3(3,5), 10(3), 12(5), 13(3),  Hillenbrand, S . , 3(40), 99
                                             Ho, Y. K . , 292(229), 334(269), 360, 362
      16(3,5), 19(5), 25-26(5), 30(3),       Hobza, P., 9(65), 91-94(65), 100
     95(182), 96(182), 98, 104               Hoffnagle, J. , 113(38), 354
Haber, K. S . , 25(100), 47(145), 64(145),   Hofmann, H . , 311(248), 360
     70(145), 71(152), 101-103               Hogervorst, W., 112(34), 219(34), 268-
Haddon, R. C., 4(56), 21(56), 24-26(56),          269(34), 324-325(34), 348(34), 354
     99                                      Holbrook, K. A , , 122(65), 323(65), 355
Hahn, O., 307(240), 360                      Holle, A . , 112(34), 219(34), 268-269(34),
Halpern, J. B., 32(120), 102                      324-325(34), 348(34), 354
Hamilton, C. D., 112(31), 353                Holmes, P., 296(238), 360
Handelsman, R. A , , 130(81), 135(81),       Hopkins, P. F., 113(41), 161(41), 227(41),
     230(81), 356                                 337-338(41), 349(41), 354
Handy, N. C., 192(137), 351(302), 357,       Horani, M . , 3(10), 18(10), 63(10), 98
     363                                     Hougen, J. T., 35(123), 102
Hannay, J. H., 222-223(184), 359             Howard, J. E., 113(38), 354
Hansen, A . E., 247(197), 267-270(197),      Howls, C. J., 351(310), 364
     360                                     Hsu, D. K . , 103
Harayama, T., 228-229(192), 359              Huber, D. L., 119(60), 355
Harney, H. L., 114(48), 227(48), 337(48),    Huber, J . R . , 32(119), 102
     354                                     Huber, K. P., 35(123), 102
Harrington, J., 3(27), 99                    Huet, T. R . , 112(31), 353
                                             Humblet, J., 118(55), 355
                                             Hung, W. J., 42(128), 102
370  AUTHOR INDEX

 Huo, W. M., 3(51), 99                         Kash, M. M., 112(33), 269(33), 324(33),
 Hylleraas, E., 327(263), 362
                                               354
 Ikawa, M . , 206(157), 3.58
 Ikeda, K., 218(176), 3.59                     Kasting, G. B., 11(80), 100
 Iliopoulos, J., 144(85), 3.56
Imre, D., 112(31), 3.53                        Kaya, K., 89(171), 90(171), 103
 Imre, K., 123(67), 178(67), 35.5
Innes, K. K., 112(31), 353                     Keating, J. P., 210(164), 344(284), 3.58,
Ishio, H., 338(272), 362
Ito, M., 30(107), 101                          363
Itzykson, C., 144(85), 3.56
Iu, C., 112(33), 269(33), 324(33), 3.54        Kellman, M. E., 282-283(219), 360
Iwasaki, M., 5(57), 21(57), 99
Izrailev, F. M., 323(253), 351(253), 362       Kenny, J. E., 112(32), 3.53

Jackiw, R. W., 247(197), 267-270(197),         Ketzmerick, R., 340(280), 363
      360
                                               Khundkar, L. R., 113(39), 344(39), 3.54
Jacobs, D. C., 10(77), 30(77), 100
Jahn, H. A., 4(54), 21(54), 99                 Kimura, K., 3(39), 8(62-63), 47(131),
Jalabert, R. A . , 113(43), 161(43), 338(43),
                                               89(170-171), 90(171), 94(62), 99-100,
      340(278), 349(43), 3.54, 362
Jammer, M . , lO8(8), 111(8), 3.52             102
Janik, G. R., 63(143), 102
Jayatilaka, D., 192(137), 3.57                 Kinsey, J. L., 112(31), 300(239), 313(239),
Jennings, B. K., 123(68), 178(68), 35.5
Jiang, Y., 3(29), 47(145), 63(29). 64(145),    351(303), 3.53, 360, 363

     71(153-155,158a), 76(158b), 79(158b),     Kitaev, A. Yu., 344(284), 363
      81-83(158b), 99, 102-103
Joachain, C. J., 116-117(54), 121(54), 3.5.5   Kitsopoulos, T. N . , 3(14-15), 69(15), 98
Joens, J. A , , 319(254), 362
Johansson, G., 10(69), 100                     Kleppner, D., 112(33), 269(33), 324(33),
Johns, J. W. C., 35(123), 102
Johnson, B. R., 300(239), 313(239),            354
     351(303), 360, 363
Johnson, K. E., 112(32), 3.53                  Knee, J. L., 3(16,22,35), 15(35), 63(35),
Johnson, P., 3(40-41), 26(41), 95(41), 99
Jones, L. F . , 247(200), 360                  94-95(22), 98-99
Jouvet, C., 3(42), 26(42), 88(168), 95(42),
     99, 103                                   Knickelbein,  M.  B.,  71(152).                    -7-0- 3
Joyeux, M., 280-284(216-217), 345(216-                                                       -,I
     217), 347(216-217), 360
Jung, C., 349(291), 363                        Knittel, T., 20(92), 23-24(92), 27(92), 101
Jungen, Ch., 3(10,49-50), 18(10), 57(137),
     63(10), 64(144), 98-99, 102               Kobrin, P. H., 10(72), 100
Junttila, M.-L., 24(97), 101
                                               Koenders, B. G., 69(146), 102
Kadanoff, L. P., 345(286), 363
Kaldor, A , , 3(17,33), 98-99                  Kong, W., 3(47), 48-50(132), 95(47), 99,
Kantz, H., 173-174( 1251, 357
                                               102

                                               Konig, A . , 112(35), 219(3.5), 324-325(35),

                                               348(35), 3.54

                                               Koopmans, M. P., 69(146), 102

                                               Koppel, H., 26(101), 28(101), 101

                                               Kopps, I., 35(123), 102

                                               Kosloff, D.. 311f247). 360

                                               Kosloff, R.; 130(80): 292(80), 311(80,247),

                                               3.56, 360

                                               Koyama, N., 334(265-266), 336(265-266),

                                               362

                                               Kramers, H. A . , 112(28), 353

                                               Krause, H., 3(43), 26-27(43), 95-96(43),

                                               99

                                               Krauss, M., 351(298), 363

                                               Kubiak, G. D., 30(103), 101

                                               Kulander, K. C., 287(222), 289(222), 360

                                               Kumar, S . , 349(290), 363

                                               Kurbatov, B. C., 10-11(67), 100

                                               KUS,M., 222-223(183), 3.59

                                               Labastie, P., 112(37), 271(37), 324-
                                                    325(37), 354

                                               Laidler, K. J., 292(228), 360
                                               Lakshiminarayan, C., 3(16), 98
AUTHOR INDEX                                371

Landau, L., 224(187), 247(201), 251(201),   Littlejohn, R. G., 184(131), 200(151),
     275(187), 348(201), 359-360                 212(171), 221(181), 271(171),
                                                 247(198-199), 248(199), 357-360
Landauer, R., 337(271), 362
Lane, A. M., 292(231), 360                  Littman, M. G., 112(33), 269(33),
Lange, V., 112(36), 269(36), 325(36), 354        324(33), 354
Lauritzen, B., 238(193), 359
Lazutkin, V. F., 219(178), 359              LoCascio, L., 327(261), 362
Leahy, D. J . , 10(77), 30(77), 100         Lochschmidt, A . , 3(23), 98
Lee, L. C . , 290(225), 360                 Loeser, J. G . , 3(14), 98
Lee, M.-T., 3(32), 30(118), 40(118), 55-    Lornbardi, M., 112(37), 271(37), 324-

     57(32,136), 99, 102                         325(37), 354
Lee, S.-Y., 120(61), 162(61), 290(61),      Long, S. R . , 21(95), 101
                                            Longuet-Higgins, H. C., 25(98), 28(98),
     312(61), 355
Lee, T. J., 75(159), 78(159), 103                101
Lefebvre, J. H., 209(163), 358              Loudon, R., 119-120(59), 355
Lefebvre-Brion, H., 35(123), 47(145),       Louisell, W. H., 119-120(59), 355
                                            Lucchese, R. R., 33(122), 43(122), 102
     51(134), 63(141), 64(145), 69(141a-    Lucia, J . , 87(164), 103
     b,147), 70(145), 102                   Lutz, C. P., 114(46), 340(46), 354
Lefevre, G., 3(10), 18(10), 63(10), 98      Lynch, D. L., 3(51), 99
Leggett, A . J . , 114(50), 354             Lynch, E. D., 282-283(219), 360
Legrand, O., 114(49), 354                   Lynch, G. C., 309(243), 351(300), 360,
Lembach, G., 91(179), 104
Lengeler, H., 114(48), 227(48), 337(48),         363
     354
Leone, S. R., 311(248), 360                 Machado, L. E., 30(118), 40(118), 102
Leopold, J. G . , 326(256), 362             Machta, J., 161(109), 357
Le Roy, R. J . , 112(32), 353               MacKay, R. S., 108-109(3), 152(94),
Lester, W. A. Jr., 292(230), 360
Leutwyler, S., 89(175), 93-94(175), 103          153(3), 193(3), 345(286), 352, 356,
Levine, R. D., 3(38), 15(38), 99, 108(1),        363
     352                                    Mackey, I., 292(231), 360
Levit, S., 130(78), 136-137(78), 356        Maheshwari, A , , 136(83), 141-142(83),
Levy, D. H., 112(32), 353                        144(83), 356
Lewenkopf, C. H., 114(48), 227(48),         Mahon, C. R . , 63(143), 102
     337(48), 354                           Main, J., 112(34), 113(44), 219(34), 268-
Li, Z., 282-283(219), 360                        269(34), 324-325(34), 348(34),
Lichtenberg, A . J., 108-109(2), 153-            349(44), 354
     154(2), 160(2), 170(2), 193(2), 352    Manne, T., 10(69), 100
Lieb, E. H., 112(30), 268(30), 353          Manners, J., 280-284(216-217), 345(216-
Lieberman, A . J., 108-109(2), 153-              217), 347(216-217), 360
     154(2), 160(2), 170(2), 193(2), 352    Manz, J., 309(242), 360
Lievin, J . , 351(304), 363                 Mao, J.-M., 112(34-35), 219(34-35), 268-
Lifshitz, E., 224(187), 275(187), 359            269(34), 324-325(34-35), 348(34-35),
Light, J. C., 287(222), 289(222), 360            354
Lin, X . , 282-283(219), 360                Marcus, C . M., 113(41), 161(41), 227(41),
Lindle, D. W., 10(72), 100                       337-338(41), 349(41), 354
Lindner, R., 3(8-9,18), 5(8-9), 8(18),      Marcus, R. A . , 194(144), 358
     12(8-9,85), 19(8-9), 22-24(8), 69(9),  Marcus, R. M., 114(51), 292(51), 351(51),
     93(181), 96-97(184-185), 98, 100-           354
     101, 104                               Martin, A . , 144(85), 356
Lipert, R. J . , 89(173-174), 90(176), 103  Martin, M., 3(29), 63(29), 76(158b),
                                                 79( 158b), 81-83( 158b), 99, 103
372  AUTHOR INDEX

Martrenchard-Barra, S., 3(42), 26(42),         Molmer, K., 108(10), 352
     95(42), 99                                Molzahn, F. H. 351(301), 363
                                               Monts, D. L., 103
Maslov, V. P., 110(22), 126(22), 127(74),      Moore, C. B., 323(252), 351(299), 362-
     130(74), 131(22,74), 353, 355
                                                    363
Masnou-Seeuws, F., 3(10), 18(10), 63(10),      Moore, R., 247(200), 360
     98                                        Morette, C., 128(77), 355
                                               Morse, M., 127(72), 130(72), 199(72), 355
Matsunaga, F. M., 286-287(220),                Mortessagne, F., 114(49), 354
     289(220), 360                             Motoyama, T., 334(265), 336(266), 362
                                               Mount, K. E., 127(75), 198(75), 355
Matsuzawa, M., 334(265-266), 336(265-          Moyes, W., 84(161), 103
     266), 362                                 Muller, J., 326-327(258), 362
                                               Muller, K . , 226(189), 359
Matthies, C., 210(165), 358                    Muller-Dethlefs, K . , 3(1-
Maya, J . , 311(248), 360
McCormack, E. F., 30(108,110), 202                  9,11,18,21,23,28), 6(60-61), 9(64-65),
McKoy, V., 3(12,32,44,51), 10(76),                  10-12( 1-5,7,9,85), 15(7), 16(1,3-6,8-
                                                    9,21,21,85-87), 17(1,3-63-9,21,23),
     18(12,88), 22(12,76), 30(140), 35-             19(5-6,8-9), 20(3), 22-23( 6,8), 24(8),
     37(115-116), 40( 115-116,118),                 25-26(5-6,9), 27(9,85), 28(8-9),
     42(117), 43(122,129), 44(129),
     45(112,129-130), 46(129),                      29(9), 30(4,11), (47(7,11),) 63(2),
     47( 130,140), 48( 132,140), 49( 115-           69(9), 80(2), 85-86(61), 89(18,172),
     116), 50(132,140), 51(115-116,133),            90(64), 91(64-65, 177-179, 181),
     52(133), 53(112-113), 54(112-                  92(64-65), 93(64-65,181), 94(64-65),
     113,135), 55(32,44,136,139), 56-               95-96(182,184-185), 97(184), 98-100,
     57(32,136-139), 58-61(139), 62-                103-104
     63(140), 80(140), 98-102                  Mulliken, R. S . , 38(126), 40-41(126),
McQuarrie, D. A , , 119(60), 355                    84(163), 102-103
Mead, C. A , , 252(203-204), 253(203),
     204(259), 360                             Nakamura, H., 349(290), 363
Meek, J. T . , 21(95), 101                     Nakamura, K., 151(93), 161(93), 239(93),
Meiss, J. D., 108-109(3), 153(3), 193(3),
     345(286), 352, 363                             338(272-273), 339(273), 340(275-
Mello, P. A., 241(194), 322(194), 360               276), 356, 362
Menschig, A . , 340(279), 363                  Nakata, R. S . , 286-287(220), 289(220),
Merer, A. J., 35(123), 102                          360
Merkt, F . , 3(19,25,37), 6(19,25-26),         Narnhofer, H., 121-122(64), 178(64), 355
     10(45-46), 15(45-46), 15-17( 26),         Nelson, B., 136(83), 141-142(83), 144(83),
     63(9,25), 98-99                                356
Metz, R. B., 3(24), 95(24), 98                 Nenner, I., 11(82), 100
Meyer, K. R., 152(94), 356                     Neumark, D. M., 69(15), 95(24), 98-99
Michaille, L., 351(305), 364                   Neusser, H. J . , 3(43), 20(92), 23-24(92),
Mies, F. H., 351(298), 363                          27(43,92), 26(43), 95-96(43), 99, 101
Miller, T. A , , 4(56), 21(56), 24-26(56,99),  Neveu, A . , 144(86), 356
     99, 101                                   Nicolis, G., 146(88), 350-351(293), 356,
Miller, W. H., 114(50), 122(66), 192(137-           363
     138), 203(153), 219-220( 66,179),         Niedner-Schatteburg, G., 3(21,23,28),
     323(252), 351(299,302), 354-355, 357-          17(21,23,28), 98-99
     359, 362-363                              Niehaus, A , , 10(71), 100
Mills, I. M., 20(90), 101, 192(135), 357       Nielsen, H. H., 192(136), 357
Misra, B. K., 349(290), 363
Moiseyev, N., 292(229), 360
Moldauer, P. A , , 241(194), 322(194), 360
AUTHOR INDEX                                373

Noid, D. W., 326-327(258), 345(285),        Porter, C. E., 194(142), 241(194),
     349(290), 362                               322(142,194), 358, 360

Nordling, C., 10(69), 100                   Poston, T., 223(186), 359
Nunime, K., 5(57), 21(57), 99               Potts, A. W., 21(94), 84(94), 101
Nussenzveig, H. M., 349(288), 363           Pradeep, T., 89(169), 103
                                            Pratt, S . T., 3(34), 10(73), 15(34),
O'Halloran, M. A , , 30(106), 101
Oka, T., 5(58), 99                               30( 105-106,108-110), 99-101
Okuda, T., 338-339(273), 362                Press, W. H., 304(245), 360
Okuyama, K., 8(62), 94(62), 100             Price, W. C., 21(94), 84(94), 101
Oldani, M., 20(91), 101                     Prigogine, I., 146(88), 350(292), 356, 363
Opik, U., 25(98), 28(98), 101               Pritchard, H. O . , 122(65), 323(65), 355
Osborn, T. A , , 351(301), 363              Pryce, H. L., 25(98), 28(98), 101
Oseledec, V. I., 147(89), 3.56
Ott, E., 165-166(117), 168(120), 357        Raghavachari, K., 4(56), 21(56), 24-
Ozeki, H., 8(63), 47(131), 100, 102              26(56), 99
Ozizmir, E., 123(67), 178(67), 355
Ozorio de Almeida, A. M., 108(7), 222-      Ramasamy, R., 349(290), 363
                                            Ramsay, D. A , , 35(123), 102
     223(7,184), 352, 359                   Rand, D., 173-174(126), 357
                                            Rangacharyulu, C., 114(48), 227(48),
Pack, R. T., 290(224), 312(224), 360
Paladin, G., 173-174(126), 357                   337(48), 354
Palmer, M. H., 84(161), 103                 Rao, C. N. R., 89(169), 103
Pandey, A., 241(194), 322(194), 360         Rapelje, A., 112(35), 219(35), 324-
Papousek, D., 192-193(134), 250(134),
                                                 325(35), 348(35), 354
     357                                    Raseev, G., 33(122), 36-37(125), 40(125),
Parisi, G . , 144(87), 176(129), 187(129),
                                                  43(122), 4Y(125), 51(125), 69(147),
     356-357                                     102
Paterson, C. W., 212(171), 271(171), 359    Rau, A. R. P., 120(63), 325(255), 337(63),
Pauli, W., 112(27), 353                          355, 362
Pauls, S., 87(164), 103                     Reilly, J. P., 6(59), 10(74-76), 21(95),
Peatman, W. B., 11(80,83-84), 100                 22(76), 30(75,104), 86(59), 87(165),
Pecelli, G., 157(102), 159(102), 356              94(59), 99-101, 103
Pechukas, P., 296(236), 314-315(236),       Reilly, P. T. A,, 69(149), 103
                                            Reinhardt, W. P., 292(22Y), 326(257), 360,
     344(236), 360                               362
Peet, A. C., 247(200), 360                  Reiser, G . , 3(3,5,7,18), 6(7,60-61), 8(18),
Percival, I. C . , 108(10), 219(177),
                                                9(64), 10(3), 13(3), W),18(7),
     326(256), 345(285), 353, 359, 362-363
Pesin, Ya. B . , 173-174(125), 3.57              19(5), 25-26(19), 30(3), 47(7), 85-
Pine, A . S., 24(97), 101                         86(61), 90(64), 92(64), 93(181),
Pique, J.-P., 280-284(216-218), 345(216-         95(182), 98, 100, 104
                                            Reuter, M., 130(78), 136-137(78), 356
     218), 347(216-217), 351(305), 360,     Rice, J. E., 87(166), 103
     364                                    Rice, S. A , , 151(93), 156(101),
Pliva, J . , 20(93), 24(93), 101                 160(105,108), 161(93), 163(114),
Poincare, H., 111(24), 153(24), 353              175( 114), 204( 114), 206-207( 114),
Polik, W. F., 323(252), 351(299), 362-363        224(101), 238(114), 239(93,114), 240-
Pollak, E., 295(235), 296(236-237),              241( 114), 243( 114), 247(200),
      309( 242), 314-315( 236-237),              314(114), 315(114), 319(101),
     344(236), 360                               322(108), 325-328(101), 331(101),
                                                 334(101), 345(285), 349(290), 356-
                                                 357, 360, 363
374  AUTHOR INDEX

Richter, A., 114(48), 227(48), 337(48),     Sander, M., 3(1-2,11), 12(1-2), 16-17(1),
     354                                          18(2,11), 30(11), 47(11), 63(2), 80(2),
                                                  98
Richter, K., 111(23), 156(99-loo),
      169(99-loo), 206(159), 268(23,100),   Sandner, W.. 112(36), 269(36), 325(36),
     325(23,99-loo), 326(99-100,259),             354
     327-328( 23,99-100,259-260), 331(99),
     340(278-279), 353, 356, 358, 362-363   Sands, W. D., 247(200), 360
                                            Saphir, W. C., 350-351(295), 363
Ridyard, J. N. A . , 84(161), 103           Sathyamurthy, N . , 349(290), 363
Riedle, E., 20(92-93), 23-24(92-93,97),     Sato, K . , 89(171), 90(171), 103
                                            Sato, S., 287(221), 360
     27(92), 101                            Schardt, P., 114(48), 227(48), 337(48), 354
Rieger, D., 6(60-61), 85-86(61), 100        Schedletzky, O., 340(280), 363
Ring, H., 351(305), 364                     Scherer, P., 210(168), 359
Rinneberg, H., 112(35), 219(35), 324-       Scherzer, W. G., 95(183), 104
                                            Schiff, L. I., 115(52), 354
     325(35), 348(35), 354                  Schinke, R., 120(62), 267(62), 288(223),
Robbins, J. M., 199-200(150-151),
                                                 289-290(62,223,227), 300(223),
     212(171), 271(171), 358-359                 313(223), 355, 360
Roberts, G., 279(215), 292-294(234),        Schlag, E. W., 3(1-4,11,18), 6(4,60-61),
                                                 8(18), 9(64), lO(3-4), ll(83-84),
     311(234), 315(234), 360                      13(3), 16-17(1,3-4), 18(2,11), 20(3),
Robinson, P. J . , 122(65), 323(65), 355         30(4,11), 47(11), 63(2), 80(2), 89(18),
Robnik, M., 194(146), 358                        90-94(64-65), 95(183), 98, 100, 104
Rod, D. L., 157(102), 159(102), 356         Schmidt, C., 343(281), 363
Rodgers, D., 3(47), 48-50(132), 95(47),     Schneider, R., 26(101), 28(101), 101
                                            Schulman, L. S., 136(82), 351(309), 356,
     99, 102                                     364
Romelt, J., 309(242), 360                   Schutz, M., 89(175), 93-94(175), 103
Rose, T. S . , 258(206), 360                Schwartz, S. D., 219-220(179), 359
Rosenbaum, M . , 123(67), 178(67), 355      Schweizer, H., 340(279), 363
Rosenfeld, L., 118(55), 355                 Schwenke, D. W. 309(243), 351(300), 360-
Rosenqvist, P. E., 206(160), 345(287),           363
                                            Seaton, M. J . , 3(48), 99, 325(255), 362
     358, 363                               Seideman, T . , 192(138), 194(138), 358
Rosker, M., 258(206), 360                   Sekiya, H., 3(8-9), 5(8-9), 12(8-9,85),
Rost, J. M., 327(260), 334-336(267-268),         19(8-9), 22-24( 8), 26-29( 8-9,85),
                                                 69(9), 98, 100
     362                                    Sekreta, E., 6(59), lO(74-76), 22(76),
Rostas, J., 35(123), 102                         30(75,104), 86(59), 94(59), 99-101
Rottke, H., 112(34), 219(34), 268-          Selberg, A , , 202(152), 358
                                            Seligman, T. H., 112(37), 271(37), 324-
     269(34), 324-325(34), 348(34), 354          325(37), 354
Roukes, M. L., 113(40), 161(40), 337-       Selzle, H. L., 95(183), 104
                                            Sepulchre, J.-A., 320-321(249), 324(249),
     338(40), 349(40), 354                       346(249), 361
Rudolph, H., 3(12), 0(76), 22(12,76), 98,   Shapere, A . , 252(202), 261(202), 360
                                            Sharfin, W., 112(32), 353
     100- 101                               Shaw, J., 112(34), 219(34), 268-269(34),
Ruelle, D., 108-109(4), 147(90), 172(124),       324-325(34), 348(34), 354
                                            Shimamura, I . , 292(231), 360
     173(4), 175(124,127), 202(127), 352,   Shirley, D. A , , 10(72), 100
     356-357
Ruf, M. W., 10(71), 100
Rugh, H. H., 206(160), 358
Russberg, G., 206(158),358

Sack, F. R. S., 25(98), 28(98), 101
Sack, R. A . , 25(98), 28(98), 101
Sadeghi, R . , 309(243), 360
Saher, D., 323(253), 351(253), 362
AUTHOR INDEX                                 375

Shudo, A , , 218(176), 228-229(192), 359     Streets, D. G., 21(94), 84(94), 101
Sieber, M., 210(165), 344(284), 358, 363     Strobel, A . , 3(21,23,28), 17(21,23,28), 98-
Siegbahn, K . , lO(68-69), 100
Simo, C., 219(178), 359                            99
Simon, B., 292(229), 360                     Strunz, W. T . , 212(172), 214(172), 359
Sinai, Ya. G . , 153(96), 161(96,109),       Stueckelberg, E. G. C., 247(201),

      172(122), 356-357                            251(201), 348(201), 360
Sitja, G., 280-284(216-217), 34.5(216-       Suto, M., 290(225), 360
                                             Swimm, R. T., 194(143), 358
     217), 347(216-217), 351(305), 360, 364  Syage, J. A , , 96(186), 104
Sjostrand, J., 206( 1S6), 358                Szebehely, V., 331(264), 362
Skodje, R. T., 307(241), 309(243), 360
Smale, S . , 164(116), 298(116), 357         Szepfalusy, P.,173-174( 126), 357
Small, G. J., 87(164), 103
Smilansky, U., 109(17), 113(42), 114(48),    Szeredi, T., 209(163), 358

      130(78), 136-137(78), 154(97),         Tabanov, M. B., 219(178), 359
      161(42), 227(48), 337-338( 42,48),     Tabor, M., 159(104), 219(104), 220-
     344(284), 349(42,290-291), 3S1(42),
     353-354, 356, 363                            221(180), 345(180), 356, 359
Smith, F. T., 121-122(64), 178(64), 355      Takahashi, M., 8(63), 47(131), 100, 102
Smith, J. M . , 3(6,22,35), 15(35), 63(35),  Tanner, G . , 111(23), 156(99-loo),
     94-95(22), 98-99
Softley, T. P., 3(19,2S,37), 6(19,2S-26),          169(99-loo), 206( 1S9), 209(163),
      15-17(26), 63(9,25), 98-99                  210( 167-168), 268(23,100), 325(23,99-
Sokolov, V. V., 323(253), 351(253), 362            loo), 326(99-loo), 327-328(23,99-
Soldagi, D., 3(42), 26(42), 95(42), 99             loo), 331(99), 353, 356, 358-359
Solgadi, D., 88(168), 103                    Tapper, R. S . , 71(151), 103
Solov'ev, E. A., 327(260), 362               Taylor, H. S., 307(240), 360
Someda, K . , 349(290), 363                  Tel, T., 173-174(126), 357
Song, X., 10(76), 22(76), 87(165), 100,      Teller, E., 4(54), 21(54), 99
     103                                     Terenin, A. N., 10-11(67), 100
Sornette, D., 114(49), 354                   Tersigni, S. H., 160(105), 356
Southworth, S . , 10(72), 100                Teukolsky, S. A., 304(245), 360
Spiers, M., 84(161), 103                     Thirring, W., 118(58), 121(64), 122(58,64),
Spirko, V., 9(65), 91-94(65), 100                  178(58,64), 355
Spohr, R., 11(79), 100                       Thomas, L. H., 112(30), 268(30), 353
Springborg, M . , 155(97), 187(98), 356      Thomas, R. G., 241(194), 292(231),
Srednicki, M., 351(307), 364                      322(194), 360
Staecker, J . , 3(21,28), 17(21,28), 98-99   Thurwachter, R . , 327(260), 362
Steadman, J., 96(186), 104                   Tiller, A . R., 247(200), 360
Steiger, A , , 311(246), 360                 Tomoda, S., 89(170), 103
Steil, G . , 344(282), 363                   Tomsovic, S., 120(61), 162(61), 290(61),
Steiner, F., 210(165), 344(282), 358, 363         312(61), 351(308), 3.55, 364
Stephens, J. A . , 3(44), 30(112-113),       Tonkyn, R. G . , 3(13,30-32), 17(13),
     54(135), 55(44), 99, 101-102                 30(13,114,140), 45(130),
Stephenson, T. A , , 247(200), 360                47(30,130,140), 48-49( 140), 54(31),
Stewart, I., 223(186), 359                        55-.57(32), 62(140), 63(30,140),
Stock, G., 267(209), 360                          80(30,140), 98-99, 101-102
Stone, A . D., 113(43), 161(43), 338(43),    Toriyama, K . , 5(57), 21(57), 99
     349(43), 354                            Tramer, A., 88(168), 103
Stovneng, J. A,, 121-122(64), 178(64),       Tromp, J. W., 219-220(179), 359
     355                                     Truesdale, C. M., 10(72), 100
                                             Truhlar, D. G . , 252-253(203), 309(243),
                                                  351(300), 360, 363
                                             Turchetti, G., 173-174(126), 357
376  AUTHOR INDEX

Turner, D. W., 3(52), 10-11(52,66),                 61(139), 63(141), 69(141), 99, 101-
      84(52), 99-100                                102
                                              Wang, X., 290(225), 360
Turner, J.-W., 245(196), 360                  Watanabe. K., 286-287(220), 289(220),
Tworkowski, A. S . , 326(256), 362                  360
                                              Watson, J. K. G., 112(31), 271(211), 353,
Ullmo, D., 340(278), 362                            360
Upstill, C., 223(185), 359                    Weber, T., 20(92), 23-24(92), 27(92), 101
Uzer, T., 194(144), 358                       Weidenmuller, H. A,, 113(45), 114(48),
                                                    196(147), 227(48), 269(147),
Vaienti, S., 173-174(126), 357                      337(45,48), 349(45), 354, 358
Van Craen, 112(31), 353                       Weigert, S . , 247(198-199), 248(199), 360
van der Velt, T., 112(34), 219(34), 268-      Weimann, G., 340(279), 363
                                              Weinhold, F., 88(167), 103
      269(34), 324-325(34), 348(34), 354      Weiss, D., 340(279), 363
van der Waerden, B. L., 108(9), 111(9),       Weisshaar, J. C., 3(27), 88(167), 99, 103
                                              Welch, G . R . , 112(33), 269(33), 324(33),
      352                                           354
van Ede van der Pals, P., 344(283), 363       Welge, K. H., 112(34), 219(34), 268-
van Houten, H., 113(40), 161(40), 337-              269(34), 324-325(34), 348(34), 354
                                              Wentzel, G . , 112(28), 353
      338(40), 349(40), 354                   Werme, L. O . , 10(69), 100
Van Vleck, J. H., 119(60), 128(76), 355       Westervelt, R. M., 113(41), 161(41),
Vander Auwera, J., 112(31), 353                    227(41), 337-338(41), 349(41), 354
Vassen, W., 112(34), 219(34), 268-269(34),    Westwood, N. P. C., 30(111-112), 101
                                              Weyl, H., 123(67), 178(67), 355
      324-325( 34), 348(34), 354              Wharton, L., 112(32), 353
Vattay, G., 206(160), 347(287), 358, 363      Whetten, R. L., 25(100), 71(151), 101,
Vetterling, V. T., 304(245), 360                    103, 259(208), 262(208), 360
Vilesov, F. I.; 10-11(67), 100                White, M. G., 3(13,20,30-32), 16(20),
Visvanathan, K. S . , 6(59), 86(59), 94(59),        17(13), 19(89), 30(13,20,114,140), 43-
                                                   46(129-130), 47(30,130,140), 48-
      99                                           49(140), 54(31), 55-57(32,139), 58-
Viswanathan, K. S., lO(74-75),                     59(139), 61(139-140), 62(140),
                                                   63(30,140), 80(30,140), 98-99, 101-
      30(75,104), 100-1 01                          102
Vivaldi, F., 152(94), 356                     Widmer, R., 20(91), 101
von Klitzing, K., 340(279), 363               Wiebusch, G., 112(34), 219(34), 268-
von Neumann, J., 259(207), 360                     269(34), 324-325(34), 348(34), 354
von Niessen, W., 26(101), 28(101),            Wiedmann, R . T., 3(30-32), 19(89), 43-
                                                   46(129-130), 47(30,130,140), 48-
      83(160), 84(162), 101, 103                   49(140), 54(31), 55-57(32), 58-
Voros, A,, 108(6), 159(104), 176(129),             59(139), 60(89,139), 61-63( 30,139-
                                                    140), 80(30,140), 99, 101-102
      178(130), 187(129), 195(130),           Wiggins, S . , 153(95), 170(95), 356
     203(154), 219(104), 352, 356-358         Wigner, E. P., 112(29), 121-122(64),
Voth, G. A., 114(50), 354                          123(29), 178(29,64), 259(207),
                                                   292(231), 322(251), 3.53, 355, 360, 362
Wallenstein, R., 32(120), 102                 Wilczek, F., 252(202), 261(202), 360
Waller, I. M., 3(14-15), 69(15), 98           Wilkerson, C. W., 87(164), 103
Walters, P., 167(119), 174(119), 207(119),

     357
Wang, K., 3(32,44), 30-33(112-113,116-

     118) 35-37(116), 40(116,118),]
     42(117), 43-46(129-130), 47(130),
     48(132), 49(116,132), 50(132),
     51(116,132-133), 52(132-133),
     54(135), 55-57(32,44,136,139), 58-
AUTHOR INDEX                                 377

Wilkinson, M., 228-229( 191), 359            Zacharias, H., 32(120), 102
Willetts, A . , 192(137), 357                Zachariasen, F., 123-124(69), 178(69),
Williams, T. A , , 21(94), 84(94), 101
Wilson, D. J., 11(80), 100                        275(69), 355
Wilson, W. G., 10(74), 100                   Zare, R. N., 3(46), 10(46,77), 15(46),
Winniczek, J. W., 3(13), 17(13), 30(13),
                                                  30(77,103,148), 35(123), 36-37(124),
     98                                           40( 124), 49(124), 51(124,148),
Wintgen, D., 109(18), 111(23), 149(92),           69(148,150), 99-103
                                             Zener, C., 247(201), 251(201), 348(201),
     156(99-loo), 169(99-loo), 200(92),           360
     206(159), 210(167-168), 224(189),       Zewail, A. H., 113(39), 258(206),
     268(18,23,100), 325(18,23,99-IOO),           279(215), 292-294(232-234), 311(232-
     326(99-100,259), 327-328(23,99-              234), 313(232-234), 344(39), 354, 360
     100,259-260), 331(99), 340(274), 353,   Zhang, X., 3(22,35), 15(35), 63(35), 94-
     356, 358-359, 362                            95(22), 98-99
Wirzba, A . , 243(195), 246(195), 347(287),  Zhao, M., 345(285), 363
     360, 363                                Zhu, L., 3(40-41), 26(41), 95(41), 99
Wong, S. S. M., 241(194), 322(194), 360      Zhu, Y.-F., 63(141a), 65-68(141b),
Woste, L., 259(208), 262(208), 360                69(141a), 102
Wright, T. G . , 6(61), 85-86(61), 89(172),  Ziman, J. M., 310(244), 360
     91(177-179), 100, 103-104               Zimmerman, M. L., 112(33), 269(33),
Wunner, G., 113(44), 349(44), 354                 324(33), 354
                                             Zinn-Justin, J., 108(6), 352
Xie, J . , 30(148), 36-37(124), 40(124),     Zwanzig, R., 161(109), 357
     49(124), 51(124,148), 69(148), 102-     Zwanziger, J. W., 259(208), 262(208), 360
     I 03                                    Zweifel, P. F., 123(67), 178(67), 355
                                             Zwerger, W., 114(50), 354
Xie, Y., 69(149), 103

Yoshiuchi, H . , 89(171), 90(171), 103
Young, J. W., 114(49), 354
    Advances In Chemical Physics, VolumeXC
            Edited by I. Prigogine, StuartA. Rice

Copyright © 1995 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

SUBJECT INDEX

ABA molecules:                                  Atomic systems:
   molecular transition state, vs. ABC             semiclassical electronic regimes, 324-341
      molecules, 314-316                             highly excited electronic states, 324-
   scattering resonances, chemical reaction          327
      dynamics, 344-345                              hydrogen negative ion, 327-337
                                                     mesoscopic semiconducting devices,
ABC molecules:                                       337-341
   molecular transition state, vs. ABA            semiclassical quantization, 268-269
      molecules, 314-316
   scattering resonances, chemical reaction     Autocorrelation function, wavepacket
      dynamics, 344-345                              propagation, 311-312

ab initio theory:                               Autoionization:
   para-Difluorobenzene cation (p-DFB):           nitrogen dioxide, 80-83
      self-consistent field computations, 87-     Rydberg couplings, 13-15
      88
      vibrationally resolved structure, 83-84  Benzene cations:
   nitric oxide analysis, 3                       rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 19-
   origins of ZEKE and, 10-11                        29
   phenol-water cation ZEKE spectra                  electronic ground state, 20-25
      compared with, 92-94                           6' (e2g)excited Jahn-Teller state, 25-
   rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 19            29
   ZEKE spectroscopy and, 10, 30                  ZEKE analysis of, 4-5

Adiabatic methods:                             Berry-Tabor trace formula:
   phenol-water cations, 91                       bounded molecular systems, carbon
   semiclassical regimes, 111                        disulfide molecules, 283-286
                                                  eriodic-orbit quantization, nonisolated
Agaronov-Bohm effect, isotropic conical              orbits, 220-222
     intersections, 261-262                       scattering resonances, chemical reaction
                                                    dynamics, 345
Ammonia molecules, vs. ZEKE analysis of
     benzene cations, 19-20                    Bifurcations:
                                                  atomic and solid-state systems, highly
Anharmonicities:                                    excited electronic states, 325-327
   h-expansion and, 347-349                         bounded molecular systems, carbon
   trace of the propagator, Morse                   disulfide molecules, 284-285
     oscillator, 189-190                          h-expansion and anharmonicity, 348
                                                  molecular transition state:
Arnold diffusion:                                   ABA-ABC molecule comparisons,
   molecular transition state, nonseparable         314-316
     and statistical regimes, 322                   mercuric iodide (HgI2) system, 297-
   phase-space structures, 154                      299
                                                 periodic-orbit quantization, 222-223
+ Asymmetric tops, (B 1') REMPI process,            2F system tunneling, 218

     37-41                                     Billiard systems. See also specific billiard
  parity selection rules, 40-41                     systems classical mechanics, 153-154
  photoelectron matrix, 40
  rotationally resolved photoelectron

     spectra, 37-39
Atomic particle scattering, semiclassical

     regimes, 120-123

                                               379
380  SUBJECT INDEX

   mesoscopic semiconducting devices, 338-    Carbon monoxide (CO), single-photon
      341                                           ionization, 48-51

   periodic-orbit quantization, zero length   Cauchy's theory:
      paths, 196-197                             quantum observables, photoabsorption
                                                    cross section, 226-227
   phase-space structures, 161-164               semiclassical regimes:
   quantum billiards, 227-246                       overview, 110
                                                    probability conservation and Van
      degenerate periodic orbits, 234-236           Vleck-Morette matrix, 127-129
      disk scattering applications, 238-246
      multiple scattering expansion, 228-230  Ceiling function, phase-space structures,
      periodic orbits, 233-234                      151-153
      resummation, 237-238
      stationary phase integration, 230-232   CH, molecules, single-photon ionization,
      wave equations, 227-228                       60-62
Birkhoff coordinates:
   billiard systems, 162                      Chaos phenomenon:
   symbolic dynamics, Smale horseshoe,           billiard systems, 161-164
      168-169                                    semiclassical regimes, overview, 109-111
Bohr frequency, molecular vibrograms,
      274-278                                 Charge interaction, phenol-water cations,
Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization                       91
   atomic and solid-state systems, 327-328
   matrix Hamiltonians, isotropic conical     Chemical reaction dynamics, scattering
      intersections, 262-265                       resonances and, 344-345
   molecular transition state, intermediate
      regime, 307-309                         Circle billiards:
   periodic-orbit quantization, Selberg and      classical mechanics, 162
     Ruelle zeta functions, 204-205              periodic-orbit quantization:
   semiclassical quantization, 111                 trace of the propagator, 186-187
Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approximation:               zero length paths, 196-197
   molecular vibrograms, 278
   Hamiltonian matrices, 269-271              Classical dynamics:
   rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 25-       chaos theory and, 341-344
     26                                         flowchart of Hamiltonian and classical-
  semiclassical properties, 272-273                semiclassical regimes, 341-342
Bounded systems:                                molecular transition state, mercuric
  molecular vibrograms, 279-286                    iodide (HgI,) system, 295-301
     carbon disulfide Fermi resonance,          periodic orbits and quantum spectra,
     280-286                                       341-344
     Morse-type model, 279-280                  phase-space structures:
  periodic-orbit quantization, zeta                billiards, 161-164
     functions, 209-210                            Hamiltonian mappings, 159-161
  phase-space structures, 154                      Hamiltonian systems, 154-159
Breit-Wigner theory, nonseparable and              linear stability, 146-153
     statistical regimes, 322                      mechanical system examples, 153-164
Bunimovich stadium. See Stadium billiard           overview, 110
                                                   h a l e horseshoe and symbolic
Cantor sets, Smale horseshoe mapping,              dynamics, 164-170
     166 -                                         thermodynamic formalism, 170-175
                                                semiclassical regimes, overview, 108-111
Carbon disulfide, bounded molecular
     vibrogram, 280-286                       Coherent extreme ultraviolet (XUV),
                                                   carbon monoxide and nitrogen
                                                   compounds, 48-51

                                              Collinear motion, hydrogen negative ion
                                                   (H-), 328-333

                                              Complex energies of scattering resonances:
SUBJECT INDEX                                 381

  matrix Hamiltonians:                          HC1 and DCI compounds, spin-orbit
     isotropic conical intersections, 265          relaxation and rotational coupling, 64-
     surface hopping, 258-259                      70

  molecular transition state, low-energy        ionization of ZEKE Rydberg states, 13-
     regimes, 306-307                              16

  nitrogen dioxide, 76-80                       ZEKE detection and, 12
Computational procedures, zero-kinetic-       Deuteration effects, ZEKE analysis and, 9
                                              Deuterium chloride, delayed pulsed-field
     energy (ZEKE) photoelectron
     techniques, 42-43                             threshold photoionization, 64-69
Conical intersections, matrix Hamiltonians,   Deuterium sulfide, unbounded molecular
     259-267
  anisotropic intersections, 265-267               vibrogram, 0
  isotropic intersections, 259-265            Diagonal matrices:
Convergence, periodic-orbit quantization:
  bounded systems, 209-210                      Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian, 270-
  Ruelle zeta function, 205-206                    27 1
Cooper minima:
                                                matrix Hamiltonians, 248-253
  single-photon ionization, OH (2 + 1 )         quantum observables, 223-226
                                              para-Difluorobenzene cation (p-DFB),
     REMPI analysis, 54
  ZEKE spectroscopy theory and                     vibrationally resolved structure, 83-88
                                                S,Oo state, 84
     formulation, 30                             S16' state, 84-87
Coriolis coupling constants, rotationally       self-consistent ab initio computations,

     resolved ZEKE spectra, 28                     87-88
Coriolis interaction parameters, rotational-     Zeke spectra, 84
                                              Dirac distribution, isotropic conical
     vibrational Hamiltonian, 271-272
Coulomb potential:                                 intersections, 261-262
                                              Direct ionization, ZEKE intensity
   atomic systems, 325-327
   Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian, 269-              deviations, 62-70
                                                 rotational line intensities, 64-69
     271                                         spin-orbit relaxation and rotational
  hydrogen negative ion (H-):
                                                   coupling, 64-70
     classical dynamics, 329-333                 transition intensities to HCI' spin-orbit
     semiclassical quantization, 336-337
  molecular vibrograms, 275-278                    substrates, 69-70
   scattering resonances, chemical reaction   Dirichlet boundary conditions:
     dynamics, 344-345
   semiclassical quantization, 267-268, 272-     Feynman path integrators, 139-140
     273
Critical points, semiclassical regimes, 134-    hydrogen negative ion (H-)3,34
      136
Cumulative distribution function, quantum        periodic-orbit quantization, zero length
     billiards, 240-241                            paths, 196-197
Cycle expansion method, quantum
     billiards. 238-245                          quantum billiards, 227-228
                                                   multiple scattering expansion, 228-230
Darling-Dennison interaction, equilibrium-
     point quantization, 193-194              Discrete-continuum interactions, ZEKE
                                                   intensity deviations, 62
de Broglie wave theory, semiclassical
     regimes, 111                             Discrete-discrete coupling:
                                                 HCliDCl compounds, 66-67
Delayed pulsed-field threshold                   ZEKE intensity deviations, 62-63
     photoionization                             nitrogen dioxide, 79-80

                                              Disk scatterers. See also Two-disk and
                                                   Three-disk scatterers class chaos,
                                                    periodic orbits and quantum spectra,
                                                    343-344

                                                 classical mechanics, 163-164
382  SUBJECT INDEX

   hydrogen negative ion (H-), 337                 unstable and isolated orbits, 197-201
   mesoscopic semiconducting devices, 338-         zero length paths, 195-197
                                                phase-space structures, linear stability,
      341                                          152-153
   quantum billiards, 238-246                Environmental fluctuation, semiclassical
                                                   regimes, 114
      three-disk scatterers, 238-245         Equilibrium point quantization:
      two-disk scatterers, 245-246              integral evaluation, 190-193
   symbolic dynamics, Smale horseshoe,          linear inonlinear stabilities, 179-183
      168-170                                   molecular transition state:
Double-well potential, periodic-orbit              dynamics of, 314
      quantization, 214-217                        large molecule bending and extension,
Doubly excited electronic states:                  316-319
   atomic and solid-state systems, 325-327         mercuric iodide (HgI,) system, 301-
   semiclassical regimes, historical               303
      background, 112-113                          nonseparable regimes, 321-322
Dunham expansion:                                  overview, 292
   equilibrium-point quantization, 193-194         rotational motion, 320-321
   molecular transition state:                     statistical regimes, 321-322
      high-energy regime, 309-310               vs. periodic-orbit quantization, 345-346
      low-energy regimes, 306-307               phase-space structures, linear stability,
      mercuric iodide (Hgl,) system, 301-          150-151
      303                                       theory, 190-194
                                                trace of the propagator, Feynman path
EBK quantization condition, nonisolated           integral, 179
     orbits, 220-222                         Ergodic systems, linear stability, 147-148
                                             eZe configuration, hydrogen negative ion
Effective uncoupled potentials, matrix            (H--):
     Hamiltonians, 254-256                      classical dynamics, 328-333
                                                semiclassical quantization, 333-337
Eigenvalues:
   Feynman path integrators, Jacobi-Hill     Femtosecond laser techniques:
     equation, 136-139                          molecular transition state, mercuric
   molecular transition state, large              iodide experiments, 292
     molecule bending and extension, 318-      semiclassical regimes:
     319                                          historical background, 113
  phase-space structures, linear stability,       light interactions, 120
     151-153
  semiclassical limits and, 349-351          Fermi resonance:
                                               bounded molecular vibrogram, carbon
Eigenvectors, isotropic conical                   disulfide, 280-286
     intersections, 259-265                    equilibrium-point quantization, 193-194
                                               mesoscopic semiconducting devices, 340-
Electronic states:                                341
  atomic and solid-state systems, highly
     excited states, 324-327                 Fermi-Thomas-Weyl-Wignearverage level
  benzene cations, rotationally resolved          density, 195-197
     ZEKE spectra, 20-25
                                             Feynman diagrams, quantum billiards,
Elementary catastrophes, bifurcations, 223        degenerate periodic orbits, 235-236
Energy domain:
                                             Feynman path integrals:
  equilibrium point quantization, 190-194      quantum billiards, 228
  periodic orbit quantization, 194-223         semiclassical regimes:

     bifurcations, 222-223
     complex orbits, 212-220
     dynamical zeta functions, 201-211
     nonisolated orbits, 220-222
SUBJECT INDEX                                 383

      classical Green function as Jacoi-Hill        carbon monoxide and nitrogen
      resolvent, 139-140                           compounds, 48-51
      h-expansion of propagator, 141-145            H,CO molecules, 57-60
      overview, 114                                 nitric oxide analysis, 43-45
      propagator as, 132-134                        OH compounds, 45-48
      quantum time evolution and, 114-146          water molecules, 56-57
      second variation and Hacobi-Hill        Gaussian integral:
      equation, 136-139                          Feynman path integrators:
      stationary-phase integration, 134-136        h-expansion of propagator, 143-145
   trace of the propagator, 178-179                semiclassical regimes, 134-136
      equilibrium points, 179-183               periodic-orbit quantization:
Fortrat parabola, nitrogen dioxide                 Maslov index, 199-201
      rotational structure, 75-77                  stationary-phase integration, 198-199
Fourier transforms:                              trace of the propagator:
   atomic and solid-state systems, 325-327         equilibrium points, 179-183
   equilibrium-point quantization, 190-194         periodic orbits, 183-187
   molecular transition state, wavepacket     Gaussian window:
      propagation, 311-313                      bounded molecular systems, 279-286
   molecular vibrograms, 276-278                carbon disulfide molecules, 281-282
   periodic-orbit quantization, 197-199       Generating partition, Smale horseshoe,
   semiclassical regimes:                          166-168
      absorption spectrum, 120                Geometric phase, matrix Hamiltonians,
      propagator and Green operator, 115-          259-267
      118                                       anisotropic conical intersection, 265-267
      propagators, 131-132                      isotropic conical intersection, 259-265
   unbounded molecular systems:               Green function
      carbon dioxide molecules, 286-290         atomic particle scatteriilg:
      hydrogen and deuterium sulfide               reaction rates, 122-123
      molecules, 290-291                           scattering resonances, 121
Franck-Condon factor:                              time delay, 121-122
   para-ditluorobenzene cation (p-DFB),         equilibrium-point quantization, 191-193
      84-87                                     Feynman path integrators:
   nitrogen dioxide, 71-72                         h-expansion of propagator, 144-145
   phenol-water cation ZEKE spectra, 92            Jacobi-Hill operator resolvent, 139-
   vibrational symmetry selection rules, 7-9       140
Fredholm determinant, quantum billiards:        molecular transition state:
   multiple scattering expansion, 229-230          rotational motion, 320-321
   periodic orbits, 237-238                        wavepacket propagation, 311-313
Full-width at half-maximum (fwhm)               periodic-orbit quantization:
     parameters, nitric oxide analysis, 43-        Maslov index, 199-201
     45                                            unstable and isolated orbits, 197-201
                                                quantum billiards:
Gamow vectors, propagator and Green                multiple scattering expansion, 228-230
     operator, 118                                 periodic orbit contributions, 233-234
                                                   wave equations, 228
Gaspard-Rice lengthening, molecular             quantum observables, photoabsorption
     transition state, 314                         cross section, 226-227
                                                semiclassical quantization:
Gaussian detection function                        propagator and, 114-118
  periodic-orbit quantization, bounded             trace and level density, 118-119
     systems, 210
  single-photon ionization:
384  SUBJECT INDEX

  time domain, 175                              Coulomb Hamiltonian, 267-268, 272-
  trace of the propagator:                         273

     equilibrium points, 180-181                Coulomb/ B0 potential comparisons,
     periodic orbits, 185-187                      272-273
Gutzwiller density formula, zeta functions,
     201-202                                    equilibrium-point quantization, 193-194
Gutzwiller trace formula:                       flowchart of classical-semiclassical
  h-expansion and anharmonicity, 347-349
  molecular transition state, intermediate         regimes and, 341-342
     regime, 307-309                            matrix Hamiltonians, 246-267
  molecular vibrograms, 274-278
  periodic-orbit quantization, nonisolated         conical intersection and geometric
     orbits, 221-222                               phase, 259-267
  scattering resonances, chemical reaction         diagonalization, 248-253
     dynamics, 345                                 two-surface 1F model and surface
  zeta functions and, 341-344                      hopping, 253-259
                                                molecular systems, 269-272
h-Expansion                                        Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian, 269-
   anharmonicities and, 347-349                    273
   Feynman path integrators                        rotational-vibrational Hamiltonian,
     expansion of propagator, 141-145              271-272
   matrix Hamiltonians, 247                     phase-space structures:
     diagonal matrices, 252-253                    harmonic oscillator, 154-159
     overview, 110                                 Henon-Heiles Hamiltonian, 157-159
     two-surface one-degree-of-freedom             linear stability, 148-153
     model, 254-255                                Morse oscillator, 155-156
  periodic-orbit quantization                     quartic oscillator, 154-155
     vs. equilibrium point quantization,          two-electron atomic system, 156-157
     345-346                                    quantum observables:
     zeta functions, 211                          diagonal matrix elements, 223-226
   semiclassical quantization, overview,          photoabsorption cross section, 226-
     109-111                                      227
  time domain, 175-190                          semiclassical regimes:
     equilibrium points, 179-183                  atomic particle scattering, 120-123
     harmonic oscillator, 187                     Feynman path integrators, 133-134
     Morse oscillator, 187-190                    light interactions, 119-120
     overview, 110                                overview, 109-111
     path integral, 178-179                       propagator and Green operator, 115-
     periodic orbits, 183-187                     118
     regularization, 175-178                      trace and level density, 118-119
     short-time behavior, 178                     Weyl-Wigner representation, 123-124
                                               short-wavelength asymptotics, 124-127
H,CO molecules, single-photon ionization,    Hamiltonian mapping:
     57-60                                     mercuric iodide (HgI,) dissociation
                                                  classical dynamics, 295-301
Hamilton-Jacobi equation:                         from flow to mapping, 295-297
  probability conservation and Van Vleck-         mapping properties, 297-299
     Morette matrix, 127-129                      return to flow, 299-301
  short-wavelength asymptotics, 125-127        molecular transition state, ABA and
                                                  ABC molecular repellers, 314-316
Hamiltonian equations:                         phase-space structures, 159-161
  atomic systems, 268-269                      symbolic dynamics, Smale horseshoe,
                                                  168-170
SUBJECT INDEX                                385

Hankel function, quantum billiards:          High-energy regime, molecular transition
  degenerate periodic orbits, 235-236              state, 309-310
  multiple scattering expansion, 228-230
   stationary phase method, 230-232          Hilbert space, propagator trace formula,
                                                   175-178
Hard walls concept, classical mechanics,
      153-154                                Homoclinic orbits:
                                                hydrogen negative ion (H-), classical
Harmonic oscillator:                               dynamics, 331
   phase-space structure, 154                   phase-space structures, linear stability,
   trace of the propagator, 187                    153
                                                scattering resonances, chemical reaction
Hartley ozone band, molecular transition           dynamics, 345
     state:                                     symbolic dynamics, Smale horseshoe,
                                                   170
  large molecule bending and extension,
     319                                     Homogenization of the spectrum, trace of
                                                   the propagator, 176-178
   mercuric iodide (HgI,) system, 300-301
Hartree-Fock models, Rydberg states          Hund's cases:

     computation, 42-43                        (n + 1') REMPI process, linear
Hausdorff dimension:
                                                  molecules, 33-37
  phase-space structures, thermodynamic         delayed pulsed-field threshold
     formalism, 174-175
                                                  photoionization, 69-70
   Smale horseshoe, symbolic dynamics,          ZEKE spectroscopy theory and
      166-168
                                                  formulation, 30
Heaviside function:                          Husimi transform, molecular vibrograms,
  Feynman path integrators, Jacobi-Hill
     equation, 139                                277-278
  periodic-orbit quantization, zero length   Hydrogen-bonded complexes:
     paths, 195-197
                                                vibrationally resolved structures, 88-89
Heisenberg uncertainty relations                ZEKE spectroscopy and, 96-97
  class chaos, periodic orbits and quantum   Hydrogen chloride:
     spectra, 343-344                           delayed pulsed-field threshold
  matrix mechanics, semiclassical regimes,
     111                                          photoionization, 64-70
  Morse-type molecular vibrograms, 279-           rotational line intensitites, 64-69
     280                                          transition intensities of spin-orbit
                                                  substates, 69-70
Helmholtz equation:                             ZEKE intensity deviations, 63-64
  periodic-orbit quantization, staircase     Hydrogen fluoride, delayed pulsed-field
     function, 196-197                            threshold photoionization, 69-70
  quantum billiards:                         Hydrogen negative ion (El-):
     multiple scattering expansion, 228-230    atomic and solid-state systems, 327-337
     wave equation generalities, 227-228       classical dynamics, 328-333
                                             Hydrogen sulfide, unbounded molecular
HCnon-Heiles Hamiltonian:                         vibrogram, 290-291
  phase-space structure, 157-159             Hyperbolicity, Smale horseshoe mapping,
  periodic-orbit quantization, 218-219            166

Htnon mapping, phase-space structures,       Improved virtual orbital method, Rydberg
     160                                          states computation, 42-43

Hermitian matrix:                            Intermediate regimes, molecular transition
  matrix Hamiltonians, 249-250                    state, 307-309
  quantum observables, diagonal matrix
     elements, 224-226                       Intermolecular vibrations:
                                               ab initio calculations compared with, 94
Hessian matrix, equilibrium points, 179-
     183
386  SUBJECT INDEX

  phenol-water cation ZEKE spectra, 91-      Lagrangian manifold, periodic-orbit
     92                                           quantization:

Intramolecular vibrations:                      Maslov index, 200-201
  nitrogen dioxide, 76-80                       nonisolated orbits, 221
  phenol-water cation ZEKE spectra           Landau-von Neumann equation:
     compared with ab initio calculations,      molecular vibrograms, 275-278
     93-94                                      semiclassical limits and, 349-351
  ZEKE intensity deviations, 62              Langmuir orbit, hydrogen negative ion

Iodine molecules, Morse-type molecular            (H-), 329
     vibrogram, 279-280                      Laplace transform:

Ionization energy (IE):                         quantum billiards, 227-228
  delayed pulsed-field ionization, 13-15        semiclassical regimes, propagator and
  phenol-water cations, 90-91
                                                  Green operator, 115-118
Jacobi-Hill equation:                           trace of the propagator, 177
  Feynman path integrators:                  Laser experiments, zero-kinetic-energy
     Green function as resolvent, 139-140
     h-expansion of propagator, 142-145           (ZEKE) photoelectron techniques,
     second variation, 136-139                     16-17
  phase-space structures, linear stability,  Lebesgue measure, Smale horseshoe
     147-153                                      mapping, 166
  short-wavelength asymptotics,              LEPS-type potential surface, unbounded
     semiclassical regimes, 129-131               molecular systems, 287-289
                                             Level density, periodic-orbit quantization:
Jahn-Teller effect:                             dynamical zeta functions, 201-202
  rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra:          Fermi-Thomas-Weyl-Wignearverages,
     benzene cations, 21-25                       195-197
     6' (eZg)excited states, 25-29           Light interactions, semiclassical regimes,
  ZEKE analysis, benzene cations, 4-6             119-120
                                             Linear molecules:
KAM theorem, equilibrium-point
     quantization, 193-194                     + (n 1') REMPI process for, 31-37

Kicked Morse oscillator, phase-space              parity selection rules, 36-37
     structures, 160                              photoelectron matrix element, 35-36
                                                  rotationally resolved photoelectron
Kolmogorov-Sinai (KS) entropy:                    spectra, 31-35
  periodic-orbit quantization, zeta            single-photon ionization:
     functions, 206                               carbon monoxide and nitrogen
  quantum billiards, three-disk scatterers,       compounds, 48-51
     240-241
  phase-space structures, thermodynamic          HBr (2 + 1 ) REMPI analysis, 51-53
     formalism, 173-175
                                                  nitric oxide, 43-45
Kramers-Heisenberg-Dirac relation, light          OH compounds, 45-48
     interactions, 120
                                                OH (2 + 1 ) REMPI analysis, 53-54
Lagrangian equations:
  Feynman path integrators:                  Linear stability analysis:
     propagators as, 133-134                   classical dynamics:
     second variation and Jacobi-Hill             hydrogen negative ion (H-), 331-333
     equation, 136-139                            phase-space structures, 146-153
  semiclassical regimes, propagators, 131-     h-expansion and anharmonicity, 348-349
     132                                       matrix Hamiltonians, 247
  short-wavelength asymptotics, 129-131        molecular transition state, mercuric
                                                  iodide system, 296-297
                                               short-wavelength asymptotics, Jacobi-Hill
                                                  equation, 129- 131

                                             Liouville equation:
SUBJECT INDEX                               387

  semiclassical quantization:                 quantum billiards, periodic orbit
     limits and, 350-351                         contributions, 234
     Weyl-Wigner representation, 124
                                              semiclassical propagators, 111, 131-132
  molecular vibrograms, 275-278             Mass analyzed threshold ionization
Lippmann-Schwinger equation, Rydberg
                                                 (MATI) :
     states computation, 43                   pulsed separation fields, 96-97
Lorentz billiards:                            rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 26-

  disk cluster configuration, 163-164            27
  wave equations, 227-228                   Matrix Hamiltonians:
Low-energy regimes:
  bounded molecular systems, 281-282          conical intersection and geometric phase,
  molecular transition state, 303-307            259-267
Lyapunov exponents:
  atomic and solid-state systems, 327         diagonalization, 248-253
  hydrogen negative ion (H-), 337             h-expansion and anharmonicity, 348-349
  mercuric iodide (HgI2) dissociation, 294    molecular transition state, 324
  molecular transition state, 291             two-surface 1F model and surface

     high-energy regime, 309-310                 hopping, 253-259
     intermediate regime, 307-309           Matrix isolation electron spin resonance,
     large molecule bending and extension,
     317-319                                     4-5
     low-energy regimes, 306-307            Mercuric iodide (HgI,):
     mercuric iodide (HgI2) system, 302-
     303                                      molecular transition state:
  periodic-orbit quantization:                   classical dynamics and Hamiltonian
     bounded systems, 209-210                    mapping, 295-301
     convergence and topological pressure,       overview, 293-295
     zeta functions, 206                         transition state dynamics, 313-314
     h-corrections, 211                          wavepacket propagation, 313
     trace of the propagator, 185-187
  phase-space structures                      scattering resonances, chemical reaction
     linear stability, 147-153                   dynamics, 344-345
     thermodynamic formalism, 172-175
  quantum billiards, 233-234                Molecular clusters. See also Billiard
  scattering resonances, chemical reaction       systems.
     dynamics, 344-345
  stadium billiard. 162-163                   ZEKE analysis of, 8-9
                                            Molecular Hamiltonian systems,
Markov chain, zeta function
      approximation, 207-210                     semiclassical quantization, 269-272
                                            Molecular Rydberg states, delayed pulsed-
Maslov index:
   hydrogen negative ion (H-):                   field ionization, 13-16
      classical dynamics, 328               Molecular transition states, 292-324
      semiclassical quantization, 333-334
   matrix Hamiltonians, isotropic conical     ABA vs. ABC molecules, 314-316
      intersections, 262-265                  classical dynamics and Hamiltonian
   periodic-orbit quantization, 199-201
      nonisolated orbits, 220-222                mapping, 295-301
      zeta function approximation, 207-209    equilibrium point quantization:
      trace of the propagator, 185-186
                                                 dynamics of, 314
                                                 large molecule bending and extension,
                                                 316-319
                                                 mercuric iodide (HgI,) system, 301-
                                                 303
                                                 nonseparable regimes, 321-322
                                                 overview, 292
                                                 rotational motion, 320-321
                                                 statistical regimes, 321-322
                                              high-energy regime, 309-310
                                              intermediate regime, 307-309
                                               low-energy regimes, 303-307
388  SUBJECT INDEX

    matrix Hamiltonians, 324                     molecular transition state:
    mercuric iodide (HgI2) system:                  high-energy regime, 309-310
                                                    low-energy regimes, 304-305
      Dunham expansion, 301-303
      overview, 293-294                          periodic-orbit quantization, 199-201
      large molecule equilibrium point           quantum observables, diagonal matrix
      quantization, 316-3 19
      nonseparable and statistical regime           elements, 225-226
      resonances, 321-323                        semiclassical quantization, 111
      rotational motion, 320-321
      transition state dynamics, 313-314            Jacobi-Hill equation, 130-131
      wavepacket propagation, 310-313               propagators, 131-132
   periodic-orbit quantization, 301-310       Morse oscillator:
      dynamics of, 313-314                       bounded molecular systems, diatomic
      overview, 292                                 model, 279-280
   quantum dynamics, 291                         equilibrium-point quantization, 190-193
   resonances, overview, 292                     kicked Morse oscillator, 160
   rotational motion, 320-321                    molecular transition state, wavepacket
   saddle equilibrium points:                       propagation, 312-313
      ABA-ABC molecule comparisons,              periodic-orbit quantization, staircase
      314-316                                       function, 201-202
      large molecule bending and extension,      phase-space structure, 155-156
      316-319                                    semiclassical properties, 272-273
      nonseparable and statistical regimes,      trace of the propagator, 187-190
      322                                     Multichannel quantum defect theory
   semiclassical regimes, overview, 111
   wavepacket propagation, 311-313                  (MQDT)
Molecular vibrograms:                            nitric oxide analysis, 3
   basic principles, 274-278                     rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 19
   bounded systems, 279-286                      water molecule analysis, 57
      carbon disulfide Fermi resonance,       Multiple scattering expansion, quantum
      280-286
      Morse-type model, 279-280                     billiards, 228-230
   semiclassical regimes, 110-111             Multiple-well potential, periodic-orbit
   unbounded systems, 286-291
      carbon dioxide, 286-290                      quantization, 1F system tunneling,
     hydrogen sulfide and deuterium                213-218
     sulfide, 290-291                            Multivaluedness, semiclassical
Monodromy matrix:                                  quantization, 126-127
   periodic-orbit quantization:
     Maslov index, 200-201                    Near-ZEKE electrons, 12
     Selberg and Ruelle zeta functions,       Neumann boundary condition
     202-205
   phase-space structures, linear stability,    hydrogen negative ion (H-), 334
     151-153                                     periodic-orbit quantization, 196-197
  trace of the propagator, periodic orbits,   Nitric oxide:
     184-185                                    rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 19
Morse index:                                    single-photon ionization, 43-45
  Feynman path integrators, h-expansion         ZEKE analysis, compared with other
     of propagator, 142-145
  hydrogen negative ion (H-), 333-334              techniques, 3-4
                                              Nitrogen compounds, single-photon

                                                   ionization, 48-51
                                              Nitrogen dioxide:

                                                photoionization efficienty (PIE)
                                                   measurements, 6-7

                                                state-to-state threshold photoionization,
                                                   72-80
SUBJECT INDEX                                389

      rotational intensitites, 76-80           hydrogen negative ion (H-), 333-334
      rotational structure, 75-76            Period-energy diagram:
   three-color triple-resonant threshold
      photoionization, 70-83                   circle billiard, 162-163
   electronic structure and photoselection,    Morse oscillator, 156
      71-72                                    two-electron atomic systems, 157
   vibrational relaxation, threshold         Periodic-orbit quantization:
      intensities, 80-83                       atomic and solid-state systems, 325-327
   vibrational structure and state-to-state    billiard systems, 161-164
      photoionization, 72-80                   bounded molecular systems, 284-286
   ZEKE intensity deviations, 63-64            classical chaos and quantum spectra,
Nonlinear molecules:
   ZEKE analysis of, 54-62                        341-344
     CH,, 60-62                                complex orbits, 212-220
     H,CO, 57-60
     water, 54-57                                 1F system tunneling, 212-218
   semiclassical quantization, 109-111            2F system tunneling, 218-219
                                                  partition functions, 219-220
OH compounds:                                     quantum billiards, 232
   single-photon ionization, 45-48             degenerate orbits, quantum billiards,
   (2 t 1) REMPI analysis, 53-54                  231-232, 234-236
                                               energy domain, quantization, 194-223
One-channel scattering map, phase-space           bifurcations, 222-223
     structures, 161                              dynamical zeta functions, 201-211
                                                  zero length paths, 195-197
One-degree-of-freedom systems:                 vs. equilibrium point quantization, 194,
   matrix Hamiltonians, two-surface model,        345-346
     253-259                                   ghost orbits, quantum billiards, 232
   periodic-orbit quantization, tunneling,     hydrogen negative ion (H-):
     212-218                                      classical dynamics, 331-333
                                                  semiclassical quantization, 334-337
Open systems, phase-space structures, 154      matrix Hamiltonians, surface hopping,
                                                  256-257
Parity selection rules:                        mesoscopic semiconducting devices, 340-
                                                  341
  (n + 1')REMPI process:                       molecular transition state:
                                                  dynamics of, 313-314
     asymmetric tops, 40-41                       high-energy regime, 309-310
     linear molecules, 36-37                      intermediate regime, 307-309
  single-photon ionization, H,CO                  low-energy regime, 303-307
     molecules, 58-59                             mercuric iodide (HgI2) system, 301-
  ZEKE spectroscopy theory and                    302
     formulation, 30                              overview, 292
Partial wavefunctions:                         molecular vibrograms. See Molecular
  photoionization matrix, water molecules,       vibrograms
     54-55                                     nonisolated orbits, 220-222
  rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra,          off-diagonal orbits, 298-299
     benzene cations, 23-24                    phase-space structures, linear stability,
Partition functions, periodic-orbit               151-153
     quantization, 219-220                     quantum billiards:
Pauli exclusion principle:                       regular orbit contributions, 233-234
  atomic Hamiltonian systems, 268-269            stationary phase method, 230-232
  CH, molecules, single-photon ionization,     semiclassical regimes, overview, 110-111
     61-62
390  SUBJECT INDEX

   symbolic dynamics, Smale horseshoe,             single-photon ionization:
      167-168                                         H,CO molecules, 59-60
                                                      nitric oxide analysis, 43-45
   trace of the propagator, 183-187                   OH compounds, 45-48
      classification of orbits, 186-187
      Feynman path integral, 179                   ZEKE compared with, 3-4, 10-12
      real, unstable, isolated orbits, 183-186  Photoionization efficiency (PIE)

   unstable-isolated orbits, 197-201                  measurements, 6-7, 10-11
      Maslov index, 199-201                     Photoselection, nitrogen dioxide, 71-72
      stationary-phase integration, 197-199     7~ electron system, rotationally resolved

Perturbation theory, equilibrium-point                ZEKE spectra, 20-21
      quantization, 192-194                     Planck constant:

Pesin formula, phase-space structures, 174         Feynman path integrators:
Phase portraits:                                      h-expansion of propagator, 144-145
                                                      semiclassical regimes, 134-136
   atomic and solid-state systems, 325-327
   bounded molecular systems, 284-285              matrix Hamiltonians, 247
   matrix Hamiltonians, 262-265                       diagonal matrices, 251-253
Phase-space structures:                               isotropic conical intersections, 263-265
   classical dynamics, 146-175
                                                   Morse oscillator, 272-273
     billiard systems, 161-164                     periodic-orbit quantization:
     Hamiltonian mappings, 159-161
     Hamiltonian systems, 154-159                     convergence and topological pressure,
     linear stability, 146-153                        zeta functions, 205-206
     mechanical system examples, 153-164              h-corrections, 211
     h a l e horseshoe and symbolic                   zero length paths, 196-197
     dynamics, 164-170                             semiclassical regimes:
     thermodynamic formalism, 170-175                 short-time behavior, 178
   molecular transition state, 309-310                short-wavelength asymptotics, 125-127
   semiclassical quantization, 126-127                trace formula, 109-111
   scattering resonances, chemical reaction           Weyl-Wigner representation, 123-124
     dynamics, 345                                 trace of the propagator, 177
Phenol-water cations:                           Poincart resonances:
  vibrationally resolved structures, 88-94         atomic and solid-state systems, 325-327
     ab initio comparisons, 92-94                  hydrogen negative ion (H-), 328-329
     ZEKE spectra, 89-92                           matrix Hamiltonians, anisotropic conical
  ZEKE analysis of, 8-9                              intersections, 265-267
Photoabsorption cross-section:                     molecular transition state:
  molecular vibrograms, 274-278                      intermediate regime, 307-309
  quantum observables, 226-227                       mercuric iodide (HgI2) system, 297-
  semiclassical quantization:                        300
     atomic particle scattering, 121              periodic-orbit quantization:
     light interactions, 120                         bifurcations, 222-223
     overview, 110                                   2F system tunneling, 218
  trace of the propagator, 177-178                   quantum billiards, 234
                                                     zeta function approximation, 207-209
Photoelectron matrix element, (n + 1')            phase-space structures:
                                                     Hamiltonian mappings, 159-161
     REMPI process:                                  linear stability, 151-153
  asymmetric tops, 40                             semiclassical limits and, 349-351
  linear molecules, 35-36                       Porter-Thomas distribution, quantum
Photoelectron spectroscopy (PES):                    billiards, 241-242
  rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 21-       Potential energy surface (PES):

     25
SUBJECT INDEX                                391

   matrix Hamiltonians, two-surface one-           three-disk scatterers, 243-244
      degree-of-freedom model, 256-257             two-disk scatterers, 245-246
                                                 semiclassical quantization, 108
   mercuric iodide (HgI,) dissociation,          unbounded molecular systems, 291
      293-295                                 Quantum spectra:
                                                 classical chaos and periodic orbits, 341-
 Predissociation, Rydberg couplings, 13-15         344
 Probability conservation, short-wavelength     semiclassical averaging, 223-227
                                                   diagonal matrix elements, 223-226
      asymptotics, 127-129                         photoabsorption cross section, 226-
 Propagator:                                       227
                                              Quartic oscillator, phase-space structure,
   h-expansion of, Feynman path                    154-155
      integrators, 141-145                    Quasiclassical method, Weyl-Wigner
                                                   representation, 123-124
   semiclassical quantization:
      Feynman path integrators, 132-134      Random matrices, molecular transition
      short-wavelength asymptotics, 131-132        state, 323

   time domain trace, 175-190                Reaction rates, atomic particle scattering,
      equilibrium points, 179-183                  122-123
      harmonic oscillator, 187
      Morse oscillator, 187-190              Reflection amplitude, periodic-orbit
      path integral, 178-179                       quantization, 214-215
      periodic orbits, 183-187
      regularizations, 175-178               Relative errors, three-disk scatterers, 243-
      short-time time behavior, 178                245

Pseudomagnetic field, matrix                 Resonant enhanced multiphoton ionization
      Hamiltonians, isotropic conical              (REMPI) techniques:
      intersections, 261-262
                                                computational procedures, 42-43
Pulsed field ionization (PFI) spectroscopy:     nitric oxide analysis with, 3
   OH compounds, 46-47
   ZEKE analysis and, 10, 15-16              (n + 1') REMPI process:

Pulsed separation fields, mass analyzed         asymmetric tops, 37-41
      threshold ionization (MATI), 96-97           parity selection rules, 40-41
                                                   photoelectron matrix element, 40
Q - t o 4 branch intensity ratio, 50-51            rotationally resolved photoelectron
Quantum billiards:                                 spectra, 37-39

   degenerate periodic orbits, 234-236          linear molecules, 31-37
   disk scattering, 238-246                       parity selection rules, 36-37
                                                  photoelectron matrix element, 35-36
      three-disk scatterer, 238-245               rotationally resolved photoelectron
      two-disk scatterer, 245-246                 spectra, 31-35
   multiple scattering expansions, 228-230
   regular periodic orbits, 233-234            symmetric tops, 41-42
   semiclassical regimes, 110                Resonance-enhanced multiphoton
   stationary phase integration, 230-232
   wave equations, 227-228                        ionization PES (REMPI-PES), 89
  zeta function resummation, 237-238         Riemann surface contours, propagator and
Quantum energy levels, Morse oscillator,
     272-273                                      Green operator, 116-117
Quantum gaps, three-disk scatterers, 239-    Rigged Hilbert spaces, propagator and
     240
Quantum Hamiltonian, semiclassical                Green operator, 118
     quantization, 268-269                   Rotational coupling:
Quantum mechanics:
  quantum billiards:                           rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 24-
                                                  25

                                               ZEKE intensity deviations, 64-70
392  SUBJECT INDEX

    HCliDCl (2 + 1) threshold                      field ionization of, 17-19
                                                   nitric oxide, 3
      photoionization, 64-70                       nitrogen dioxide:
   nitrogen dioxide, 76-80
   molecular transition state, 320-321                state-to-state threshold
 Rotational structure:                                photoionization, 72-75
   nitrogen dioxide, state-to-state threshold         three-color triple-resonant threshold
                                                      photoionization, 71-83
      photoionization, 73-76                       photoionization efficienty (PIE)
   rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 22-            measurements, 6-7
                                                   REMPI procedures, 42-43
      24                                           semiclassical regimes, 112-113
   ZEKE analysis of                                unbounded molecular systems, 228-290
                                                   ZEKE intensity deviations, 62-70
      benzene cation, 5                           ZEKE spectroscopy, longevity of, 95-97
      nitric oxide, 3-4
Rotational-vibrational Hamiltonian, 271-        S-matrix:
      272                                          atomic particle scattering, 122-123
Rotationally resolved photoelectron               quantum billiards, 228
      spectra:                                    scattering resonances, 121
   asymmetric tops, 37-39                         semiclassical limits and, 349-351
   linear molecules, 31-35
Rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra:            Saddle equilibrium points:
   benzene cation, 19-29                          molecular transition state:
      6' (eZg)excited Jahn-Teller state, 25-         ABA-ABC molecule comparisons,
      29                                             314-316
      electronic ground state, 20-25                 large molecule bending and extension,
   nitric oxide, 19                                  316-319
Rovibronic ionic state:                              nonseparable and statistical regimes,
   origins of ZEKE and, 10-11                        322
   photoionization efficienty (PIE)                  rotational motion, 320-321
     measurements, 6-7                            phase-space structures, linear stability,
RRKM theories:                                       150-151
   molecular transition state, 322-323            Smale horseshoe mapping, 166
   scattering resonances, chemical reaction       unbounded molecular systems, 287-289
     dynamics, 345
Ruelle zeta function:                          Scaling laws, hydrogen negative ion (H-),
  periodic-orbit quantization, 202-205               335-337
     approximations, 206-209
     convergence and topological pressure,     Scattering resonances:
     205-206                                      chemical reaction dynamics and, 344-
  quantum billiards:                                 345
     periodic orbits, 238                         matrix Hamiltonians, surface hopping,
     three-disk scatterers, 238-245                 258-259
  semiclassical limits and, 351                   molecular transition state:
Rydberg states. See also Molecular                  low-energy regimes, 304-305
     Rydberg states                                 overview, 292
  atomic and solid-state systems, 324-327        semiclassical regimes, 121
  atomic Hamiltonian systems, 269
  Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian, 271            I Scrambling interactions:
  delayed pulsed-field ionization of, in         ZEKE intensity deviations, 63
     ZEKE analysis, 13-16                        ZEKE spectroscopy theory and
                                                    formulation, 30-31
 , . delaved oulsed-field threshold
     photoionization, 69-70                    Schrodinger equation:
SUBJECT INDEX                                  393

   mesoscopic semiconducting devices, 337-     Feynman path integrals, 132-145
      341                                         Green function as resolvent of Jacobi-
                                                  Hill operator, 139-140
   molecular transition state, wavepacket         h-expansion of propagator, 141-145
      propagation, 311-313                        propagators as, 132-134
                                                  stationary-phase integration, 134-136
   quantum billiards, 227-228                     variation and Jacobi-Hill equation,
   Rydberg states computation, 42-43              136-139
   semiclassical regimes, 111-1 12
                                               flowchart of Hamiltonian and classical
      limits and, 350-351                         orbits and, 341-342
      propagator and Green operator, 114-
      118                                      historical background, 111-114
   short-wavelength asymptotics, 124-132       hydrogen negative ion (H-), 333-337
     Jacobi-Hill equation and linear           limits of, 349-351
     stability, 129-131                        matrix Hamiltonians, 246-267
     probability conservation and Van
     Vleck-Morette matrix, 127-129                conical intersection and geometric
     to Hamilton's equations, 124-127             phase, 259-267
Schwinger variational principle, 43               diagonalization, 248-253
Selberg zeta function:                           two-surface 1F model and surface
  periodic-orbit quantization, 202-205            hopping, 253-259
     approximation, 208-209                    mesoscopic semiconducting devices, 337-
     h-corrections, 211                           341
  quantum billiards, periodic orbits, 237-     molecular systems, 269-272
     238                                          Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian, 269-
  quantum observables, diagonal matrix           271
     elements, 224-226                            Coulomb-Born-Oppenheimer
Self-consistent field ab initzo computations:    Hamiltonian comparisons, 272-273
  para-difluorobenzene cation (p-DFB),           rotational-vibrational Hamiltonian,
     87-88                                       271-272
  Rydberg states, 42-43                        molecular transition states, 292-324
Semiclassical quantization:                      ABA and ABC molecule repellers,
  atomic systems, 268-269, 324-341               comparison, 314-316
     highly excited electronic states, 324-      classical dynamics and Hamiltonian
     327                                         mapping, 295-301
     hydrogen negative ion, 327-337              equilibrium point quantization, 301-
  classical chaos, periodic orbits and           303
     quantum spectra, 341-344                    HgI, system overview, 293-294
  classical dynamics, 146-175                    HgI, transition state dynamics, 313-
     mechanical systems, 153-164                 314
     phase space linear stability, 146-153       large molecule equilibrium point
     Smale horseshoe and symbolic                quantization, 316-319
     dynamics, 164-170                           nonseparable and statistical regime
     thermodynamic formalism, 170-175            resonances, 321-323
  Coulomb Hamiltonian, 267-268                   periodic-orbit quantization, 303-310
     B - 0 Hamiltonian compared with,            rotational motion, 320-321
     272-273                                     wavepacket propagation, 310-313
  energy domain:                               molecular vibrograms, 273-291
     equilibrium-point quantization, 190-        bounded molecular systems, 279-286
     193                                         principles, 274-278
     periodic-orbit quantization, 194-223        unbounded molecular systems, 286-
  h-expansion and anharmonicities, 347- 349      29 1
394  SUBJECT INDEX

   observable quantities, 119-123                probability conservation and Van Vleck-
     atomic particle scattering, 120-123            Morette matrix, 127-129
     light interaction, 119-120
                                                 semiclassical regimes, 124-132
   overview, 108-111                          Sinai billiard:
  periodic-orbit vs. equilibrium-point
                                                 trace of the propagator, 186-187
     techniques, 345-346                         wave equations, 227-228
  propagator and Green operator, 114-118      Single-photon ionization:
  quantum billiards, 227-246                     linear molecules, 43-54

     degenerate periodic orbits, 234-236            carbon monoxide and nitrogen
     disk scattering applications, 238-246          compounds, 48-51
     multiple scattering expansion, 228-230         HBr (2 t1 ) REMPI analysis, 51-53
     periodic orbit contribution, 233-234           nitric oxide, 43-45
     stationary phase method and periodic          O H (2 $. 1 ) REMPI analysis, 53-54
     orbits, 230-232                                OH compounds, 45-48
     summation, 237-238                          nonlinear molecules, 54-62
     wave equation and generalities, 227-           CH, molecules, 60-62
     228                                           H,CO molecules, 57-60
  quantum observable averages, 223-227             water molecules, 54-57
     diagonal matrix elements, 223-226        Single-well potential, periodic-orbit
     photoabsorption cross section, 226- 227       quantization, 215-216
   quantum time evolution, path integrals     Smale horseshoe:
     and limits, 114-146                         chaotic systems, 164-170
   scattering systems and chemical reaction        examples, 168-169
     dynamics, 344-345                             generalization of, 169-170
   short-wavelength asymptotics,                   horseshoe map, 165-166
     Schrodinger's equation, 124-132               symbolic dybamics, 166-168
   time domain: molecular vibrograms,            class chaos, periodic orbits and quantum
     273-291                                       spectra, 341-344
   time domain: propagator trace, 175-190       molecular transition state:
     equilibrium point continuum, 179-183          HgI, experiments, 292
     harmonic oscillator exarnplle, 187            mercuric iodide (HgI,) system, 300-
     Morse oscillator example, 187-190             301
     path integrals, 178-179                    periodic-orbit quantization, zeta
     periodic orbits, 183-187                      function approximation, 208-209
     regularizations, 175-178                   semiclassical regimes, 110
     short-time behavior, 178                 Solid-state systems, semiclassical electronic
  trace and level density, 118-119                 regimes, 324-341
  Weyl-Wigner representation and                highly excited electronic states, 324-327
     quasiclassical method, 123-124             hydrogen negative ion, 327-337
Semiconductor devices:                          mesoscopic semiconducting devices, 337-
  historical background, 113-114                   341
  mesoscopic devices, 337-341                 Spin-orbit relaxation, ZEKE intensity
Semisided Fourier transform:                       deviations:
  equilibrium point quantization, 190-194
  periodic-orbit quantization, 197-199         HCliDCl (2 + 1) threshold
Short-time behavior, trace function of the
     propagator, 178                               photoionization, 64-70
  Short-wavelength asymptotics:                 OH compounds, 46-48
  Jacobi-Hill equation and linear stability,  Stadium billiards
     129-131                                    classical mechanics, 162-163
                                                trace of the propagator, 186-187
                                                wave equations, 227-228
SUBJECT INDEX                                 395

Staircase functions, periodic-orbit              generalization of, 169-170
     quantization:                               horseshoe map, 165-166

  dynamical zeta functions, 201-202           Symmetric tops, (n + 1') REMPI process,
  zero length paths, 196-197
Standard mapping, phase-space structures,           40-41
                                              Symmetry-forbidden transitions, 7
     160                                      Symmetry selection rules, ZEKE analysis,
Stark mixing, ZEKE intensity deviations,
                                                   5
     63
State-to-state threshold photoionization,     Taylor expansion:
                                                 Feynman path integrators, 141-145
     nitrogen dioxide, 72-80                     molecular transition state, 306-307
  rotational intensitites, 76-80                 periodic-orbit quantization:
  rotational structure, 75-76                       quantum billiards, 233-234
Stationary-phase integration:                       stationary-phase integration, 198-199
  Feynman path integrators, 134-136              trace of the propagator:
  periodic-orbit quantization, 194-223              equilibrium points, 181-183
                                                    periodic orbits, 183-187
     bifurcations, 222-223
     complex orbits, 212-220                  Thermal reaction rates, periodic-orbit
     dynamical zeta functions, 201-211              quantization, 219-220
     nonisolated orbits, 220-222
     unstable-isolated orbits, 197-199        Thermodynamic formalism, phase-space
     zero-length paths, 195-197                     structures, 170-175
  quantum billiards, 230-232
Statistical dynamics                          Thomas-Fermi-Weyl-Wigneraverage level
  periodic-orbit quantization, 219-220             density:
  scattering resonances, chemical reaction
     dynamics, 345                               Feynman path integrators, Jacobi-Hill
Stick spectrum, molecular vibrograms,              equation, 138-139
     274-278
Stokes' theorem, matrix Hamiltonians,            semiclassical regimes, 123-142
     diagonal matrices, 252-253                  short-time behavior, 178
Sturm-Liouville problem, Feynman path         Three-branch horseshoe, scattering
     integrators:
  Jacobi-Hill equation and linear stability,       resonances, 344-345
     130-131                                  Three-color triple-resonant threshold
  second variation and Jacobi-Hill
     equation, 136-139                             photoionization, 70-83
Sudden approximation, rotationally               electronic structure and photoselection,
     resolved ZEKE spectra, 19
Superadiabatic levels, matrix Hamiltonians,        71-72
     247                                        vibrational relaxation, threshold
Surface electron motion, semiclassical
     regimes, 113-114                              intensities, 80-83
Surface hopping:                                vibrational structure and state-to-state
  h-expansion and anharmonicity, 348-349
  matrix Hamiltonians, 247                         photoionization, 72-80
     two-surface one-degree-of-freedom        Three-disk scatterer, molecular transition
     model, 253-259
Symbolic dynamics, Smale horseshoe, 164-           state, 321-324
     170                                      Threshold photoelectron spectroscopy
  examples, 168-169
                                                   (TPES):
                                                origins of ZEKE and, 11
                                                ZEKE intensity deviations and, 62-63
                                              Threshold photoionization. See also

                                                   Delayed pulsed-field threshold
                                                   photoionization; State-to-state
                                                   threshold photoionization
                                                Time domain:
                                                h-expansion:
                                                   equilibrium points, 179-183
396  SUBJECT INDEX

       harmonic oscillator, 187               Two-channel scattering map, phase-space
      Morse oscillator, 187-190                     structures, 161
      path integral, 178-179
      periodic orbits, 183-187                Two-color photoionization efficiency
      propagator trace formula, 175-190             (REMPI-PIE):
      regularization, 175-178
      short-time behavior, 178                   phenol-water cations, 89-91
    molecular vibrograms, 274-278                zero-kinetic-energy (ZEKE)
      basic principles, 274-278
      bounded systems, 279-286                      photoelectron techniques, 16-17
      unbounded systems, 286-291              Two-degree-of-freedom systems:
   periodic-orbit vs. equilibrium point
      quantization, 346                          bounded molecular models, 283-284
   semiclassical regimes, 114-146                molecular transition state, 303-307
      atomic particle scattering, 121-122        periodic-orbit quantization, 218-219
      Feynman path integrators, 133-145       Two-electron atomic systems:
                                                 phase-space structure, 156-157
         stationary-phase integration, 134-      symbolic dynamics, 169
      136
      overview, 110                           Ultraviolet absorption spectra:
      propagator and Green operator, 114-        carbon dioxide molecules, 286-290
      118                                        unbounded molecular systems, 286-291
Time-of-flight (TOF) measurements:
   field ionization of Rydberg states, 18-19  Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, 89
   vs. photoionization efficienty (PIE)       Unbounded molecular systems,
      measurements, 6-7
   rotationally resolved ZEKE spectra, 21-          vibrograms, 286-291
      22                                         carbon dioxide molecules, 286-290
   Zeke Rydberg states, 15-16                    hydrogen sulfide and deuterium sulfide
Topological pressures:
   periodic-orbit quantization, Ruelle zeta         molecules, 290-291
      function, 205-206
   phase-space structures, thermodynamic      Vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) radiation:
      formalism, 172-175                         CH, molecules, 60-62
Trace formula:                                   H,CO molecules, 57-60
   propagators:                                  nitric oxide analysis, 3-4
     path integral, 178-179                         single-photon ionization, 43-45
     regularizations, 175-178                    nitrogen dioxide, three-color triple-
     short-time behavior, 178                       resonant
   semiclassical regimes, 109-111                   threshold photoionization, 71-72
Trajectory conditions, molecular transition      OH compounds, 45-48
     state, 295-296                              origins of ZEKE and, 10-11
Transfer operator, periodic-orbit
     quantization:                            Van der Waals molecule, matrix
   1F system tunneling, 212-218                    Hamiltonians, 247
  zeta function approximation, 206-209
Transition state. See Molecular transition    Van Vleck contact transformation:
     state                                      equilibrium-point quantization, 192-194
Transmission matrix, mesoscopic                 h-expansion and anharmonicity, 348-349
     semiconducting devices, 337-34 1           matrix Hamiltonians, diagonal matrices,
Trapped trajectories, phase-space                  250-252
     structures, 154                            molecular transition state:
                                                   large molecule bending and extension,
                                                   317-319
                                                   rotational motion, 320-321
                                                periodic-orbit vs. equilibrium point
                                                   quantization, 346
                                                semiclassical regimes, 110

                                              Van Vleck-Morette matrix, semiclassical
                                                   quantization:
SUBJECT INDEX                                 397

  Jacobi-Hill equation, 130-131                 matrix Hamiltonians, 262-265
  short-wavelength asymptotics, 127-129         periodic-orbit quantization, 213-218
Vector potential, matrix Hamiltonians,
                                              X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),
     252-253                                       origins of ZEKE and, 10-11
Vibrational relaxation, nitrogen dioxide,
                                              Zee configuration, hydrogen negative ion
     80-83                                         (H-), 328-329
Vibrationally resolved structures:
                                              ZEKE electrons, characteristics of, 12
   para-dibluorobenzene cation (p-DFB),       ZEKE-PFI spectroscopy:
     83-88
     self-consistent ab initio computations,    defined, 15-16
     87-88                                      highest resolution experiments, 16-19
     S,Oo state, 84                           Zero-kinetic-energy (ZEKE) photoelectron
     4 6 ' state, 84-87
     ZEKE spectra, 84                              techniques:
                                                computational procedures, 42-43
  phenol-water cation, 88-94                    delayed pulsed-field ionization of
     ab initio comparisons, 92-94
                                                   Rydberg states, 13-16
   ZEKE spectra, 89-92                          detection principles, 11-13
Vibronic symmetry species, rotationally         deviations from direct ionization

     resolved ZEKE spectra, 28-29                  predictions, 62-70
                                                para-difluorobenzene cation (p-DFB):
Wannier symmetric stretching motion,
      326-327                                      self-consistent field ab initio
                                                   computations, 87-88
Water molecules, single-photon ionization,         S,O" state, 84
      54-57                                        4 6 ' state, 84-87
                                                   vibrationally resolved structure, 83-88
Watson form, rotational-vibrational             evolution of photoionization
      Hamiltonian, 271-272                         experiments, 10-11
                                                future applications, 94-97
Wave equations, quantum billiards, 227-         highest resolution experiments, 16-19
      228                                       linear molecule results, 43-54

Wave functions:                                   (2 + 1) REMPI of HBr, 51-53
   Born-Oppenheimer Hamiltonian, 270-
     271                                         + (2 1) REMPI of OH, 53-54

  (n + 1') REMPI process, 33-35                    single-photon ionization of CO and
                                                   N,, 48-51
   vs. semiclassical quantization, 114             single-photon ionization of nitric
   short-wavelength asymptotics, 125-127           oxide, 43-45
Wavepacket propagation, molecular                  single-photon ionization of OH, 45-48
                                                nonlinear molecule results, 54-62
     transition state, 310-313                     single-photon ionization of CH,, 60-
Weyl-Wigner representation:                        62
                                                   single-photon ionization of H,CI, 57-
   equilibrium-point quantization, 191             60
   matrix Hamiltonians, 247                        single-photon ionization of water, 54-
   periodic-orbit quantization, 196-197            57
   semiclassical quantization, 123-124          overview, 3-10
                                                phenol-water cations, 89-92
     limits and, 349-351                           comparison with ab initio results, 92-
     short-time behavior, 178                      94
Wigner repulsion, semiclassical limits and,        intermolecular vibrations, 91-92
     349-351                                       ionization energy, 90-91
Wigner spacing distribution, 343-344
Wigner transform, quantum observables,
     224-226
WKB conditions:
  periodic-orbit quantization, 204-205
398  SUBJECT INDEX

   vibrationally resolved structure, 88-94       electronic structure and
ws. photoionization efficienty (PIE)             photoselection, 71-72
                                                 state-to-state effects and vibrational
   measurements, 6                               structure, 72-80
                                                 vibrational relaxation and threshold
(n + 1`) REMPJ for asymmetric tops,              intensity, 80-83
                                              two-color ionization, 16-17
   37-41                                    Zero length paths, periodic-orbit
  parity selection rules, 40-41                  quantization, 195-197
  photoelectron matrix element, 40          Zeta functions:
  rotationally resolved PE spectra, 37-       Gutzwiller trace formula and, 341-344
  39
                                              hydrogen negative ion (H-)3,33-337
+ (n 1') REMPI for linear molecules,
                                              matrix Hamiltonians, 252-253
  31-37                                       molecular transition state, 319
  parity selection rules, 36-37               periodic-orbit quantization:
  photoelectron matrix element, 35-36
  rotationally resolved PE spectra, 31-          approximation, 206-209
  35                                             bounded systems, 209-210
                                                 convergence and topological pressure,
+ (n 1') REMPI for symmetric tops, 41-           205-206
                                                 h-corrections, 211
  42                                             level density and staircase function,
resolution properties of, 3                      20 1-202
rotationally resolved spectra, 19-29             1F system tunneling, 217-218
                                                 Selberg and Ruelle Zeta functions,
  benezene, 19-29                                202-205
  nitric oxide, 19                            quantum billiards, periodic orbits, 237-
spin-orbit relaxation and rotational             238
  coupling:                                   quantum observables, diagonal matrix
  HC1/DCL photoionization, 64-70                 elements, 224-226
  rotational line intensities, 64-69          scattering resonances, chemical reaction
                                                 dynamics, 344-345
 + transition of HCI spin-orbit

  substates, 69-70
theory and formulation, 30-43
three-color triple-resonant threshold

  photoionization of nitrogen dioxide,
  70-83
