S   E   C    O   N   D           E   D   I   T   I   O   N




GENERAL SYSTEMS
    THEORY
            Problems •Perspectives • Practice



                  Lars Skyttner
GENERAL SYSTEMS
    THEORY
 Problems ^Perspectives •#• Practice
       G T?TVn7T? A T QVQTiyA/TQ
         EJVH JDJAilJb O I 0 1 JDlVlo

                         TT-TT70TIV
              Problems •# Perspectives # Practice




                                                       SECOND         EDITION




                                                       Lars Skyttner
                                                       University ofGavle, Sweden




                        ! > W o r . d Scientific
NEW JERSEY • LONDON • SINGAPORE • BEIJING • SHANGHAI • HONGKONG • TAIPEI • CHENNAI
Published by
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA office: 27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601
UK office: 57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE




British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.




GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY (2nd Edition)
Problems, Perspectives, Practice
Copyright © 2005 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval
system now known or to be invented, without written permission from the Publisher.




For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to
photocopy is not required from the publisher.


ISBN 981-256-389-X
ISBN 981-256-467-5 (pbk)




Printed in Singapore by World Scientific Printers (S) Pte Ltd
                             Preface

Do we really need system theories? Their claim to be part of a
universal science has evoked criticism: a 'theory of everything' has
no real content and must of necessity be superficial. However, to be
honest, the attempt to gain more abstract and general comprehension
must sometimes be made at the expense of concrete and particular
exposition. But it is also true that the most general theory, which
explains the greatest range of phenomena, is the most powerful and
the best; it can always be made specialized in order to deal with
simple cases.
   The more science becomes divided into specialized disciplines,
the more important it becomes to find unifying principles. What we
need to understand is not the behaviour of individual parts but rather
their orchestration. Often, our goal must not be to understand what
things are made of, but rather how they are compounded and work
together in integrated wholes. We can call this systems science. This
science looks for system properties applicable to all collection of parts,
regardless of size or nature.
   The why and how in defence of Systems Theory is presented in
the following chapters. When applied sensibly, this theory will make
us conscious of the far-reaching interconnections and complexity of
our existence. It will show the consequences of adopting solutions
that are too spontaneous and too simple and should help us to speak
in terms that are understandable in fields as remote from each other
as agriculture and astrophysics. Furthermore, it should be recalled
that systems theory and its applications emerged out of a need to
solve real world problems.
   All who attempt to solve problems, make recommendations
and predict the future, need theories, models and, as a starting
point, concepts, which represent the backbone of the task. Theories
introduce order and meaning to observations that may otherwise
seem chaotic. Good theories should provide a simplified presentation
of complex ideas by establishing connections between hitherto

                                    v
vi         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



unrelated phenomena. They enhance a growing understanding and
help us to guide future research. Those searching for useful ideas
among these pages must however realize that the benefit of a certain
theory has nothing to do with whether it is 'true' or not — 'truth' is
a quality that is undefinable. What we can define is usefulness in
relation to our need; different needs obviously demand different
theories.
   The book is divided into two parts. The first is devoted to the
historical background of the systems movement and presents
pioneering thoughts and theories of the area. Basic concepts of general
systems theory with well-known laws and principles are offered as
well as related topics like cybernetics and information theory.
   The second part deals with some of the common applications of
systems theory within systems science like artificial intelligence,
management information systems, informatics and some other
associated topics. Finally, an attempt is made to predict the future of
systems theory in a world apparently going to be at the same time
both fragmented and integrated.

"In times of change, it is the learners who will inherit the earth,
while the learned will find themselves beautifully equipped for a
world that no longer exists".



                                                             Lars Skyttner
                                                 University of Gavle, 2005
                        Contents

Preface                                                     v

Part 1: The Theories and Why                                1

 1   The Emergence of Holistic Thinking                     3
     The scholastic paradigm                                5
     The Renaissance paradigm                               8
     The mechanistic world and determinism                 12
     The hegemony of determinism                           14
     The age of relativity and quantum mechanics           23
     The systems age                                       36
     Review questions and problems                         47
 2   Basic Ideas of General Systems Theory                 49
     GST and concepts defining systems properties          56
     Cybernetics and concepts defining systems processes   75
     General scientific and systemic concepts              95
     Widely-known laws, principles, theorems and
       hypotheses                                           99
     Some generic facts of systems behaviour               105
     Review questions and problems                         108

 3   A Selection of Systems Theories                       110
     Boulding and the Hierarchy of Systems Complexity      111
     Miller and the General Living Systems Theory          118
     Beer and the Viable System Model                      132
     Lovelock and the Gaia Hypothesis                      140
     Teilhard de Chardin and the noosphere                 152
     Taylor and the Geopolitic Systems Model               156
     Klir and the General Systems Problem Solver           162
     Laszlo and the Natural Systems                        165
     Cook and the Quantal System                           170
     Checkland and the Systems Typology                    175
     Jordan and the Systems Taxonomy                       178
viii        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



       Salk and the categories of nature                               180
       Powers and the Control Theory                                   185
       Namilov and the organismic view of science                      189
       Bowen and Family Systems Theory                                 192
       Jaques and the Stratified Systems Theory                        197
       Review questions and problems                                   203

 4     Communication and Information Theory                            204
       Basic concepts of communication theory                          207
       Interrelations between time, place and channel                  213
       Shannon's classical theory                                      219
       Basic concepts of information theory                            227
       Information, exformation and entropy                            230
       How to measure information                                      238
       Entropy and redundancy                                          246
       Channels, noise and coding                                      250
       Review questions and problems                                   254

  5    Some Theories of Brain and Mind                                 256
       The need for consciousness                                      259
       A hierarchy of memory                                           273
       Brain models                                                    278
       A model perspective                                             292
       Review questions and problems                                   293

  6    Self-Organization and Evolution                                 294
       Evolution as self-organization                                  297
       Basic principles of self-organization                           301
       Some rules of the game                                          307
       The city                                                        309
       Climate and weather                                             311
       The economy                                                     314
       Review questions and problems                                   315

Part 2: The Applications and How                                       317

  7    Artificial Intelligence and Life                                319
       The Turing test                                                 326
       Parallel processing and neural networks                         329
                             CONTENTS                    IX



     Expert systems                                     332
     Some other applications                            336
     Artificial life                                    339
     Computer viruses                                   346
     A gloomy future                                    348
     Review questions and problems                      351

8    Organizational Theory and Management Cybernetics   352
     The origin of modern trading corporations          355
     The development of organizational theory           358
     The non-avoidable hierarchy                        367
     Organizational design                              368
     Multiple perspectives of management cybernetics    379
     A systems approach in ten points                   387
     Review questions and problems                      389

9    Decision-Making and Decision Aids                  390
     Some concepts and distinctions of the area         393
     Basic decision aids                                401
     Managerial problems and needs                      405
     Four generations of computer support               408
     C3I systems                                        413
     Some psychological aspects of decision-making      423
     The future of managerial decision support          428
     Review questions and problems                      429

10   Informatics                                        430
     Electronic networks                                432
     Fibre optics, communication and navigation
       satellites, cellular radio                       437
     Internet                                           440
     Virtual reality                                    450
     Cyberspace and cyberpunk                           453
     Review questions and problems                      455

11   Some of the Systems Methodologies                  457
     Large-scale, soft and intertwined problems         459
     Systems design                                     462
     Breakthrough thinking                              464
X         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



     Systems analysis                                                470
     Systems engineering                                             472
     GLS simulation                                                  475
     Method versus problem                                           481
     Review questions and problems                                   484

12   The Future of Systems Theory                                    485
     Science of today                                                486
     The world we live in                                            487
     The need for change                                             492
     Systems thinking as alternate and criticized paradigm           496
     Systems thinking and the academic environment                   500
     How to write the instruction manual                             502
     Review questions and problems                                   504

References                                                           505

Name Index                                                           513

Subject Index                                                        517
       Parti
The Theories and Why
                                 1
      The Emergence of Holistic
             Thinking
• The scholastic paradigm
• The Renaissance paradigm
• A mechanistic world view and determinism
• The hegemony of determinism
• The age of relativity and quantum mechanics
• The systems age

'Reality is not only stranger than we conceive but stranger than we
can conceive.' (/.B. Haldane)



W       hile man and his situation are the central focus of all social
        and humanistic sciences, each science pursues its studies from
a certain point of view. Political science concentrates on the society's
political and administrative organization. Business economics is
concerned with the commercial organization, geography with the
physical structure and philosophy with the pattern of thought, views
of life and ideologies, to name some examples.
   Systems science too has its specific point of view: to understand
man and his environment as part of interacting systems. The aim is
to study this interaction from multiple perspectives, holistically.
Inherent to this approach is a comprehensive historical, contemporary
and futuristic outlook.



                                   3
4          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Systems science, with such an ambition and with its basic Systems
Theory, provides a general language with which to tie together various
areas in interdisciplinary communication. As such it automatically
strives towards a universal science, i.e. to join together the many
splintered disciplines with a 'law of laws', applicable to them all and
integrating all scientific knowledge. Systems science can promote a
culture wherein science, philosophy and religion are no longer
separated from each other.
    To engage oneself in systems science is therefore a highly cross-
scientific occupation. The student will come in contact with the many
different academic disciplines: philosophy, sociology, physics, biology,
etc. The consequent possibility of all-round education is something
particularly needed in our over-specialized society.
    Contributions concerning all-round education include thoughts
put forward by a number of distinguished people. Frangois Voltaire
once said: 'Education is the only quality which remains after we
have forgotten all we have learned'. Oscar Wilde said in one of his
plays: 'Education is a good thing but it ought to be remembered that
nothing which is worth knowing can be taught.' A Swedish proverb
tells us that: 'Education is not something which can be learned; it is
something you acquire.'
    In the following pages some Western system-theoretical outlooks
and theories will be presented together with central concepts
(the Eastern world has its own tradition although science is an
offspring of Western civilization as a whole). Some philosophical
aspects will also receive attention. The broad spectrum of knowledge
will be introduced according to the funnel method: much will
be poured in, but the output will be a defined flow of systems
knowledge.
    The natural starting point should be in the golden age of Greece,
the cradle of Western modern human science. Beginning in the Middle
Ages will (besides keeping the number of pages down) suffice to
provide the background necessary to understand the origin of systems
thinking and the subsequent development.

                                      *
                   THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                5


The scholastic paradigm

First we must realize that beliefs and knowledge in any era are
influenced by concomitant time-dependent paradigms. That the
medieval world view could be described with the help of the
scholastic paradigm satisfied contemporary needs. Although this
paradigm may be characterized as prescientific, it was a complete
philosophy which wove together morality and heavenly systems with
physical and worldly systems, creating one entity. This amalgamation
was based on the following propositions, the aim of which was to
join belief and knowing:

• Nature was alive and thus mortal, vulnerable and finite.
• The universe and the nature of time was possible to understand.
• Salvation of the soul was the most important challenge.
• Natural sciences were subordinate to theology.
• The goal of science was to show the correlation between the world
  and spiritual truth.
• Knowledge was of an encyclopaedic nature, classified and labelled.
• The structure of society was influenced by Heaven and reflected a
  divine order. The cruciform medievial city was not only functional,
  in addition, it was a religious symbol.

   Scientific development was thus acknowledged only when it
supported religion. Religion was considered the superior interest and
had the priority in a clash of interests. To pursue science in this era
was most often the same as profound interpretations of old religious
texts. The existing method with which to explain the complexities of
phenomena was insight or revelation. Divine order and truth was
revealed to human beings through the Church. Curiosity as such was
a sin and when the first universities emerged, it was in order to
maintain the knowledge which was acquired through or given by
God. Observation, recording, experimentation and drawing objective
conclusions were not encouraged. Nature was viewed as an organism
created by God; to destroy Nature was to commit a sin. The natural
forces were beyond human control; any protection from them
6          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



would come from God or from witchcraft. Natural phenomena not
understood were given a supernatural explanation.
   Every man was considered to have his place in the divine order.
To question or change this order was a rebellion against nature and
society, both creations of God. Worldly poverty was compensated
with heavenly happiness and the sinful abundance of wealth was
punished by the horrible fire of hell.
   In the scholastic conception, goal-seeking or teleology, was an
important concept. It was considered built into nature: stones fell to
earth because they belonged to the earth and strove to join their
origin and come to rest. The flower strived to bloom in order to bear
fruit etc. Also the static explanation of world order according to the
second century AD astronomer Ptolemy as his geocentric world view,
was predominant.
   No difference was made between reality and dream, between fact
and judgement. Alchemy was not distinguished from chemistry, nor
astrology from astronomy. Reason was often regarded as something
irrelevant or offensive to the mysterious existence. The connection
with reality was unformulated, imprecise, implicit and indeterminate.
In physics, for example, one spoke about the four (later extended to
six) basic substances. They were:

— Earth
— Water
— Air
— Fire
— (Quintessence, including ether)
— (Magnetism)

    To these basic substances or elements were associated certain
genius. The gnome belonged to the earth, while the undine belonged
to the water. The sylf protected air and the salamander fire. The elements
had a natural position in the world with fire uppermost, thereafter
air, water and at the bottom earth. They also had natural qualities
like warm (fire), cold (air), moist (water) and, dry (earth). Moreover,
all elements had their own, distinct geometrical marks (the Platonic
bodies).
                   THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING               7


   Psychology as a formal science was unknown. Mental qualities,
such as satanic, demonic, human, angelic, divine, were nevertheless
recognized, as were the following manifestations.

Deadly sins:          Cardinal virtues:
                      — Justice
— Pride               — Prudence
— Covetousness        — Fortitude
— Lust                — Temperance
— Envy                Divine virtues:
— Gluttony            — Faith
— Anger               — Hope
— Sloth               — Love
  (Note that the virtues balance the sins.)

   The Greek physician Galenos (131-201) produced a classification
of human beings. According to him, each individual belonged to one
of four classes defined by what kind of 'body fluid' was predominant.
A certain connection between body fluid and type of personality was
considered to be highly significant.

Dominant fluid:        Type of personality:
— Blood                — Sanguine
— Yellow gall          — Choleric
— Black gall           — Melancholic
— Slime                — Phlegmatic

   An upset in the balance between the bodily fluids was considered
to be the cause of an illness. The initial learning in science and art
had their own symbolic shapes taken from the Greek mythology.
They were the Nine Muses, goddesses with the follwing fields of
responsibility:

— Kalliope, epic writing
— Klio, historical writing
— Melpomene, tragedy and mourning writing
— Erato, song with accompaniment
— Euterpe, flute music
8          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



— Thalia, comedy
— Terpsichore, choir and dance
— Polyhymnia, dance and pantomime
— Urania, astronomy

    When we approach the Renaissance, the contemporary universities
of Europe were permanently established. Embryos of modern
disciplines were organized and students studied Liberal Arts (Artes
Liberales). It was called liberal because they were considered liberating
for the soul and a convenient study for a freeman. Originally, the
Liberal Arts were seven in number. Including the medieval subjects
of grammar, dialectics and rhetoric (trivium), Liberal Arts consisted
of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and music.
    In a sense, medieval life was unnarcissistic. Ordinary people had
only vague ideas of their own participating in the world. Individual
and social identities were formed by influences from rituals
and traditions rather than by reflection. But despite of prevailing
mysticism, it would be a mistake to consider the mentality of the
Middle Ages as primitive. Behind this disregard for the physical
world and the world of men lay the image of human existence as a
trial. Life was considered to be a journey to heaven. The seemingly
austere existence was abundantly compensated for by a rich mental
life and a far-reaching spiritual imagination. The scholastic world-
view created harmony between existing belief and science of its time
and between physics and metaphysics.




The Renaissance paradigm

With the coming of the 16th century, the prescientific stage is
succeeded by one in which science is acknowledged as capable of
describing phenomena, as a route to knowledge. The introspective,
absorbed mentality of scholasticism left room for a rediscovery of the
external reality. Learned men began to understand the value of careful,
reiterated observations and a careful methodical analysis when
confronted with guesses, preferences, inspirations or revelations.
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                9


Science itself became a source for the d e v e l o p m e n t of n e w
technologies. A growing respect for facts tested in valid experiments
and a proficiency in the communication of knowledge and opinions
emerged. Teleological explanations of observed regularities in human
environment (the idea that physical systems are guided by or drawn
towards a final goal), earlier seen as a norm for various phenomena,
were gradually abandoned. In place of those, laws of Nature came to
be formulated on a mathematical basis and deduced from mechanical
observations. By this means only factors directly influencing the course
of events were considered and the explanatory attitude was replaced
by a descriptive outlook. The foundation of what has been called the
scientific revolution with the mathematical-physical way of thinking
and its experimental method, was put in place.
   A new possibility to cope with human existence was introduced
with the emergence of increased knowledge in astronomy. With the
discoveries of Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) the geocentric world
view was slowly abandoned in favour of a new heliocentric theory
for the movements of celestial bodies. Influenced by earlier aesthetic
preferences he continued to consider all planetary movements to
be perfectly circular. Thoughts about an infinite Universe and
world multiplicity vindicated by the philosopher Giordano Bruno
(1548-1600) were considered to be so provocative by the church that
he was sentenced to death and burned at the stake. Tycho Brake
(1546-1601) developed a newly elaborated technique for observation
of planetary movements thereby i m p r o v i n g the theory. His
achievement is implemented by Johannes Kepler (1571-1630) to prove
the elliptic nature of planet orbiting (The three laws of Kepler).
Through the invention of the telescope by Galileo Galilei (1564-
1642) it is possible to have a more realistic perspective on the planet
Earth. The Earth can no longer be seen as the centre of all phenomena
when it is one among several planets moving around the sun. The
discovery of huge numbers of stars proved that the universe is both
larger and more diverse than decreed by the Church and theologians.
Teleological explanation of motion was discarded and motion is now
seen as a force acting on bodies rather than these body's striving to
join an origin. In the thoughts of Galilei we see the beginning of the
10         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



mechanistic world view and the separation between religion and
science. 'The world of nature is the field of science'.
   Thanks to his experimental and mathematical approach, Galilei
was considered to be the first modern scientist. As a researcher he
differentiated between quantitative and qualitative properties. The latter,
like colour, taste, and smell were descriptions for things existing only
in our consciousness and therefore unfit for use within science (which
had to be pursued by universal data originating from the objects).
Questions like 'why' were more and more replaced by questions like
'how'. From now on, a distinction between research and science is
established where research is the production of knowledge and science
implies the creation of conditions favorable for the continuation of
research.
   Another researcher, Rene Descartes (1596-1650), a contemporary
of Galileo, contributed his integrated philosophy from chaos to
cosmos. He is considered the first rationalist and extended the
separation between religion and science to one between body and
mind, dualism. Descartes differs between the body which belongs to
the objective world of physic reality (the domain of science) and that
which belongs to the subjective world of the mind with its thought
and feelings (the domain of religion). The dualism implies that body
and soul is separated from each other but is also in a ranking order,
a kind of control thinking. The soul is what commands and body (the
nature) is what has to obey. In a sense, this separation of mind and
matter was historically unavoidable in order for science to stand free
from the all-mighty church. This fundamental breach between subject
and object became the starting point for the category-thinking of
modern society. Dichotomies like man and nature, spirit and matter,
male and female became part of western thinking.
   From here on, the Western religious tradition holding human
beings as something unique in this world and perhaps in the universe,
began its implacable retreat. Human consciousness no longer mirrors
a divine origin, only itself. Old religious authorities were succesively
replaced by other sovereignties and theological models of explanation
were changed to scientific.
                     THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                   11



    Most of the natural p h e n o m e n a s u r r o u n d i n g m a n seemed
however still to be inexplicable, i.e. without apparent causation.
The explanations offered were of a purely superstitious nature.
In spite of this, it was generally believed, as a principle if not in
practice, that a complete understanding of the world is possible.
When the Renaissance scientist looks about he sees his own world as
a relatively small island of certainty surrounded by a sea of accepted
mystery.
    The birth of modern science must be seen in relation to the power
of the church. The influence of the papal theocracy and the religious
world view influenced the course of development. There was very
little difference between priests and learned men. The trials of
Giordano Bruno and Galileo Galilei showed that science was in danger
if it interfered with social questions, that is, the domain and the
authority of the Pope. Science had to declare itself independent and
neutral, and concepts such as impartiality and objectivity soon became
its hallmark, influencing modern civilization much more strongly
than religion. The religious imperative of man's supremacy over
himself was successively superseded by the scientific imperative of
the human right to supremacy over nature. In our time, at the end of
the 20th century, the concept of objectivity and impartiality is still
relevant — if we acknowledge its limitations.
    At the time of the scientific revolution, the European university
was firmly established and considered as a conduce to rapid
development. The first universities were a further development of
a number of cathedral schools and had no intentions to. be the
servant of society. The aim of the professors, teachers, and students
was to take advantage of their own interests and protect the activity
against encroachment from both church and state. The resulting
alliance became an organization so successful that it survived half a
millennium. The university as a neutral zone, relatively free from
religious and government authorities and with its own administration
of justice, could offer a sanctuary of freedom.

                                     *
12         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



The mechanistic world and determinism

In the beginning of the 18th century, the view that we today call the
'scientific world view' was firmly established in European society,
albeit dressed in clothes of its own time. Tradition and speculation
were replaced by rationalism and empiricism with the assumption that
natural phenomena can and must be investigated and explained.
The inexplicable was only a matter of 'undiscovered science'. The
conception was that reality is determined, exact, formulated, explicit
and that it is possible to control the natural forces.
    The image of the world changed to that of a machine and the
ambition of science was to dominate and conquer Nature. Such an
entirely material world could be treated as if it was dead, letting
man be the possessor and master of his environment, including all
plants and animals, and even permitting the expansion of slavery.
This world was also separated from the moral world with which it
had been one during the medieval era. The spiritual and physical
order which were synthesized within the Natural Law (now seen
as a mathematical/physical entity) were still influencing the whole
universe. All the mysteries of nature can now ultimately be explained
in mechanistic terms.
    The physical world formed a machine wherein every subfunction
could be calculated and events in one part of the universe have
consequences for all other parts. In this classic determinism, to every
effect there is a cause and to every action there is a reaction. Cause
and event initiate a chain of interrelated events. In this eternal
continuum, annihilation of matter/energy is impossible.

                    'All things by immortal power
                              Near or far
                               Hiddenly
                       To each other linked are
                   That thou canst not stir a flower
                     Without troubling of a star.' (F. Thompson 1897)

   Astronomy became the symbolic area for a materialistic world
philosophy: a mechanistic universe of dead bodies passively obeying
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING               13


the order of blind forces. For many, mechanism had come to be
the logical opposite to superstition. Even the general outlook on
man changed and was mainly mechanistic. Men and animals were
in principle nothing more than very elaborate mechanical beings.
The human heart became a pump obeying pure thermodynamical
principles within a hydraulic/mechanical system. Morality, free will,
and thinking were explained as functions of the organization of matter.
For example, in the famous book L'Homme machine from 1748 by the
French philosopher La Mettrie. This mechanistic era is often called the
Machine Age, a term rooted both in the world view presented here
and in the central role played by machines in the industrial revolution.
   The most important name in mathematics/physics of this era
is Isaac Newton (1643-1727). In his Principia of 1687 concerning
gravitation, Newton presents a working mechanistic universe,
independent of spiritual order. In Newtonian mechanics the term
initial condition denotes the material status of the world at the
beginning of time. Status changes are then specified in the physical
laws. Known positions and velocities for planets in our solar
systems at one specific moment are thus enough to determine their
position and velocities for all future time. Newton's laws therefore
automatically had determinism built into them.
   In Newton's mechanical world-view there are distinct connections
with cause and effect. Events and processes are causal, rectilinear,
and predictable and have a determined direction of time. Such an
intellectual view had to apprehend the universe like a gigantic
machine with evident and pregnant rules. When the connections not
are visible, there are either such correlations.
   Pierre Simon de Laplace (1749-1827), a follower of Newton,
considered the univers to be a complex but understandable machinery.
He became famous for his concept, the 'Laplace's demon'. This demon
knows the position and speed of every particle in the universe at any
moment. Using Newton's laws, it calculates both the past and the
future of the whole universe. From that followed that all the problems
in the universe could be solved by interpolation or extrapolation.
Perfect knowledge of the past would give perfect knowledge of the
future.
14         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The idea of the universe as a clockwork mechanism was thus
established. On this was founded the doctrine of determinism,
implying the orderly flow of cause and effect in a static universe, a
universe of being without becoming. Carried to its final extreme,
superdeterminism was embraced by many of the scientists of the time.
According to this world view, not even the initial condition of the
universe could have been other than it was; it is determined exactly
so by a determinism which determined itself.




The hegemony of determinism

A uniform world view was emerging, expressed in mechanistic terms.
It is possible to comprehend the universe, at least fundamentally.
This clockwork universe, having been wound up by the Creator,
works according to the internal structure and the causal laws of nature.
The purpose and meaning, the very existence is put outside of the
universe itself. The distinction of a clockwork is just that its meaning
is external to the machine and only exists in the mind of its creator.
As a clockmaker is to a clock, so is God to Nature.
    Clockwork was also presented as a central characteristic of the
general principle of causality: that every effect is preceded, not followed,
by a cause. Just as one cogwheel drives and influences the other in
a rational way, a measurable cause always produces a measurable
effect in any rational system. Also, identical causes imposed upon
identical rational systems, always produce identical effects. Thus one
cause/effect relation explains all existence, where the first cause was
God.
    Under these circumstances, the problem of free-will came to the
fore: free will was claimed to be an illusion. Meaning and freedom
of choice lost their purpose in a deterministic universe; they are not
necessary to explain natural phenomena and human behaviour. The
cause explains the effects completely.
    On the basis of this mental world view, reductionism became the
pre-dominant doctrine. Reductionism argues that from scientific
                   THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING               15


theories which explain phenomena on one level, explanations for a
higher level can be deduced. Reality and our experience can be
reduced to a number of indivisible basic elements. Also qualitative
properties are possible to reduce to quantitative ones. Colour can be
reduced to a question of wavelength, hatred and love to a question
of the composition of internal secretion, etc. Thus reductionism was
inherent to all main fields of science, as is illustrated below.

— in physics     : the atom with two qualities, mass and energy
— in biology     : the cell, the living building block
— in psychology : the archetype instincts
— in linguistics : the basic elements of sound, the phonemes

  Reductionism in turn provides a foundation for the analytical
method with its three stages.

• Dissect conceptually/physically.
• Learn the properties/behaviour of the separate parts.
• From the properties of the parts, deduce the properties/behaviour
  of the whole.

   Observations and experiments are the cornerstones of reductionist
analytical methodology. Another prerequisite of this method is
freedom from environment, that is, environment is considered to be
irrelevant. The scientific laboratory concept standardizes, and thereby
excludes, the environment. In this milieu, the effect of different
variables — those being observed by the scientist — can be studied
in proper order without influence from the environment. Here various
hypotheses about nature are tested in order to arrive at approximate
answers. In this activity the scientist is presupposed to be outside
of the experiment. The observer is not involved, at least ideally.
The lodestar of the scientist becomes non-intervetion, neutrality and
objectivity.
    Through analytical science the The Scientific Method is established
with its ultimate activity to

• understand
• describe
16         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• control
• predict
• explain
• prescribe (in certain cases)

the various phenomena. Its own approach become the

— reduction of complexity through analysis
— development of hypotheses
— design and replication of experiments
— deduction of results and rejection of hypotheses

   The basic metaphysical ideas behind the Scientific Method are
certain presumptions regarding reality. These are constantly subject
to criticism but as a starting point for scientific activity they cannot
be dispensed with. They are presented below.

(1) Nature is neither unpredictable nor secretive. Its qualities are
    possible to discover, albeit that this will sometimes take an
    extremely long time. There is no knowledge which is higher or
    more absolute than the human mind can assimilate.
(2) Nature is regular and thus predictable (governed by certain laws)
    and the same laws are valid in all parts of the Universe during all
    existing time. A theory regarding a chaotic Universe therefore is
    unthinkable.
(3) The laws of nature are hierarchical. Uppermost, laws regarding
    all parts of the known Universe prevail, while others only are
    relevant for the earth and include components of chance and
    historical necessity.
(4) Nature is computationally reversible. Laws of Nature do not
    change with time and it is possible to calculate what has happened
    and what will happen.
(5) Experiments always give the same results independent of time and
    place in the Universe if the conditions are the same (repeatability,
    intersubjectivity, intrasubjectivity).
(6) The laws of Nature are transfactual, that is, they are valid under
    all circumstances and not only under experimentally controlled
    situations. The laws of Nature have no exceptions and are absolute.
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                 17


(7) The same process which has created the Universe has brought
    forth the human mind. The same rules which are to be found in
    the physical reality exist in human thinking (the principle of
    congruence). The function of Western logic reflects the structure
    of the world.
(8) The development of the Universe has no goal. Nature is blind
    and the evolution handles good and bad solution in the long run,
    equally.
(9) The laws of Nature do not direct individual events. They only
    direct the probabilities with which these events appear.

    The basic metaphysical presumption behind the concept of the
laboratory is that nature is neither unpredictable nor secretive and that
it is computationally reversible. Predictability implies that the same
laws of nature are valid in all parts of the universe. It also implies
that the physical states are influenced by laws, but not vice versa.
Furthermore, the laws of nature are transfactual, that is, they are valid
under all circumstances and not only under experimentally controlled
situations. The laws of nature have no exceptions. By non-secrecy it
is meant that all aspects of nature are in principle possible to reveal,
albeit that this will sometimes take an extremely long time. The same
experiment performed by different observers in different parts of the
universe and at different times should always give the same results
(intersubjectivity and repetitionality). Dissimilar results are attributed
to human deficiency or deception and will be corrected through better
precision of the experimental design. Computational reversibility
implies that, given all necessary knowledge, it is possible to calculate
what happened in a previous instance, that is, that nothing changes
with time.
    Through analytical science The Scientific Method is established with
its own approach in the following order:

— reduction of complexity through analysis
— development of hypotheses
— design and replication of experiments
— deduction of results and rejection of hypotheses
18         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   This methodology, albeit still with its basic metaphysical
assumptions, became the cornerstone of empirical science. It entails
a rational, empirical process of inquiry from observation to the
formulation of hypotheses and further via experiments to theory. Its
strength (and also weakness in our time) is its exclusive consideration
of relevant fact for what is in focus. An examination of weight thus
entirely excludes the colour of the investigated object. Newton, for
example, found out that gravitational attraction depends only on
mass, not on colour or temperature.
    Thus the aim of the method was to bring about a fixed path
reasoning appropriate for all kinds of problems. The person who
uses it can be assured that he has not been outwitted by certain
circumstances to believe something that he actually does not know.
Note, however, that a scientific accomplishment obtains a value only
when it is unrestrictedly and officially communicated to others.
Thanks to this implied fifth and imperative step of the methodology,
comments and corrections of the result can be fed back to the
researcher. This will initiate new ideas and experiments which in
turn ensure that the accumulation of knowledge never halts.
    Classic empirical science is able to produce not only theories
explaining existing phenomena but also theories revealing phenomena
not yet discovered. It can even use methods which create unexplained
theories in search of phenomena. Abstract elegant theories waiting
for a practical application are part of the history of science. It is no
overstatement to assert that the scientific method constitutes the
foundation of the whole, modern development of society.
    This scientific method laid the ground for a certain kind of
mentality and a marked homogenous world view based on the
concepts of empiricism, determinism and monism. While empiricism is
the doctrine that the universe is best understood through the evidence
confronting our senses, determinism is the belief in the orderly flow
of cause and effect. Monism implies the inherent inseparability of
body and mind, a prerequisite in all European thinking. The above
concepts taken together are often referred to as the Scientific Paradigm.
 In the study of electricity, magnetism, light and heat the Scientific
 Paradigm had great success. Within a short time general mathematical
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                 19


laws were formulated which show the interrelationship between the
different areas.
   Human optimism grew rapidly: science was expected to give the
ultimate answers to questions within all areas. Scientific positivism
with its demand for 'hard facts' acquired through experience was
brought into fashion by Auguste Comte (1798-1857). Concepts like
cause, meaning and goal were weeded out of the natural sciences.
Only a reality possible to observe with our senses and possible to
treat logically can be accepted as a basis for reliable knowledge. The
role of the scientist should be that of the objective observer, explaining
and predicting. The collection of absolute facts and the quantification
of these were the main occupations of the scientist. These facts should
be used to find general connections which in turn can be utilized in
predictions of phenomena before they have occured. When the
observation confirms the prediction the connection is verified.
   This positivist mentality can be summed up using the following
concepts.

• Philosophical monism: Body and mind are inseparable.
• Objective reality: A reality possible to experience with our senses.
• Nominalism: All knowledge is related to concrete objects.
  Abstractions lack a real existence.
• Empiricism: All knowledge is founded on experience.
• Anti-normativism: Normative statements do not belong to science
  as they are neither true nor false.
• Methodological monism: Only one method of scientific research
  exists, that given us by the scientific method.
• Causal explanations: Goals, intentions and purpose are irrelevant.

   In a way Comte laid the foundation of a social physics, the ultimate
aim of which became the development of a technology for social
engineering. Hereby human order and advancement could be secured
for the future.
   The last remainder of metaphysics was now cleaned up when
Charles Darwin (1809-1882) published his theory of evolution by
20         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



natural selection in The Origin of Species. By this pioneering work, life
itself got the conformity to scientific law which had been revealed in
physics by Newton 150 years earlier. Left over was pure science —
logical, empirical and with laws permitting predictions.
    At the end of this era of classical determinism, the mechanistic
interpretation of thermodynamics led to new insights. The two main
laws of thermodynamics were formulated through works of Rudolph
Clausius (1822-1888), William Kelvin (1824-1907), Ludwig Boltzmann
(1844-1906) and James Maxwell (1831-1879), the originator of
Maxwell's demon. This is a metaphysical thermodynamic being who
apparently neglects the second law by decreasing the entropy into
an isolated system. The concept of entropy was introduced as a
mathematical formulated abstract condition, the physical reality of
which retained a shroud of mystery.
    The first law of thermodynamics says: the total energy in the
universe is constant and can thus be neither annihilated nor created.
Energy can only be transformed into other forms. (The principle of
conservation of energy with regard to quantity.) Nothing is destroyed!
In a sense, this law had already been formulated 500 years B.C. by
the Greek mathematician Pythagoras who said 'everything changes,
nothing is lost'.
    The second law of thermodynamics states that all energy in the
universe degrades irreversibly. Thus, differences between energy
forms must decrease over time. Everything is spread! (The principle
of degradation of energy with regard to quality.) Translated to the
area of systems the law tells us that the entropy of an isolated system
always increases. Another consequence is that when two systems are
joined together, the entropy of the united system is greater than the
sum of the entropies of the individual systems.
    The third law of thermodynamics, or the asymptotic law,
states that all processes slow down as they operate closer to the
themodynamic steady-state (making it difficult to reach that state
in practice!). Of the three laws, the third is the one which is intuitively
most easy to embrace. All people know how difficult it is to get
 something done in a messy environment.
    Potential energy is organized energy, heat is disorganized energy
 and entropy therefore results in dissolution and disorder. The sum of
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                21


all the quantities of heat lost in the course of all the activities that
have taken place in the universe equals the total accumulation of
entropy. A popular analogy of entropy is that it is not possible to
warm oneself on something which is colder than oneself. The process
of human ageing and death can serve as a pedagogic example of
entropy. Another common experience is that disorder will tend to
increase if things are left to themselves (the bachelor's housekeeping!).
Note also that maximun entropy is maximum randomization.
An interpretation of the three laws also tells us, that entrophy is
proportional to the size of a system. Therefore the entropy of two
liters of water is twice that of one liter of water under the same
condition.
    Inasmuch as there is a mathematical relation between probability
and disorder (disorder is a more probable state than order because
there exists so many more messy states than ordered), it is possible
to speak of an evolution toward entropy. Below some well-known
expressions illustrates this process.

Probability:                        Improbability:
— Disorder                          — Order
— Disorganized energy (heat)        — Organized energy
— Heat (low-grade energy)           — Electricity (high-quality energy)
— Entropy                           — Negentropy (syntropy)

   The above process derives from the second law of thermodynamics
and has had a tremendous impact on our view of the universe. One
consequence is to experience the world as indeterministic or as chaotic.
The ultimate reality is the blind movements of atoms whereby life is
created as a product of chance, and evolution is the result of random
mutations. Another is that the Newtonian world machine has a
persistent tendency to run down; the Creator must wind up the
celestial clockwork from time to time. Any event that is not prohibited
by the laws of physics should therefore happen over and over again.
   Today we can see how these perspectives, together with the image
of the inevitable death of the universe, have significantly influenced
philosophy, art, ethics, and our total world view. This image has
inflicted upon the Western culture some form of paralysis. For the
generations of researchers nurtured via this period's mentality, a
22         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



physical eternity without purpose seemed to be the basis for all
reality. For these people the Universe could be described as 'big and
old — dark and cold', quoting the contemporary geologist George
Barrow. The French physician Leon Brillouin (1889-1969) sums
everything up in his question 'How is it possible to understand life
when the entire world is organized according to the second law of
thermodynamics which points to decay and annihilation?'
    The era of determinism coincides with both the era of machines in
the industrial revolution and the conservative Victorian culture.
Human skills are increasingly taken over by machines; the remaining
manual tasks are broken down into a series of simple and monotonous
manipulations. This dehumanization of productive effort and the
subsequent alienation of the worker gives rise to mental phenomena
such as Marxism-Leninism.
    The deterministic era can also be named the age of scientistn,
with reference to the belief that only concepts which can be expressed
in the language of the exact natural sciences and proven by
quantification have a reality. It assumes the existence of an objective
reality, including dichotomies contrasting man and nature, mind and
matter, facts and values. Its primary concern is to discover truth,
regarding questions of values and needs as outside the realm of
scientific inquiry. Scientism is also synonymous with the 'objective'
mode of presentation of results, used by many researchers of this era.
That courage, despair and joy are important prerequisites for a
successful result is neglected — for entirely subjective reasons.
    In the deterministic interpretation of the second law of thermo-
dynamics it is possible to find the roots of the pessimism prevailing
at the turn of the century. It is not possible to maintain existing states
and patterns and decline and decay is the fate of all things in time.
A fully deterministic cosmos leaves no room for values such as truth,
beauty, goodness, perseverance or love. There the sun is exhausting
its life-giving resources, the earth is approaching a new glacial period
and the society is declining. Inferior army discipline, general
decadence, falling birth rate, spread of tuberculosis are all visible
effects of increased entropy. Emotionally, cosmic and physical values
are never separated from a human system of evaluation. The resulting
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                 23


gloominess, the fin de siecle mode, is excellently presented in European
literature and art of this period.
    While a 300-year-old attitude towards reality draws to its end, the
dissolution of determinism gave room for new impulses and new
perspectives.




The age of relativity and quantum mechanics

The first fatal blow to determinism with its static view of the universe
comes from Albert Einstein (1879-1955) in 1905, in his special theory
of relativity. An event is defined with four numbers: three for the
position in space and one for time. These constituents do not exist
individually; it is not possible to imagine time without space, or vice
versa. When a star is observed at a distance of one hundred light-
years, the star is not only this far away in space but it is also observed
as it was one hundred years ago. The four-dimensional space with its
space/time continuum was introduced.
   The contradiction between this theory and Newton's theory of
gravitation posed a problem. Einstein solved it in 1915 by introducing
the general relativity theory, where gravitation is a consequence of
the non-flat curving space/time caused by the content of mass and
energy. The mass of the sun curves the space/time into a circular
orbit in the three-dimensional world even if it is a straight line in the
four-dimensional world. Einstein's synthesis of the fundamental
quantities of time, space, mass, and energy was confirmed first in the
1930s through astronomical observations.
   Obviously, Einstein has been able to see both deeper and longer
away than other members of the scientific community, exemplified
by this poem:

                        "Man has two eyes
             One only sees what moves in fleeting time
                            The other
                    What is eternal and divine"        (/. Scheffler)
24         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   For the general public living in the first part of the twentieth
century, the scientific world view represented by Einstein's theories
was sometimes more than incomprehensible. When he showed that
two spatially separated events judged to occur simultaneously by
one observer can occur at different moments for another, even the
educated classes shook their heads. A contemporary view of the
general relativity theory may be found in the following limerick:

            There was a young lady girl named Bright,
              Whose speed was far faster than light,
                     She travelled one day,
                        In a relative way,
               And returned on the previous night.                    (R. Bullet)

   Another death blow to determinism was quantum theory. It
had been enunciated already 1901 by the German physicist Max
Planck (1858-1947), yet without attracting attention. When he
discovered that light can be apprehended like a small physical
entity (called light quantum) or like a waveform, both of them
propagating in space, the classic concepts of mechanics started
its reformulation. The causality of physics and the possibility to
create comprehensible and down-to-earth models of reality had
now come to an end. Central scientific concepts like identity and
objectivity now lost their firm contours. The conception of the
world changed. The focus of the research was moved from objects to
transformations, processes and transitions. From having been
explanatory, investigating, arranging and partially comforting, natural
science at the turn of the century became increasingly confusing,
menacing and unintelligible.
    In 1927, it was Werner Heisenberg (1901-1976) who framed the
uncertainty principle: it is fundamentally impossible to simultaneously
define position and velocity for a particle. Heisenberg's principle
must be considered a special case of the complementarity principle, also
articulated in 1927 by Niels Bohr (1885-1962). This states that an
experiment on one aspect of a system (of atomic dimensions) destroys
the possibility of learning about a complementarity aspect of the
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                 25


same system. Wave and particle behaviour of, for example light, are
not contradictions, but complementary aspects of the one and same
reality. Physical systems can exist as superpositions of different states.
A defined underlying reality does not exist. Together these principles
have shocking consequences for the comprehension of entropy and
determinism.
   The new mechanics, quantum mechanics, thus includes indeter-
minism as a fundamental principle in the processes of nature.
Consequently, when taking measurements, the very measurement
is defining what is measured. Every measurement of a quantum
system will influence it by interchange between the system and the
equipment. The measurement defines quantities which earlier was
undetermined. A quantity cannot be assigned a meaning before the
measurement has been done. The answer we get is dependent of
how we put the question. Furthermore, it proves the impossibility of
determinism when it focuses on the atom and its particles. It is not
even possible to suppose that scientific laws has a similar function
on all levels between macrocosmos and microcosmos. Earlier
uncertainty was the same as ignorance while today it is part of
knowledge. In the small-scale system of the atom, the predominant
and special circumstances are explained with the help of quantum
theory. This theory concerns probabilities rather than certainties. Thus
quantum mechanics is a statistical theory, differing from other such
theories by the fact that its probability charachter is an integrated
part of the very theory.
   Although concerned solely with extremely small particles, the
theory revealed some extraordinary circumstances in physics. One is
'A spooky action at a distance', as Einstein called the spectral effect or
'entanglement'. A pair of correlated particles which have at one time
been connected continue to influence each other instantly even after
they have moved to separate parts of the universe. According to the
laws of nature, energy and or information cannot be transmitted
from one place to another faster than light. This guarantees, that in
the chain of cause and effect, the effect never occurs before the cause.
The velocity of light here seems to have an exception which up to
now not has got its explanation. The spectral effect is an example of
26         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



one of the main qualities of quantum theory, namely non-locality, the
technical name for a signal-less, instantaneous action at a distance.
   Another remarkable effect is that electrons will not jump from one
energy level to another while they are being watched, the zeno effect
or the principle of inseparability. This illustrates a basic phenomenon
within quantum physics; the interpreter and the interpreted do not
exist independently. Thus, interpretation is existence and existence is
interpretation.
   The mysterious behaviour of particles in quantum theory has
inspired the following small poem:

                  Neutrinos, they are very small
              They have no charge and have no mass
                    And do not interact at all
               To them the earth is just a silly ball.                (/. Updike)

   A compressed summary of the quantum theories is presented in
the main points below.

• In quantum mechanics, individual events have no cause.
• Quantum mechanics never explains how someting happens. It only
  explains probabilities for that it should happen.
• A quantum-mechanical event has both non-local and local influence
  backward in time.
• Quantum mechanics is stochastic. Which one of different possi-
  bilities becomes realized can never be predicted.
• Quantum mechanics does not give explanations or descriptions of
  a measurement process. In this things happens outside time.

   Thus quantum fluctuations are not caused by anything. They
are genuinely spontaneous and intrinsic to nature at its deepest
level — something unitelligible for human brains which are hardwired
to think in terms of cause and effect. However, by operating without
cause and effect they leave room for free will and spontaneity.
   While quantum theory is not the final answer in physics, it
had definitely opened a completely new way of thinking; its
impact on the perception of reality and our world view should
not be underestimated. Today, most scientists agree on a world
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                27


view in which global determinism points in a main direction;
they agree that local development determines its own non-predictive
path, open to causal influences coming from both lower and
higher levels.
    The predominant cosmological view, called the standard model,
tells us that the universe is expanding and has as its starting point
in time the big bang of 15 billion years ago (the greatest effect of all
with no cause!). The universe has then developed from an incredibly
tightly-packed system, a singularity, where the natural laws as we
know them did not exist. This condition cannot be described with
the help of either a theory of relativity or the quantum theory. These
can at most be seen as components of a not yet existing final theory.
A part of the standard model is what is called the cosmological principle.
This states that the Universe has no centre and is essentially the same
everywhere and that materia and radiation are uniformly distributed
in space at the greatest scale.
    Today, the standard model is one of the most verified theories of
natural science. Hitherto it has been able to stand all scientific tests
and all experiments has given the same results. Predictions regarding
things which should exist in the Universe but not were observed
have later been detected and confirmed by help of the theory.
    We are now nearing the end of the 20th century. What was begun
by Galileo, continued by Newton and finished by Einstein has over
time inspired even poets:
           'Nature and nature's laws lay hidden in night
            Let Newton be God said and all was light.'
                                                   (Alexander Pope)

          'But then the devil cried that Einstein had to do
                his work and reestablish status quo.'
                                                        (John Collings)

   These small poems implicitly question whether we can understand
the world surrounding us and theories about it. Theories such as the
quantum theory cannot actually be proved. If they are mathematically
consistent and observations coincide with predictions, the probability
28         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



is however high that they describe reality reasonably well. Today,
the rules of quantum theory have been around for a long time and
must be considered neither wrong nor incomplete. But modern science
based on quantum theory has come to realize that it is impossible to
conclusively describe and understand the natural world. To this may
be added that even if modern science was able to explain how the
Universe is structured, it cannot say why.
   Scientists today tend to agree that when we formulate the theories
of the atomic world, we are doing it vis-a-vis not the reality but rather
our knowledge regarding reality. Physics, for example, does not claim
anything about something actually existing, but rather informs our
knowledge concerning the structure of our psyche. The models of
physics no longer explain, they only describe. Therefore, in a way,
fundamental physics today is a matter of philosophy, while cosmology
has been a kind of scientific poetry. On its most fundamental
level, nature is not possible to comprise with traditional knowledge.
However, the everyday world where we live in and which is based
on quantum mechanics, is possible to understand and comprise.
    A consequence of this attitude is that it is possible to claim that
the world only exists in the spectator's mind, that an observation is
dependent upon the observer. This philosophical shattering of reality
echoes the claim of Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) that the concepts of
space and time were necessary forms of human experience, rather
than characteristics of the universe. Kant considered that it is not
only the consciousness which adapts to things, but things also adapt
to the consciousness. This kind of physical idealism is well expressed
in another limerick:

               There once was a man who said 'God
                   Must think it exceedingly odd
                      If he finds that this tree
                           Continues to be
               When there's nobody else in the quad.'
                                                                (Ronald Knox)

   The view that only one truth about reality exists and that the
various scientific disciplines describe different parts of it is no longer
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                29


tenable. What exists is only subjective and often contradictory
conceptions of reality. The decline of the illusions of the pre-Einstein
natural science shows that not even scientific results are absolute. In
due time they are replaced by theories and models having an extended
descriptive and predictive value. Present-day knowledge is only the
best description of reality we have at the current moment in time.
    Werner Heisenberg is reported to have said: 'A quantum world
does not exist. The only thing which exists is our abstract description
of the physical reality.' Niels Bohr also said: 'Physics is only about
what we can say concerning nature.' Even Max Planck who was
thoroughly educated in classical mechanics had, during his whole
life, difficulties in accepting the verified results of his own theories.
There is no point in asking how matter could be constituted behind
our observations of it, as these are the only evidence we can
ever have. According to this view, quantum theory should not be
understood as a description of the world, but rather as an instrument
enabling the human mind to make predictions and calculations.
Quantum theory suggests that the subatomic world — and even the
world beyond the atom — has no independent structure at all until
defined by the human intellect.
    Albert Einstein took a dedicated rationalist view when he said:
'The firm laws of logic are always valid, and nature's laws are
 indifferent to our attitude' and 'The most incomprehensible thing
about the Universe is that it is comprehensible'. Thus Einstein claimed
that the world exists independent of human beings and that it is only
 in part comprehensible. Einstein's pursuit of the old rationalist
 tradition in Western science that reality has an objective existence
 independent of the observer is, however, today questioned by many
 researchers.
    The multiple perspectives, issuing from the modern, relativistic
 science, have actualized the dualism between substance and
 awareness, the classic b o d y / m i n d problem. Our conventional
 definition of self-consciousness includes totality and consistency
 in time and space. Such self-consciousness can be achieved only
 by a creative human intelligence. Quantum physics claims that
 consciousness per se may be seen as the particle's mental existence in
30         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



wave form defined by cooperation, interference and overlapping. It
exists everywhere and has knowledge of what happens in other places.
The particle's physical existence is its permanence as matter with mass
and position in space. On the basis of the above we can identify the
following internal respective external opposites:

— consciousness          — body
— subject                — object
— individual             — environment
— culture                — nature

   A number of proposals taken from the area of relativity theory and
quantum physics are presented below. Many of these are paradoxical
but one has to bear in mind that they relate to microcosmos and not
our conventional environment.

• There is an infinite number of worlds and we exist parallel in them.
• Time goes both backward and forward at the same time.
• Matter and consciousness are the same thing.
• A particle exists in several places at the same time when manifested
  as a wave form. Although it can only be observed in one place at
  a time, it does exist in several spaces simultaneously.
• Quantum physics concerns probabilities. Quantum wave functions
  express all probabilities simultaneously. When someone observes,
  the probability becomes a reality with fixed properties. Other
  possibilities vanish.
• In the world of quantum physics everything is interconnected.
  Everything exists everywhere simultaneously, but can only be
  observed as an object in one universe at a time.
• The quantum wave is a connection through all time both in future
  and past time.
• What we remember of past times has been determined by something
  in the future. Both past and future have existed before, the future
  in a parallel universe.
• When we choose to observe something, we create and influence it.
• Observations create consciousness and consciousness creates the
  material universe.
                     THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                 31


• The existence of matter and consciousness is the same thing.
• The existential basis for all matter is meaning.
• Radio-transmitted music confined in the form given by the radio
  wave exists as a potentiality; it is heard only when the receiver is
  turned on.
• Quantum fields of potential information are everywhere omni-
  present. Their meaning is existence. To change the meaning changes
  the existence.
• The mental and the physical world are two sides of the same coin.
  They are separated by consciousness only, not by reality.
• Meaning and purpose are inherent parts of reality, not an abstract
  quality in the human mind.

    Quantum theory has seriously undermined science's faith in an
external, material reality and has implied a repudiation of scientism
and a rigorous positivistic empirical science. The potential of
dead matter to produce living matter and consciousness signifies
a recognition of purpose, of creation and self-organization. Living
systems inevitably emerge as soon as the prerequisites are by hand.
According to this view, life is a consequence of the structure of the
Universe rather than a random event. The function of living matter
is apparently to expand the organization of the universe. Here, locally
decreased entropy as a result of biological order in existing life is
invalidating the effects of the second law of thermodynamics, although
at the expense of increased entropy in the whole system. It is the
running down of the universe that made the sun and the earth
possible. It is the running down of the sun that made life and us
possible. And the price of indentity in life is mortality — conteracted
by the fact that family and species live longer than one of us.
    Strict determinism is no longer valid; the development of our
universe is decided both by chance and necessity, by random and
deterministic causes working together in entropy, evolution, continuity
and change. These universal principles — sometimes called syntropic
{Fuller 1992) — counteracting decay and destruction (the second law
of thermodynamics), will create a new and more flexible world view.
    Another challenge to positivistic science is the idea that the universe
itself is a living phenomenon, irrespective of its organic inhabitants.
32         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



The creation of new stars, their growth, reproduction and death,
together with their metabolism, justify the use of the term 'living' in
the eyes of many scientists.
    The concept of value is not inherent to science; classical science
never asks why or what for. Nor is speculation as to the cause,
meaning and ultimate goal an attribute of its method. The second
law of thermodynamics, expressing the diffusion and deterioration
of matter and existence, has long represented the classical science
mentality and influenced the construction of methods and instruments.
Today, with a growing awareness of the universe undergoing a
creative and problem-solving evolution, values can add new and
fruitful dimensions to classical science.
    On the basis of the above outline of this scientific development
and the consequences thereof for the present-day world view, some
observations can be emphasized. The first is that the disintegration
of classic physics initiates the dissolution of art and morality. Proust's
soundings in human memory, Picasso's insurrection against the
perspective and Schonberg's musical revolution in tone, harmony,
and rhythm is coherent with a new scientific world-view. There, the
concepts of time and room have got a new and radical change. The
discoveries of Planck and Einstein corresponded better with Freud's
mapped dream-world than with the conventional perceived, empirical
world. The reaction of the then existing man against modernism was
an uneasiness caused by the ever increasing enstrangement of science
and art from the area of immediate intelligibility. Today art and
literature reflect the fragmentation of Western civilization.
    A second and astonishing observation is that the classic natural
laws formulated by Newton, for example, are still going strong. While
piece after piece has been added to the theoretical building by new
generations of scientists, it has not yet been necessary to demolish its
main structure and start from scratch again. In the domain of classical
physics regarding motions of objects, there is no contradiction between
deductions done by Newtonian mathematics and quantum theory.
This is called the correspondence principle, and was formulated by Bohr.
    The Newtonian gravitational theory has influenced Einstein's
theory of relativity. Through Einstein's theories, Newton's equations
have become more complex; Newton's original theory is nonetheless
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                33


still valid and gives us in most cases very good approximations.
Newton's mechanics has now become a 'special case' within Einstein's
theory of relativity. The counter-intuitive subatomic paradoxes of
quantum physics do not interfere with the common sense of everyday
life, although they are very extensive in for example microelectronics.
Regarding the relation between relativity theory and quantum theory,
the latter suggests that space and time are approximate concepts,
which may have to be abandoned when the infinitely small is
contemplated. Thus large-scale mechanics and quantum mechanics
have been forced to co-exist, because neither is any good at explaining
the other.
    Another observation is that the classical division of the disciplines
was to a great extent conditioned by — but also reflected — the order
of nature, mind and society of its time (that is, the well-organized
Victorian society). This is expressed by Comte's hierarchy of
development in science with its three stages.

— The theological stage (corresponding to the scholasticism) with
  magic and religion.
— The metaphysical stage (corresponding to the the Renaissance)
  where theology has been replaced by philosophy.
— The positive or the scientific stage (corresponding to the
  mechanistic era).

   At the same time it is possible to see a reductionist hierarchy
in the various scientific disciplines when arranged in order according
to 'size'.

— Astronomy
— Sociology
— Psychology
— Biology
— Chemistry
— Physics

  Further, the various disciplines in science have undergone a similar
development and show a parallelism in their development of methods.
Every field of human knowledge thus passes through distinct stages.
34         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



— Intuition
— Fact-finding
— Analysis
— Synthesis

   Synthesis is a prerequisite for the systems thinking of our
own time, just as analysis was for the mechanistic era. A system
inasmuch as it is a whole, will lose its synergetic properties
if it is decomposed; it cannot be understood through analysis.
Understanding must therefore progress from the whole to its
parts — a synthesis. Synthesis takes the steps of analytical science
(see p. 15) in reverse order.

— Identify the system of which the unit in focus is a part.
— Explain the properties or behaviour of the system.
— Finally, explain the properties or behaviour of the unit in focus as
  a part or function of the system.

   Synthesis does not create detailed knowledge of a system's
structure. Instead, it creates knowledge of its function (in contrast to
analysis). Therefore, synthesis must be considered as explaining while
the scientific method must be considered as describing.
   Systems thinking expands the focus of the observer, whereas analy-
tical thinking reduces it. In other words, analysis looks into things,
synthesis looks out of them. This attitude of systems thinking is often
called expansionism, an alternative to classic reductionism. Whereas
analytical thinking concentrates on static and structural properties,
systems thinking concentrates on the function and behaviour of whole
systems. Analysis gives description and knowledge; systems thinking
gives explanation and understanding. With its emphasis on variation
and multiplicity, rather than statistically ensured regularities, systems
thinking belongs to the holistic tradition of ideas. However, what
really differentiates this kind of thinking from ordinary linear cause/
effect reasoning is that none of these concepts can be regarded as
more primary than the other. A change can be initiated everywhere
in an event cycle and after a certain time be read off as either cause
or effect elsewhere in a system.
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING               35


   Systems thinking is a response to the failure of mechanistic thinking
in the attempt to explain social and biological phenomena. As an
attempt to solve the crisis of classical science it has formulated new
approaches in scientific investigation. Primarily, it dates back to the
1920s when emergent properties in living organisms were generally
recognized. Born in biology, it is easy to understand that the systems
movement has acquired the major part of its terminology from that
area when considering terms like autonomy, survival, etc.
   It is now possible to note how the specific tools in the various
areas have emphasized the different stages. The tools for the analysis
were par excellence the microscope and the telescope, tools which
must be considered to be reductionist promotive. The tools of the
emerging systems age are designed to enhance synthesis and
have often taken over the function of the classical laboratory.
The computer has become a viable substrate for experimentation.
It has enabled what we can call functionalism. This is the view that
functional properties of a system can be studied independently of the
underlaying implementation. Research in many fields such as nuclear,
aerodynamics, biology, chemistry, etc. is now being simulated instead
of actually performed. A computer simulation is a form of science
standing halfway between theory and experiment. An equation, for
example, solved by a computer can unfold patterns never predicted
as it may be far too complicated to solve by hand. Research in many
fields such as nuclear, aerodynamics, biology, chemistry, etc. is now
being simulated instead of actually performed. The particle accelerator
combines analytic and synthetic properties in a kind of super
microscope capable of the resolution of objects less than the diameter
of the atomic nucleus. Geostationary or orbiting satellites give
outstanding possibilities for the understanding of global phenomena
and for the first time in history humanity has now the opportunity
to look upon itself from the outside. Tools with the above-mentioned
properties are often called macroscopes. Together these tools has
 done that which earlier only was intellectual experiments now can
be real ones.

                                    *
36        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



The systems age

In the 1950s, with the introduction of computers, hydrogen bombs
and space exploration, large-scale problems began to penetrate
Western society. The traffic-system breakdowns, environmental
disasters and the nuclear threat were immediately high on the agenda.
Society was faced with messes, interacting problems varying from
technical and organizational to social and political.
   It was suddenly realized that many solutions were inadequate
when applied to problems which no longer existed in their original
form. Change itself, with its accelerating rate, was a major concern.
Two hundred years of success for classical science and technology
had created a form of development the long-term effects of which
apparently were programmed to be devastating for humanity. Gerald
Weinberg states in one of his books that 'science and engineering
have been unable to keep pace with the second order effects produced
by their first order victories'.
   The following examples address some of the problems:

— deterioration of the human gene-pool, increasing allergies,
  diabetes, and antibiotic resistance
— deterioration of human epidemic environment, e.g. AIDS
— environmental destruction and climatological changes
— deforestation and desertification
— garbage accumulation, nuclear radiation, water, soil, and air
  pollution
— acidification, decreasing subsoil water and shrinking ozone layer
— decreasing biodiversity and extinction of species
— population explosion, general migration, criminalization, terrorism
— junk food and genetically altered cereals and fruit
— urbanization, unemployment, and proletarianization
— energy wastage and resource depletion
— motorization and noise pollution
— data pollution, lack of information and knowledge
— commercialization and cultural impoverishment
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING               37


— mental corruption and drug abuse
— environmental ugliness with growing amounts of concrete and
  asphalt
— bureaucratization, passivization and dulling of the human intellect
— destruction of arable land with buildings, highways, mining
  districts, junkyards and minefields
— wars constantly in progress on several places in the world
    Classical science, with its over-specialization and compartmen-
talization, had already proved its inability to handle problems of
such tremendously increased complexity as in the above list. The
interaction of system-variables are so interlinked to each other that
cause and effect is a kind of circular logic. One separate variable thus
can be both cause and effect. An attempt to reduce complexities to
their constituents and build an understanding of the wholeness
through knowledge of its parts is no longer valid. Not understanding
that the wholes are more than the sum of their parts, scientists had
assembled knowledge into islands, extending into an archipelago of
disconnected data.
    Not long ago, physics was regarded an archetype for all genuine
science. A reductionary chain was envisaged where psychology was
deducted to neurophysiology, neurophysiology to biochemistry,
biochemistry to chemistry and this in turn to quantum mechanics.
Today, modern biology has shown that this kind of reductionism is
out of the question. Physics, chemistry and biology have united with
each other into molecular biology — a new overarching description
system separated from the area of both physics and chemistry.
    Many scientists have now realized that the way they had embraced
the world was not far-reaching enough to understand and explain
what they observed and encountered. As Gary Zuchov (1979) says in
his book The Dancing Wu-Li Masters: 'Their noses had been too deeply
buried in the bark of a special tree, to be able to discuss forests in a
meaningful way.' Against this background, the adaptation of science
became systems thinking. This attitude was an answer to the inability
of the mechanistic outlook to explain social and biological phenomena.
It can be deduced from the 1920s when synergy-effects in living
38         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



organisms began to be observed. General Systems Theory was born as
an attempt to convergence in a world where the unity of science had
been lost and different disciplines had drifted apart.
   It was gradually accepted that systems are wholes which cannot
be understood through analysis inasmuch as their primary properties
derive from the interactions of their parts. Thus awareness grew that
everything in the universe — including themselves — which seems
to exist independently, was in fact part of an all-embracing organic
pattern. No single part of this pattern was ever really separated from
another. It was possible to catch a glimpse of a universality of systemic
order and behaviour which characterized both living and non-living
systems. That humans now had got access to some of the main design
principles of the universe implied that they too were included in the
drawings for some very significant ultimate purpose.
   Earlier, the alternative to systemic intervention was to suffer the
consequences, to endure whatever happened; scientists had too often
waited for systems failures to see what these could reveal about the
mechanism. Today function, not anatomy, is the main point. The
important task is to solve problems in real life. To describe and
understand were not values in themselves; their purpose was to
enhance the capability for large-scale system prediction and control.
   The technicians strove to have things work well, the social scientist
to have things behave well. Science was to become more ethical, less
philosophical. To do things, was considered to be more important
than to think about them. In these circumstances emerged the new
interdisciplinary and holistic approach. Here, holism was an attempt
to bring together fragmentary research findings in a comprehensive
view on man, nature, and society. In practice it was a search of an
outlook to see better, a network to understand better and a platform to
act better.
   Without hesitation this had it roots in the wartime efforts and the
special mentality of operations research. This 'emergency-discipline'
handled military strategic decisions, resource allocations, optimal
scheduling and risk analysis, etc. in a truly pragmatic way. Its aim
was to do, to the best of human knowledge in a given context and
with given time and resources, all in order to win the war. Its main
                   THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                  39


guidelines were the following:

• It is not necessary to understand everything, rather to have it under
  control. Ask what happens instead of why.
• Do not collect more information than is necessary for the job.
  Concentrate on the main consequences of the task, the small details
  may rest in peace.
• Solve the problems of today and be aware that prerequisites and
  solutions soon become obsolete.
   Operational research gave rise to the first successful methodology
where the problem complex knot was disassembled into disciplinary
parts and could be treated as one entity by different researchers.
   In 1954, the International Society for General Systems Theory,
ISGST, was founded. This society later become the International
Society for Systems Science, ISSS. Two of the most prominent founders
were Ludwig von Bertalanffy and Kenneth Boulding. Although
Bertalanffy had already formulated his ideas in the 1930s, he was not
recognized until one of his now-classic papers on systems theory
appeared in the American journal Science in 1950. Then, the idea that
systems had general characteristics independent of the scientific areas
to which they belonged was both new and revolutionary. Boulding
in turn published his well-known system hierarchy in 1956.
   The founding team of interdisciplinary scientists, had a shared
interest in a universal science. They wanted to link together the many
splintered disciplines with a law of laws applicable to them all. The
following aims were stated:

• to integrate similarities and relations within science;
• to promote communication across disciplinal boundaries;
• to establish a theoretical basis for general scientific education.

   Integration should be promoted by the discovery of analogies and
isomorphisms and the new science should be a tool with which to
handle complex systems. Analogies are explanations done by relating
something not yet understood to something understood. Isomorphism
exists when common characteristics, structures, formulas and form
of organization are in accordance in different systems. That is, when
40         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



formally identical laws governing the functioning of materially
different phenomena exist. A partial accordance is generally referred
to as homomorphism. The use of isomorphism made possible the
indirect study of systems in terms of other systems (simulation) and
the use of content-independent methods within different scientific
areas.
   Step by step a theory was established: the General Systems
Theory or GST. As a basic science, it deals, on an abstract level,
with general properties of systems, regardless of physical form or
domain of application, supported by its own metaphysics in Systems
Philosophy. GST provides a way to abstract from reality; simplifying
it while at the same time capturing its multidimentionality. As an
epistemology it structures not only our thinking about reality but
also our thinking about thinking itself.
   General Systems Theory was founded on the assumption that all
kinds of systems (concrete, conceptual, abstract, natural or man-made)
had characteristics in common regardless of their internal nature.
These systems could serve to describe nature and our existence.
General Systems Theory is, however, not another discipline — it is
a theory cutting across most other disciplines linking closely
e.g. generalized concept of organization, to that of information and
communication. GST uses various ways in classifying different types
of systems — most of them offering an intuitive classification of
systems ranked in increasing order of complexity. Here each level
include, in some way, the lower levels but have its own, new,
emergent properties. The process of emergence results from the
interaction of independent parts when they stop being independent
and start to influence each other. In the various levels of the taxonomy,
it can be seen, that it is the relationships between components in
the system and not the nature of its individual components, that
proliferate its properties and behaviour.
   Expressed in more precise terms, the goal of General Systems
Theory can be specified as follows:

• To formulate generalized systems theories including theories of
  systems dynamics, goal-oriented behaviour, historical development,
  hierarchic structure, and control processes.
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                 41


• To work out a methodological way of describing the functioning
  and behaviour of systems objects.
• To elaborate generalized models of systems.

    As an applied science, GST became Systems Science, a
metadiscipline with a content capable of being transferred from
discipline to discipline. As such, it is knowledge regarding
knowledge structures and attempts to add and integrate those
aspects that seem not to be adequately treated in older science
(but also to engage in continuous cross-fertilization of various
disciplines). Systems science become the science of synthesis and
integration. The management scientist Russ Ackoff (1972) has
defined the difference between the synthetic thinking of a
metadiscipline and the analytical thinking of a discipline.
    In systems science, the equivalent to the classical laboratory became
the computer. Instead of designing experiments with real materials,
the computer itself became a viable substrate for experimentation.
The use of computers as instruments for calculations, simulations
and the creation of a non-existing reality thus brought about a new
phenomenon that is neither actual nor imaginary, a phenomenon or
mode that was called virtual. The computer is a virtual reflection of
a non-existing mechanical adding machine. To be precise, it is an
abstract entity or process that has got physical expression. In itself,
it is a simulation, a simulation which is not necessarily a simulation
of anything actual. 'Virtual' is thus a mode of simulated existence,
resulting from computation. When creating theories regarding the
information world and complex living systems, different kinds of
virtual worlds are necessary. There, the computer works as laboratory
and in its digital universe artificial intelligence and artificial life is
created. Research in many areas like astronomy, aerodynamics,
biology, chemistry etc. is today performed by computers through
virtual simulation. Such simulations have the advantage that
unneccesary details regarding individual components can be excluded
at which overall connections and complex interactions appear.
By use of computers, new knowledge can be generated without
dangerous and ecologically harmful full-scale tests e.g in the area of
nuclear fission. Another example is how politicians can practice
42         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



crash-landing an economy without taking hundred of millions of
people along for the ride.
   The aim of systems science was, however, not to replace, but to
complement traditional science. The systems perspective naturally
acquired greater significance with the growing complexity of all
systems, including and embracing man. Gerald Weinberg (1975) says
about systems science, that it has '...taken up the task of helping
scientists to unravel complexity, technologists to master it, and others
to learn to live with it.' General systems thinking based on systems
theory became its hallmark with the aim of fostering generalists
qualified to manage today's problem better than the specialists.
Specific individual methods were developed, many of which included
modelling, simulation and gaming. Focusing on problems of complexity,
systems thinking applied as systems science has taken the task of
being a science of modelling par excellence.
   One of these methods, the Systems Approach, in reality an
application of Systems Theory, operates in an integrated framework
of modern organizational knowledge and management science. The
Systems Approach is based on the fundamental principle that all
aspects of a human problem should be treated together in a rational
manner. It is an attempt to combine theory, empiricism and pragmatics
and looks at a system from the top down rather than from the
bottom up. In particular, when the phenomenon under study concerns
functions, goals, and purposes of live organisms or human beings,
the whole behaviour is better explained by the ends than by the means.
   Another method, Systems Analysis, adopting a strictly systemic
outlook on complex organizations, entered the scientific scene to
ensure that no important factors in the structure were excluded.
Problems of identifying, reconstructing, optimizing, and controlling
an organization, while taking into account multiple objectives,
constraints and resources were worked out. Possible courses of action,
together with their risks, costs and benefits were presented. Systems
analysis can thus be considered an interdisciplinary framework of
the common problem-view.
   An extension of this method, called Anasynthesis, was introduced
with the implicit assumption that the more views one can apply to
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                 43


it, the better a problem can be understood. When using this method,
modelling, simulation, gaming, analysis and synthesis are all applied to
the development of a system. The method is used iteratively at
both the macro and micro levels of large-scale systems. Normally,
the outcome is more organized, structured and responsive to real-life
requirements than the outcomes of other methods.
    Then there is System Engineering, a method by which the orderly
evolution of man-made systems can be achieved. Hereby the four
Ms — money, machines, materials and men — are used in making
complex systems in their totality. Somtimes three more Ms are added,
generated by information and denoting messages, methods and
measurements.
    A much-discussed method of a more theoretical kind is System
Dynamics. Developed by Jay Forrester (1969) it uses dynamic
computer models which change in a network of coupled variables.
It has been employed to prognosticate the growth of the modern
city (Urban dynamics), the development of Western industry
(Industrial dynamics), and the global resource depletion (World
dynamics).
     Closely connected to the above-presented methods, and including
them all, is the conviction that man is more the creator of reality than
its discoverer. The future has become too complex to foretell or to be
planned; it has to be created. That one cannot manage change, only
be ahead of it is not relevant for systems thinking. Embracing such
a pragmatic view on reality, design or redesign becomes the key
concept of the systems perspective when it is about to change the
world for the better by building new or improved systems. The vast
majority of human systems have not been designed at all — they just
happened. Design replaces the guesswork by model building and
optimization. It is concerned with how things ought to be, with
combining resources to attain goals. This involves processes necessary
to understand the problem, to generate solutions and to test solutions for
 feasibility. Here, design is a creative process, questioning the
 assumptions upon which earlier structures have been built and
 demanding a completely new outlook. Systems design (or systems
 synthesis) is a formal procedure where human resources, artefacts,
44         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



techniques, information and work procedures are integrated into a
system in order to facilitate its performance.
   Its working procedure rests on the following steps:

• The future environment of the system has to be forecasted.
• A model has to be build and used to simulate its function.
• From the simulation, a choice must be made as to what is the best
  (thus optimizing the system).

   Systems design is the opposite of systems improvement, the policy
of recovering old systems (/. van Gigch 1978).
   A more recent perspective when investigating systems is that of
teleology, the doctrine that behaviour and structure are determined
by the purpose they fulfil. Teleology does not exist in non-living
nature but is universal in the living world. It indicates that systems
are guided not only by mechanical forces but also move toward certain
goals of self-realization. Here organizations and organisms have their
own purposes, while artefacts, e.g. machines, serve the purpose of
others but have no such purpose of their own. The search for
knowledge can thus be founded both on the hunt for causes and
purposes.
   Complex systems can be studied from many points of view which
are seen as complementary rather than competitive. The choice of
theoretical approach depends mainly on the type of insight which is
sought. A common quality of the named methods is the generation
of knowledge necessary for the solving of the problem. The
characteristic tools of the domain — computers, telecommunication
networks, databases, etc. — are to be found in informatics.
   One effect of the new approach was that subsets of traditional
scientific areas amalgamated, forming new disciplines. A fresh
example is the science of complexity, where biological organization,
computer mathematics, physics, parallel network computing, non-
linear system dynamics, chaos theory, neural networks and
connectionism were brought together. In practice, complexity science
is the study of the behaviour of large collections of simple units
which have the potentially to evolve. This stimulated the definition
of new reciprocal systemic qualities: complexity/simplicity and
                    THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING               45


simulative/non-simulative. A new quantification of complexity was
also introduced: the complexity of something should be defined as
the length of the shortest possible description (algorithm) of this
something. An alternative definition is in terms of the number of
mathematical operations needed to solve it. Computer scientists use
the term algorithmic complexity, which is defined as the the length of
the shortest program that will execute the computation (although
one cannot, in general, prove that it is the shortest. A shorter one
may always exist).
    Laws of complexity generate much of the order of the natural
world and its emergent properties. Complexity theory tries to describe
how complicated rules sometimes produce simple and organized
behaviour, e.g. the ability of living systems to become ever more
organized. Its working methodology is non-reductionist: a system is
viewed as a network of interacting parts, nearly all the fine details of
which are ignored. Regularities and common patterns valid across
many different systems are carefully examined. Of specific interest
are those conditions which ensure the emergence of evolutionary,
self-organizing and self-complicating behaviour. Complexity theory
operates somewhere in the zone between the two extremes of complete
order and complete chaos. To study complexity is to study systems
and particularly the sort of systems behaviour which cannot be
predicted from its individual components. Complexity concerns the
system-fact that the whole always is greater than the sum of its parts.
As a discipline its task is to come to grips not only with certain
complex phenomena but also with the universal features of complexity
itself.
    Also, disciplines more directly related to systems science, such as
cybernetics, bionics and C3I, merit presentation. They make possible
a broader perspective concerning the basic underlying principles of
structure and behaviour in systems.
    Cybernetics was defined in 1948 in a book by Norbert Wiener:
Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine.
In cybernetics, living systems are studied through analogy with
physical systems.
46         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Bionics, the study of living systems in order to identify concepts
applicable to the design of artificial systems, was introduced by Major
Steele in 1958. The amalgamation of biology and technique is
recognizable in the term. Bionics realizes physical systems through
analogy with living systems. Cybernetics and bionics are often said
to be the two sides of the same coin.
    The acronym C3I stands for command, control, communication
and intelligence. During the past ten years, interest in the operations
of social, military and business organizations has grown. Modern
managerial systems are based on an interchange between people,
organizational entities and technical support. The decision-making
situation has often such an innate complexity that in the initial phase
it is not possible to define what kind of information is important; the
decider usually demands more information than will be useful.
    In the extended acronym C 4 I 2 the extra C stands for computer and
the extra I for integration, emphasizing the close interconnection
between man and computer. Here, it is impossible to separate social
from technical factors and the human being is always a part of the
problem as well as a part of the solution. The adaptation man/machine
is a key issue and the system has to be designed around man, his
potential and his needs. In spite of access to high-tech decision
support, a main point must be the training of human ability to handle
the unexpected. Reality always tends to deliver a situation never met
before.
    Systems science applied as a problem solver in business
organizations is sometimes called management cybernetics. As such,
it is often occupied with design of an appropriate organizational
structure which includes:

• Specification of the organization's sub-tasks and partition of work.
• Design of communication between the subsystems.
• Definition of areas of decision-making and authority.
• Design and development of control systems and co-ordination of
  efforts toward the organizational goal.

  The efforts of management cybernetics are sometimes summed
up with the acronym 'The Seven Ss'. These stands for strategy,
                     THE EMERGENCE OF HOLISTIC THINKING                  47


staff, style, skills, systems (of communication), structure and shared
values.
   The emergence of the systems movement can now be recapitulated
with some often-cited words of Kenneth Boulding from 1956:

  'General Systems Theory is the skeleton of science in the sense
  that it aims to provide a framework or structure of systems on
  which to hang the flesh and blood of particular disciplines and
  particular subject matters in an orderly and coherent corpus of
  knowledge.'

   To that must be added that one of the most important contributions
of the systems area is that it provides a single vocabulary and
a unified set of concepts applicable to practically all areas of
science.
   Let us finally remind ourselves that the systems age in which we
are now living, is the result of the impact of the following five
revolutions:

• The agrarian revolution — the product of the tribe's collective work,
  extended our food access.
• The scientific revolution — the product of European collective
  thinking, extended our knowledge capacity.
• The industrial revolution — the product of European collective
  technology, extended our musculature.
• The electronic revolution — the product of Global collective
  technology, extended our nervous system.
• The computer revolution — the product of Global collective
  synthesis, extended our intelligence.




Review questions and problems
 1. Learned men of the scholastic era shared the belief that the nature of
    universe and time was possible to understand. In what field of knowledge
    could this conviction be studied?
48          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



 2. What is the main difference between a teleological norm and a law of
    nature?
 3. Why did science, as a human activity, have to declare itself independent,
    neutral, and objective from its earliest days?
 4. In the deterministic era, the question of free-will was considered
    irrelevant. Why?
 5. What are the most significant metaphysical presumptions behind the
    concept of the laboratory?
 6. The scientific method is associated with five methodological steps.
    Describe the last step and explain its importance.
 7. The old Greek mathematician Pythagoras once said: 'Omnia mutantum,
    nihil interit' (Everything changes, nothing is lost). How can this be
    associated with the laws of thermodynamics?
 8. Quantum theory has been used in an attempt to explain the classic
    body/mind problem. How does the train of thought run?
 9. Gerald Weinberg states that 'science and engineering have been unable
    to keep pace with the second order effects produced by their first order
    victories.' Give some examples of particularly devastating secondary
    effects influencing modern society.
10. Has systems theory been successful in formulating a law of laws appli-
    cable to all scientific disciplines? If so, how does one of these laws read?

                                       #
                                 2

            Basic Ideas of
        General Systems Theory
• GST and concepts defining systems properties
• Cybernetics and concepts defining systems processes
• General scientific and systemic concepts
• Widely-known laws, principles, theorems and hypotheses
• Some generic facts of systems behaviour

'On questions of the ends to which means should be directed,
science has nothing to say.' (N. Campbell 1953)



E   ach body of theory has its implied assumptions or axioms which
     in reality are impossible to prove and hence must be accepted as
value judgements. The underlying assumptions and premises of
systems theory can be traced backward in history. The thought that
the existence has certain common general features and that a hidden
connection exists in everything has always fascinated humanity. The
Greek philosopher, Aristotle (384-322 BC), presented a metaphysical
vision of hierarchic order in nature — in his biological systematics.
His finalistic, or teleological, natural philosophy represents a rather
advanced systems thinking for the time.
   Closer to our own era, Fredrick Hegel (1770-1831) formulated the
following statements concerning the nature of systems.

• The whole is more than the sum of the parts.
• The whole defines the nature of the parts.

                                  49
50         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• The parts cannot be understood by studying the whole.
• The parts are dynamically interrelated or interdependent.

    Ideas of the German philoshopher and writer Wolfgang Goete
(1749-1832), may be considered preceding modern systems theory.
Influenced by the monistic world of Spinoza, he tried to bring a
multiplicity of of nature back to a simple principle integrating body
and mind.
    The concept of holism received its first modern appraisal through
'structuralism', a scientific school of thought established by the
Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857-1913). Structuralists
studied 'wholes' that could not be reduced to parts. Society was not
regarded as a conscious creation; it was considered to be a series of
self-organizing structures overlapping each other, with a certain
conformity to law. This wholeness regulated the personal and
collective will.
    After World War I, the limits of reductionism were known and
the concept of holism already established (particularly in biology). A
comprehensive exposition of holism was presented by the Boer general
Jan Smuts (1850-1950) in his book Holism and Evolution in 1926. By
this book Smuts must be considered as one of the most influent
forerunners of the systems movement.
    Another forerunner of systems theory is to be found in Gestalt
psychology launched in 1912 by Max Wertheimer (1880-1943). The
central idea of Gestalt psychology was that the whole was greater
than the sum of the parts. Its theory was holistic and it embraced the
concept of emergent properties (see p. 69). It also stated that many
physical systems, named Gestalten (from German), evolved into a
 state of equilibrium. Gestalt-theory is today well-known for its
 Gestalten-laws which explain how relations of different kind between
 elements determine the formation of Gestalts. A common definition
 of the concept is the following: 'A gestalt is an organized entity or
 whole in which the parts, though distinguishable, are interdependent.
 They have certain characteristics produced by their inclusion in the
 whole, and the whole has some characteristics belonging to none of
 the parts'.
                  BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY            51


   In General Systems Theory, one of the basic assumptions embraces
the concept of order — an expression of man's general need for
imaging his world as an ordered cosmos within an unordered chaos.
A consequence implicit in this order is the presumed existence of
a law of laws which in turn inspired the name of the theory. The
systematic search for this law is a main task for General Systems
Theory. Another fundamental assertion is that traditional science is
unable to solve many real world problems because its approach is
too often narrow and inclined toward the abstract. Systems science
in contrast is concerned with the concrete embodiment of the order
and laws which are uncovered.
   Kenneth Boulding (1964) formulated five postulates which must
be regarded as the starting point for the development of the modern
General Systems Theory. They may be summarized as follows.

• Order, regularity and non-randomness are preferable to lack of
  order or to irregularity (chaos) and to randomness.
• Orderliness in the empirical world makes the world good,
  interesting and attractive to the systems theorist.
• There is order in the orderliness of the external or empirical world
  (order to the second degree) — a law about laws.
• To establish order, quantification and mathematization are highly
  valuable aids.
• The search for order and law necessarily involves the quest for
  those realities that embody these abstract laws and order — their
  empirical referents.

   Other well-known basic assumptions regarding general systems
theory as a philosophy of world and life have been summarized by
Downing Bowler (1981). A selection is given below.

• The Universe is a hierarchy of systems; that is, simple systems are
  synthesized into more complex systems from subatomic particles
  to civilizations.
• All systems, or forms of organization, have some characteristics
  in common, and it is assumed that statements concerning these
  characteristics are universally applicable generalizations.
52         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• All levels of systems have novel characteristics that apply
  universally upward in the hierarchy to more complex levels but
  not downward to simpler levels.
• It is possible to identify relational universals that are applicable to
  all systems at all levels of existence.
• Every system has a set of boundaries that indicates some degree of
  differentiation between what is included and excluded in the system.
• Everything that exists, whether formal, existential, or psychological,
  is an organized system of energy, matter and information.
• The Universe consists of processes synthesizing systems of
  systems and disintegrating systems of systems. It will continue in
  its present form as long as one set of processes does not eliminate
  the other.

   A short summary of Bowler's assumptions could be expressed in
the statement that the design of the macrocosm reflects the structure
of the microcosm.
   A further perspective on systems has been provided by the famous
professor of business administration, West Churchman (1971).
According to him, the characteristics of a system are the following:

• It is teleological (purposeful).
• Its performance can be determined.
• It has a user or users.
• It has parts (components) that in and of themselves have purpose.
• It is embedded in an environment.
• It includes a decision maker who is internal to the system and who
  can change the performance of the parts.
• There is a designer who is concerned with the structure of the
  system and whose conceptualization of the system can direct the
  actions of the decision maker and ultimately affect the end result
  of the actions of the entire system.
• The designer's purpose is to change a system so as to maximize its
  value to the user.
• The designer ensures that the system is stable to the extent that he
  or she knows its structure and function.
                  BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              53


   Churchman's concept of a designer may of course be interpreted
in a religious or philosophical way (Churchman is a deeply religious
scientist). A more common interpretation is, however, to see the
designer as the human creator of the specific system in question
(e.g. a computerized system for booking opera tickets).
   Today, there is near total agreement on which properties together
comprise a general systems theory of open system. Ludvig von
Bertalanffy (1955), Joseph Litterer (1969) and other distinguished
persons of the systems movement have formulated the hallmarks of
such a theory. The list below sums up their efforts.

• Interrelationship and interdependence of objects and their
  attributes: Unrelated and independent elements can never constitute
  a system.
• Holism: Holistic properties not possible to detect by analysis should
  be possible to define in the system.
• Goal seeking: Systemic interaction must result in some goal or final
  state to be reached or some equilibrium point being approached.
• Transformation process: All systems, if they are to attain their
  goal, must transform inputs into outputs. In living systems this
  transformation is mainly of a cyclical nature.
• Inputs and outputs: In a closed system the inputs are determined
  once and for all; in an open system additional inputs are admitted
  from its environment.
• Entropy: This is the amount of disorder or randomness present in
  any system. All non-living systems tend toward disorder; left alone
  they will eventually lose all motion and degenerate into an inert
  mass. When this permanent stage is reached and no events occur,
  maximum entropy is attained. A living system can, for a finite
  time, avert this unalterable process by importing energy from its
  environment. It is then said to create negentropy, something which
  is characteristic of all kinds of life.
• Regulation: The interrelated objects constituting the system must
  be regulated in some fashion so that its goals can be realized.
54           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



     Regulation implies that necessary deviations will be detected and
     corrected. Feedback is therefore a requisite of effective control.
     Typical of surviving open systems is a stable state of dynamic
     equilibrium.
• Hierarchy: Systems are generally complex wholes made up of
  smaller subsystems. This nesting of systems within other systems
  is what is implied by hierarchy.
• Differentiation: In complex systems, specialized units perform
  specialized functions. This is a characteristic of all complex systems
  and may also be called specialization or division of labour.
• Equifinality and multifinality: Open systems have equally valid
  alternative ways of attaining the same objectives from different
  initial conditions (convergence) or, from a given initial state, obtain
  different, and mutually exclusive, objectives (divergence).

   The application of these standards to the theories introduced in
Chapter 3 will demonstrate that the different theories are more or
less general in scope. Most of them are in fact systems theories,
albeit related to a certain area of interest. Implicit in them all is
that it is better to have general and abstract knowledge regarding
larger and less well-known systems than to have specific and
intimate appreciation of smaller and more well-defined ones. Of
course this view has broad implications for collecting information,
organizing data, describing results mathematically, and interpreting
interrelationships.
   General Systems Theory is a part of the systems paradigm
which complements the traditional scientific paradigm (see p. 18)
with a kind of thinking that is better suited to the biological
and behavioural realms. The objective attitude of the scientific
paradigm is supplemented with intervention, activism and participation
(often objectivity communicates less than subjectivity). This more
comprehensive systems paradigm attempts to deal with processes
such as life, death, birth, evolution, adaptation, learning, motivation
and interaction (van Gigch 1992). It also attends to explanations,
values, beliefs and sentiments, that is, to consider the emotional,
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY               55


mental, and intuitive components of our being as realities. Conse-
quently, the scientist becomes involved and is allowed to show empathy.
   Also related to General Systems Theory is the evolutionary
paradigm (R. Fivaz 1989). Spontaneous general evolution from the
uncomplicated to the complex is universal; simple systems become
differentiated and integrated, both within the system and with the
environment outside of the system. From elementary particles, via
atoms, molecules, living cells, multicellular organisms, plants, animals,
and human beings evolution reaches society and culture. Interpreted
in terms of consciousness, the evolutionary paradigm implies that all
matter in the universe — starting with the elementary particle — move
up in levels of consciousness under the forces of evolution. The
evolution per se thus points in a direction from the physical to the
psychical. With this background, cosmological thinking sometimes
states that man is the center of the universe because he is its meaning.
In a sense, this is a return to the religious mentality of the Renaissance
(see page 9). This view has many applications in sciences and makes
it possible to unify knowledge from separate disciplines.
    A connection between different systemic levels of complexity and
consciousness and associated academic knowledge areas takes the
following shape:

planetary                  astronomy
global                     ecology
national                   political science, economics
organizational             organizational theory, management
groups                     sociology
organisms                  psychology, ethology, biology, zoology
organs                     physiology, neurology
cells                      cellular biology
molecules                  biochemistry
atoms                      physics
subatomic particles        particle-physics

   Systemists often state that to understand the specific systemic
qualities and behaviour on a certan level, it is necessary to study the
levels above and below the chosen level.
56           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Inasmuch as scientists in the disciplines of physics, biology,
psychology, sociology and philosophy all employ some mode of
related thinking, a common language of concepts and terms has been
established. This language embraces the common underlying
principles of widely separated phenomena. Innovative and useful
constructs within one area have spread to others and then merged
into elements of General Systems Theory, which therefore can be
defined as a metatheory.
    On the following pages, the most essential terms — those related
to the general properties of systems regardless of their physical
nature — are presented. These terms refer more to organization and
function than to the nature of the mechanism involved. To understand
them is to be familiar with the basic foundation of General Systems
Theory — to possess the conceptual tools necessary to apply systems
thinking to real world systems.
    Finally, the characterization of General Systems Theory made by
its originator, von Bertalanffy (1967), is worth quoting:

     'It is the beauty of systems theory that it is psycho-physically
     neutral, that is, its concepts and models can be applied to both
     material and nonmaterial phenomena.'




GST and concepts defining systems properties

First we have to define the word system and emphasize its subjective
nature. From a linguistic point of view, the word originated from
Greek where it denotes a connected or regular whole. A system is
not something presented to the observer, it is something to be
recognized by him. An example is how man begun to recognize our
planetary system during the middle age.

                 Observe how system into system runs,
                  What other planets circle other suns.
                                                                        (A. Pope)
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              57


Most often the word does not refer to existing things in the real
world but rather to a way of organizing our thoughts about the real
world. The constructivist view of reality (E. von Glaserfeld 1990) states
that systems do not exist in the real world independent of the human
mind; only a worm's eye view defines the cell (or whatever subunit
of a system) instead of a wholeness. The fictionalist view takes a
further step and states that the systemic concept can be well suited
to its purpose even if we know that it is incorrect or full of
contradictions in a specific situation. A system cannot be understood
by analysis of the parts because of their complex interactions and
because purpose or meaning can only be immanent in the whole.
A system is in itself always an abstraction chosen with the emphasis
on either structural or functional aspects. This abstraction may
be associated with, but must not be identified with, a physical
embodiment. Anyhow, the relationship between the elements should
have as much attention as the elements being related.
    An apposite definition of the word system has been given
by the well-known biologist Paul Weiss: 'A system is anything
unitary enough to deserve a name.' More aphoristic is Kenneth
Boulding's (1985) 'A system is anything that is not chaos', while
West Churchman's view that a system is 'a structure that has
organized components' seems more stringent. Also the cybernetican
Ross Ashby's definition must be noticed: "A system is a set of variables
sufficiently isolated to stay constant long enough for us to discuss it".
    An often used common sense definition is the following: 'A system
is a set of interacting units or elements that form an integrated whole
intended to perform some function'. Reduced to everyday language
we can express it as any structure that exhibits order, pattern and
purpose. This in turn implies some constancy over time. A system's
purpose is the reason for its existence and the starting point for
measuring its success. "The purpose of a system is what it does".
    Another pragmatic definition used especially in the realm of
management is that a system is the organized collection of men,
machines and material required to accomplish a specific purpose and
tied together by communication links.
58         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   A more scientific definition has been given by Russell Ackoff (1981),
who says that a system is a set of two or more elements that satisfies
the following three conditions.

• The behaviour of each element has an effect on the behaviour of
  the whole.
• The behaviour of the elements and their effects on the whole are
  interdependent.
• However subgroups of the elements are formed, all have an effect
  on the behaviour of the whole, but none has an independent effect
  on it.

   A system-definition by Derek Hitchins (1992) considered both
pragmatic and scientific is the following: 'A System is a collection
of interrelated entities such that both the collection and the
interrelationships together reduce local entropy'.
   Finally, a short resume of the presented perspectives gives the
following: SYSTEM, an organized whole in which parts are related
together, which generates emergent properties and has some purpose.
   An often applied mathematical definition of the word system comes
from George Klir (1991). His formula is however extremely general
and has therefore both weaknesses and strengths. See Figure 2.1.
   In the formula, T stands for a set having arbitrary elements, but
it may also represent a power set. R stands for every relationship
that may be defined on the set with its special characteristics.
    It must however be emphasized that a set of elements, all of which
do the same thing, forms an aggregate, not a system. To conform with


                           • System
                                                     (Relations)
                   /s-\Ks-\                                 1
                   ' (Tyvx) \                    S = (T« R)
                     ^\    /      A system — •          .
                   i RV/R J                         (Th ngs)

                   Figure 2.1 A formula defiiting a s;^stem.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY            59


the definition of a system, there has to be a functional division and
co-ordination of labour among the parts. This implies that the
components have to be assembled in a certain way in order to build
a system. A system is distinguished from its parts by its organization.
Thus, a random assembly of elements constitutes only a structureless
mass unable to accomplish anything. Nor does an orderly assembly
of elements necessarily form a system. The beautiful organization of
the atoms of a crystal does not qualify it to be a system; it is an end
product in itself, one not performing any function.
   To qualify for the name system, two conditions apart from
organization have to be present: continuity of identity and goal
directedness. Something that is not able to preserve its structure amid
change is never recognized as a system. Goal directedness is simply
the existence of a function.
   The structure of a system is the arrangement of its subsystems and
components in three-dimentional space at a certain moment in time.
Systems differ from each other in the way they are organized, in the
particular mechanisms and dynamics of the interrelations among
the parts and with the environment. This may also be expressed as
order in the relationship among the components which enter into a
system.
    Systems are usually classified as concrete, conceptual, abstract or
unperceivable. The most common, the concrete system (sometimes
called physical system), exists in the physical reality of space and
time and is defined as consisting of at least two units or objects.
Concrete systems can be non-living or living. Another distinction can
be made, that between natural systems (coming into being by natural
processes) and man-made systems.
    A living or organic system is subject to the principles of natural
selection and is characterized by its thermodynamic disequilibrium.
Living systems are generally more interesting for how they act than
for what they look like. The functional aspect thus becomes the most
 important one. A standard biological definition of a living system
 uses the following points:

• Selfregulation
• Organization
60         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Metabolism and growth
• Reaction capacity
• Adaptability
• Reproduction capability
• Development capability

    As a complex, organized, and open system, it is also defined by
its capacity for autopoiesis (H. Maturana and V. Varela 197'4), which
means 'self-renewing' and allows living systems to be autonomous.
(Autopoiesis as a concept may be applied even to conceptions and
ideas. See Chapter 3). The activities of autonomous systems are mainly
directed inward, with the sole aim of preserving the autonomy per se.
Maintaining internal order or own identity under new conditions
demands frequent internal reorganization. The autopoietic system
has to establish a boundary between the universe of which it is a
part, and itself in order to maintain its identity. All autopoietic systems
are under influence of random variations which provide the seed of
possiblity that allows the emergence and evolution of new system
identities. Such variations can be seen among bees and ants in order
to increase the variety of the systems to which they belong.
    Characteristic for autopoietic systems is metabolism, repair, growth
and replication. These systems maintain their organization through a
network of component-producing processes which in turn generate
the same network which produced them. Advanced autopoietic
systems are capable not only of organizing themselves but also of
ordering their environment with growing efficiency. In contrast, an
allopoietic system gives rise to a system which is different from itself.
The term heteropoietic, implies human designed systems with a
purpose.
    The following specific qualities differentiate living systems from
non-living ones.

— the presence of both structural and genetic connections in the
  system;
— the presence of both co-ordination and subordination in the system;
— the presence of a unique control mechanism (e.g. the central nervous
  system) working in a probabilistic manner possessing a certain
  number of degrees of freedom in the system;
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              61


— the presence of processes which qualitatively transform the parts
  together with the whole and continuously renew the elements.
— The capability to learn or to have an extensive repertoire of instinct
  responses adopted to different situations.

    Living systems in general are energy transducers which use
information to perform more efficiently, converting one form of energy
into another, and converting energy into information. Living species
have developed a genius system to overcome entropy by their
procreative faculty. Higher levels of living systems include artefacts
and mentefacts. An artefact is an artificial object and can be everything
from a bird's nest to computers and communication networks. A
mentefact is a mental creation, exemplified here by data, information
or a message. Among artefacts, a distinction has to be made between
machines, tools, etc. and structures. The former have limited lives,
become worn out and are replaced by better ones. The structures,
however, are constructed to be permanent like the pyramids of Egypt
or the Great Wall of China.
    Living systems in general, are teleonomic — they are unconsciousely
fulfilling a goal. A mindless procedure thus could produce design
without a designer. Teleologic explanations of living systems
are seldom relevant. Sometimes, however, such explanations seem
useful in the descriptive language of an observer. Today, many
researchers consider everything which can reproduce itself as living
 (see Chapter 6).
    Living systems theory, formulated within the General Living
Systems theory, or GLS, must be regarded as a component of the
General Systems Theory. GLS, pioneered by James Miller (Living
 Systems 1976), is presented among the cornerstone theories of the
next chapter.
    A conceptual system is a system of concepts. It is composed of an
 organization of ideas expressed in symbolic form. Its units may be
 words, numbers or other symbols. A conceptual system can only
 exist within some form of concrete system, for example a computer.
 An example is a computer which drafts the specifications and plans
 for another physical system before it is actually created. A conceptual
 system (the Ten Commandments) can also regulate the operation of
62         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



a physical system (the human being). As a system it is itself always
timeless. Change is inapplicable to it as it does not exists in space
and time.
   In an abstract system, all elements must be concepts. It is of an
intermediate type in that its components may or may not be
empirically observable. The units of such systems are relationships
abstracted or selected by an observer in the light of his interest
or theoretical viewpoint. The relationships between the mental
abstractions and their classes constitute the system. In psychology,
for example, the structures of psychic processes are described by
means of a system of abstract concepts. Abstracted systems abstract
elements of the real world and map these as components of the
system model. They mix empirical and conceptual factors. Cultures
as systems is an example. In an unperceivable system the many
parts and complicated interrelationships between them hide the actual
structure of the system.
   All systems have a certain type of structure. Concrete systems, for
example, exist physically in space and time, building a specific pattern.
Conceptual and abstract systems have no defined position in space
nor a well-defined duration in time. However, as time goes on, all
systems change to a certain extent. This is called process; if the change
is irreversible, the process is called historical.
    Here a further distinction must be made, between open and closed
systems. An open system (all living systems) is always dependent
upon an environment with which it can exchange matter, energy and
information. Its main characteristic is its organization which is
controlled by information and fuelled by some form of energy. Other
qualities are that they are selective and within certain limits, self-
regulating. Proceeding up in a hierarchy of system levels, the systems
become more and more open when they engage in a wider interchange
with a greater variety of aspects of the environment. More complex
systems move toward growth and expansion when they tend to
import more matter and energy than is required for the output.
This should not be taken as a contradiction of their strive for
dynamic equilibrium. The ever existing dynamics makes a system
understandable only over time.
                  BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY             63


   Common characteristics of an open system has been defined by
Katz and Kahn (1966) according to the following ten points:

• Importation of energy
• The throughtput
• The output
• Cycles of events
• Negative entropy
• Information input and the coding process
• Equilibrium and dynamic homeostasis including adaptation
• Differentiation (elaboration, complexification)
• Integration and co-ordination
• Equifinality

    The closed system (e.g. the biosphere) is open for input of energy
only. The differences between open and closed systems are relative.
An organism is a typical example of an open system but, taken
together with its environment, it may be considered as a closed system.
    Expressed in terms of entropy, open systems are negentropic, that
is, tend toward a more elaborate structure. As open systems, organisms
which are in equilibrium are capable of working for a long time by
use of the constant input of matter and energy. Closed systems,
however, increase their entropy, tend to run down and can therefore
be called 'dying systems'. When reaching a steady state the closed
system is not capable of performing any work.
    An isolated system is one with a completely locked boundary
closed to all kinds of input. Independent of its structure or kind, it
is constantly increasing its entropy into a final genuine steady state.
While this concept is very seldom applicable in the real world, the
cosmos is the environmentless, isolated system context for all the
other systems which may arise within it.
     The systems that we are interested in exist within an environment.
The immediate environment is the next higher system minus the
system itself. The entire environment includes this plus all systems
at higher levels which contain it. Environment may also be defined
as both that which is outside of the direct control of the system and
any phenomenon influencing the processes and behaviour of the
64         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



system. The environment can exert a degree of control over the system
but cannot be controlled by the system.
   For living systems, however, environment must be seen as a part
of the organism itself. The internal structure of living organisms
contains elements which earlier in the evolution were part of its
external environment. This is confirmed, among other similarities,
by the chemical composition of blood and sea water. A system's
environment has no boundaries nor needs any.
    Environment is something which exists in a space, a concept which
is defined with respect to the kind of system in focus. Pragmatic space
is that of physical action which integrates a living system with its
natural, organic environment. Perceptual space is that of immediate
orientation, essential for the identity of a conscious being. Existential
space forms a stable image of an individual environment and connects
it to a social and cultural identity. Cognitive space is the conscious
experience of the physical world, while logical or abstract space belongs
to the world of abstract or conceptual systems, thus providing us
with a tool to describe the others.
    Through the constant interaction between system and environment,
environment affects systems and systems in turn affect the
environment. When it comes to social systems, this interaction is
especially pronounced. Its scope is suggested in the following pairs.

Living system             Environment
— Society                 — Nature
— We                      — Them
— Self                    — The other
— Ego                     — Id
— Mind                    — Body
— Consciousness           — Subconsciousness

   In order to define a system's environment, its boundary must be
defined. The boundary surrounds the system in such a way that the
intensity of interactions across this line is less than that occurring
within the system. Often a non-spatial marker, it denotes what does
or does not belong to the system. To cross a boundary normally
requires modification or transformation in some way. In the case of
information, boundaries possess a coding and decoding property. In
                  BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY             65


other words that which comes out is very seldom identical with that
which goes into a system. As systems do not always exist boundary
to boundary, the concept of interface is necessary to denote the area
between the boundaries of systems.
   As rare as the concept of a closed system is that of a solitarily
existing open system. Generally, systems are part of other systems
and are included in a hierarchy of systems. Systems theory regards
the concept of hierarchy as a universal principle existing in inorganic
nature, in organic and social life and in the cosmos. Virtually all
complex systems recognized in the real world have the tendency
to organize hierarchically. An easily comprehensible example of
hierarchy is the phenomenon of science. In Figure 2.2, it is shown
how large objects are made of smaller ones. Here the science of the
small object explains the larger one in a kind of logical reductionism.
Note that the higher levels have qualities not predictable from the
lower ones (See page 64). In living systems, a hierarchical structure
improves its ability to learn, evolve, and adapt. Sometimes, the term
heterarchy is used to denote the opposite of hierarchy and a structure
without different levels. In the heterarchy, processes are governed by
a pluralistic and egalitarian interplay of all components. Systems

                     SCIENCE                DEALING WITH

                   SOCIOLOGY      |          COMMUNITIES

                                                made of
                   PSYCHOLOGY     |          INDIVIDUALS

                                                made of
                   PHYSIOLOGY     |            ORGANS

                                                made of
                    CYTOLOGY      |             CELLS

                                                made of
                  BIOCHEMISTRY    |         BIOMOLECULES

                                                made of
                 ATOMIC PHYSICS |               ATOMS

                                                made of
                 'ARTICLE PHYSICS |            ELEMENT
                                              PARTICLES

                     Figure 2.2 A hierarchy of science.
66         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



theorist tend to say: within each level, heterarchy; between each level,
hierarchy. A hierarchy is normally a control hierarchy and therefore
becomes structurally simpler when moving upwards as higher levels
are structurally simpler than lower ones. The higher levels control
certain aspects of the behaviour of subsystems. Thus, less complex
systems control more complex ones. Selective disregard on a higher
controlling level is a general property of control systems. Emergence
of higher control levels therefore is a simplification of system
functions. A hunting pack of hyenas are both functionally and
structurally simpler (as a group) than the individual hyena. The
individual is, taken as an inclusive total system, more complex and
more unitary. Generally, evolution always moves from the lower to
the more complex type of system, and from the lower to the higher
level of organization. In an organism only the whole can display
will — none of the parts can. The parts have a low degree of freedom.
   In a hierarchic structure, subsets of a whole are ranked regressively
as smaller or less complex units until the lowest level is reached. The
lowest level elements build subsystems that in turn structure the system,
which itself is a part of a superior suprasystem. The ranking of these
is relative rather than absolute. That is, the same object may be
regarded as an element, a system or a component of the environment,
depending on the chosen frame of reference. See Figure 2.3.




                  Figure 2.3 A multilevel systems hierarchy.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              67


   Hierarchical thinking creates what has been called the paradox of
hierarchy. It implies that a system can be described if regarded as an
element of a larger system. Presenting a given system as an element
of a larger system can only be done if this system is described as a
system.
   A more elaborate hierarchical terminology used in this context is:

— macrosystem
— system
— subsystem
— module
— component
— unit
— part

    At a given level of the hierarchy, a given system may be seen as
being on the outside of systems below it, and as being on the inside
of systems above it. A system thus has both endogenous and exogenous
properties, existing within the system and determined outside of the
system respectively. Again, as above, the status of a component in a
system is not absolute: it may be regarded as a subsystem, a system
or an element of the environment. In order to carry out their functions
in a suprasystem, subsystems must retain their identities and maintain
a certain degree of autonomy. A process whereby the interaction
increases in a certain part of the system often ends up in a new local
structure. This is called centralization and small variations within this
part can produce essential changes of the whole system. However,
like a chain, a hierarchy is never stronger than its weakest point, the
top. If the top disappears, nothing will work.
    Another kind of hierarchic view is expressed in the holon (from
wholeness) concept, coined by the Hungarian-born author, Arthur
Koestler, in 1967. Wholes and parts do not have separate existences
in living organisms or social organizations. These systems show both
cohesion and differentiation. Their integrative and self-assertive
tendencies exist side by side and are reflected in their co-operative
behaviour. This 'Janus' effect (from the Roman two-faced god Janus)
is a fundamental characteristic of subwholes in all kinds of hierarchies.
68           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




Figure 2.4 Integrative and assertive relationships of a holon represented by circles.



The global structure of the holon hierarchy is nested. At least five
levels are discernible in Figure 2.4.
   Normally, the term wholeness applied to a system indicates the
following: variation in any element affects all the others bringing
about variation in the whole system. Likewise, variations of any
element depend upon all other elements of the system. In a sense,
there is a paradox of wholeness telling us that it is impossible to
become conscious of a system as a wholeness without analyzing its
parts (thereby losing the wholeness).
   The concepts of hierarchy and wholeness are especially relevant
in living things where organisms at each higher level of complexity
originate as a symbiosis of those from the previous levels. This is
demonstrated in Figure 2.5 where different organisms are shown at
each of the four levels.
   Systems can be interrelated in a non-hierarchical way when part
of a multilateral structure. This situation exists when certain elements
occur simultaneously in many systems. See Figure 2.6.
   In a system, elements can be interconnected during a certain
period of time. If the connection exists during only one specified
time the multilateral structure is called temporal. If the connection is
intermittent, the structure is called cyclic.
   The concept of system can be applied to a vast number of different
phenomena: the solar system, the academic system, the nervous
                    BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY                     69




  Figure 2.5 An organism regarded as the wholeness of organismic symbiosis.




         Figure 2.6 System element as part of a multilateral structure.



system, etc. A characteristic of them all is that the whole is greater
than the sum of its parts, a phenomenon often referred to as the
system principle. This principle includes the system's emergent properties
or its synergetic effects. Synergetic comes from the Greek word for
'working together'. Water can illustrate an emergent phenomenon:
although hydrogen and oxygen individually have no water-qualities,
water will emerge when the two elements are brought together.
Emergent properties are lost when a system breaks down to its
components. Life for example — does not exist in organs removed
from the body. Also, when a component is removed from the whole,
70         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



that component itself will lose its own emergent properties. An eye
removed from a body cannot see any longer. Emergence thus is the
creation of new organized wholes which forces their subsystem to
obey a set of critical boundary-conditions. In a hierarchy, emergent
properties denote levels under the condition that an emergent whole
at one level is merely a component of an emergent system at the next
higher level.
   The genesis of emergent properties can hardly be explained
in advance and not be deduced from a system's elements. If the
prerequisites had been slightly otherwise something quite other may
have happened. To promote emergence can only be done by the
creation of a richness of variation.
   A suprasystem taken as a whole displays greater behavioural
variety and options than its component systems, that is, it is more
synergetic. Each system has a special organization that is different
from the organization of its components taken separately.
   The evolutionary process by which new adaptive capabilities
and higher levels of complexity and control are generated in a system
is called metasystem transition (Turchin 1977). This emerges when
a new level of control arises that manages many individually pre-
existing processes. The controlling subsystems are integrated into
a metasystem and brought under a new higher control level. A
metasystem transition can take place over a scope which is a
substructure of the considered system. Thus, formation of an army
from conscripts is a typical metasystem transition. It results in a new
hierarchy of control where autonomous individuals are put under
the command of officers. Turchin predicts that the next large
metasystem transition will produce an intergrated system that includes
the whole of humanity.
   Normally systems show stability, that is, constancy of structure
and function under fluctuation, which maintains the same internal
state under various pressures. Systems which can restore their stability
by changing operation rules when important variables exceed their
limits are said to be ultra-stable. Stability then does not exclude
adaptability; only systems which change with time and adjust to
environmental pressures can survive. A system can never be optimally
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              71


adapted to its environment since its evolution itself will change the
environment so that a new adaption is needed. In an evolutionary
process, no absolute distinction can be made between system and
environment. What is system for one process is environment for
another.
   In open systems, for example, biological and social systems, final
states or objectives may be reached in different ways and from
disparate starting points. This property of finding equally valid ways
is called equifinality. The reverse condition, achievement of different
ends through use of the same means, is called multifinality.
   A basic concept in GST is that of entropy. Originally imported
from the area of thermodynamics, it is defined as the energy not
available for work after its transformation from one form to another
(see also p. 12). Applied to systems it is defined as a measure of the
relative degree of disorder that exists within a closed system at a
defined moment of time. The natural tendency of physical objects to
disintegrate and fall into random distribution can be studied in a
sand castle built on the beach on a hot day. How biological organisms
deteriorate as they age can be seen everywhere in our environment.
    Both examples relate to the effects of entropy, of the transformation
of energy from high quality to low. Living systems can however,
as open systems, counteract this tendency through purpose and
organization, by importing more energy from their environment than
they expend to it. Storing the surplus energy in order to survive is to
reverse the entropic process or to create negentropy. A living being
can only resist the degradation of its own structure. The entropic
process influencing the structure and environment of the whole system
is beyond individual control.
   Systems may be classified according to type of complexity, as has
been done by Warren Weaver (1968).
    In the organized-complexity system, the typical form for living
systems, only a finite but large number of components will define
the system. Systems within this category can also be classified as
middle-number systems. When a limit is reached, the living system
decomposes into irreducible particles. As stated earlier, the total
system always represents more than the sum of its parts. This type
72         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



of complexity cannot be treated with the statistical techniques that so
effectively describe average behaviour within unorganized complexity.
Successful investigations of organized complexity became feasible
first with the emergence of computer technology.
    The unorganized-complexity system can only refer to non-living
systems where the number of variables is very large and in which
each variable has a totally unpredictable or unknown behaviour. The
system has, nevertheless, orderly average properties and may be
defined in terms of a probability distribution according to an infinite
number of events. Its behaviour can be explained by the laws of
statistical mechanics and its components may form aggregates. The
frequency and type of telephone calls in a large telephone exchange
offer a good example.
    The organized-simplicity system is characterized by simple
systems such as machines and other human artefacts having only a
small number of components. This kind of system may be treated
analytically.
    A similar classification of systems has been made by Herbert Simon
(1968). He distinguishes decomposable, nearly decomposable and non-
decomposable systems. In a decomposable system the subsystems
can be regarded as independent of one another. A given example is
helium, an inert gas: the intermolecular forces will be negligible when
compared to the intramolecular forces. In near decomposable systems
the interaction between the subsystems is weak but not negligible.
The intercomponent interactions are usually weaker than the
intracomponent interaction. Organizations may be considered to be
near decomposable. Non-decomposable systems are directly
dependent on other systems or explicitly affect them. A heart/lung
machine is such a system.
    Another classification of systems is made on the basis of their
behaviour or function. A classification of this kind has been made by
the doyen of management research, Russell Ackoff (1971). According
to this, goal-maintaining systems attempt to fulfil a pre-determined
goal. If something deviates, there is only one response (conditional)
to correct it. Here, the thermostat and other simple regulatory
mechanisms can serve as examples.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY             73


   In goal-seeking systems choices concerning how to deal with
variable behaviour in the system are possible. Previous behaviour
stored in a simple memory permits changes based on learning. The
autopilot meets the requirements: it maintains a preset course, altitude
and speed.
   Multigoal-seeking systems are capable of choosing from an
internal repertoire of actions in response to changed external
conditions. Such automatic goal changing demands distinct alter-
natives; generally the system decides which means of achievement
are best. A prerequisite is an extended memory with the ability to
store and retrieve information. The automatic telephone exchange is
a good example.
   Reflective, goal-changing systems reflect upon decisions made.
Information collected and stored in the memory is examined for the
creation of new alternatives for action. Will, purpose, autonomy,
feedforward (see p. 81), learning and consciousness define this process,
existing only within living systems.
   Another often used system dichotomy is that of static and
dynamic systems. A static system is a structure which is not in itself
performing any kind of activity. A dynamic system has both structural
components and activity. Examples of such systems are respectively
a radio tower and a military squad with its men, equipment and
orders.
   Some other special categories of systems which need to be
mentioned are the irrational and null. Both violate the principle of
causality (see p. 14) and cannot be handled by way of rational
judgement. In the irrational system there is no correspondence
between input and the presumed system response. In the null system,
all input produces no output or an output is produced without
significant input. While both systems are also unmeasurable systems,
we must first be aware of the difficulties often involved in identifying
complex system flows. 'Occult behaviour' sometimes has a very
natural cause.
   Sometimes it is necessary to apply some basic mathematical criteria
to the concept of systems. For a continuous system, the input can be
continuously and arbitrarily changed; the result will then be a
74         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



continuous variable output. In a discrete system, the input is changed
in discrete steps, giving corresponding discrete changes in the output.
   It may also be necessary to distinguish between deterministic and
stochastic systems. According to the principle of nature's predictability
(see p. 16), the deterministic system has inputs and outputs capable
of being interpreted and measured on a single-event basis. The output
will be the same for each identical input; repeated trials will always
give the same results. The stochastic system works instead with
identical inputs and its elements cannot be returned to their original
state. The factors influencing the system obey uncertainty and
statistical variation. Nonetheless, if appropriate stochastic analysis is
employed, systemic behaviour may be possible to predict.
   Finally, a distinction has to be made between simulative and non-
simulative systems. Extremely small changes in the input into systems
which are large-scale, complex and non-linear are often amplified
through positive feedback. Such changes can thus initiate exponential
transformations of the whole system. An example of a non-simulative
system is global weather, characterized by deterministic chaos. The
system sensitivity for initial data eludes prediction. Furthermore, any
physical system that behaves in a non-periodic way is unpredictable.
    The 'butterfly effect' where the flaps of the wings of a butterfly
start a movement in the air which ends up as a hurricane has
fascinated many and captures the unpredictability of non-linear
systems. No computer program exists which can model this system.
Such a program would be just as complex as the weather system
itself. Therefore, some meteorologists say that the only computer
capable of simulating the global weather is the Earth itself, the ultimate
analogue biocomputer.
    In a simulative system the complexity of the computer program
always falls far below the complexity of the system simulated.
    Let us finally have a look at systems in their most general form
when they involves nature, man, society and technology and use
Harold Linstone's (1984) combinations.

• man — a biological system
• nature — the solar system
• technology — a communication satellite
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              75


• nature/ technology — a waterwheel
• man/society — a legal system
• nature/man/society — a primitive village
• man/society/technology — an information system

                                    *


Cybernetics and concepts defining systems processes

In order to predict the behaviour of a rational system before a certain
response from it occurs, it is essential to have some knowledge of
general control mechanisms. Although automatic control systems have
been documented in the Western field of engineering for some 2000
years, the working theory of these has been limited and seldom used
outside of engineering. (The Greek Ktesibios invented in 300 BC an
automatic control device: the water flow that controlled his water
clock, or clepsydra.)
   In his book dating from 1948, Cybernetics or Control and
Communication in the Animal and the Machine, Norbert Wiener, an
American researcher at MIT, gave control theory new life. As a
mathematician and universal thinker his fascination for logic and
electricity intertwined with his insight in automation led to the ideas
of cybernetics. The term cybernetics is derived from the Greek noun,
kubernetes, which associates to pilot or rudder.
   One of the oldest automatic control systems is in fact related to
the turning of a heavy ship's rudders: the steam-powered steering
engine. This supportive mechanism was called a servo (from the Latin
servitudo from which English has its servitude and slave). The
effectiveness of servomechanisms is based on the fact that it has no
choice and can only react in a predefined manner to events in its
environment.
   In his book Wiener intended cybernetics to embrace universal
principles relevant for both engineering and living systems (One of
these principles is that all the processes in the universe seem to be
cyclic). He did succeed in showing that these principles could fruitfully
be applied at the theoretical level in all systems, independent of any
specific context.
76         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Shortly after cybernetics emerged as an independent area of its
own, it became part of GST. For practical purposes, the two areas
were integrated within the wide domain of different problems that
became the concern of systems science.
   The field of cybernetics came into being when concepts of
information, feedback, and control were generalized from specific
applications, like engineering, to systems in general, including
living organisms, abstract intelligent processes and language. Thus
cybernetics named a field apart from, but touching upon, such
established disciplines as electrical engineering, mathematics, biology
neurophysiology, antropology, and psychology. By use of cybernetics
the rich interaction of goals, predictions, actions, and response
were brought together in a new and fruitful way. The attraction of
cybernetics was that it brought order and unity to a set of disciplines
that otherwise tend to be pursued as relatively closed specialisms.
   Philosophically, cybernetics evolved from a constructivist view of
the world (see p. 57), where objectivity derives from shared agreement
about meaning. The world is invented by an intelligence acting in
a social tradition, rather than discovered. Thus information (or
intelligence) is regarded as an attribute of an interaction rather than
a commodity stored in a computer. It is something that is used by a
mechanism or organism (a system), for steering towards a predifined
goal.
   From its start, cybernetics has been concerned with errors in
complex systems of control and communication. In cybernetics, the
concepts of control and communication are closely interrelated.
Information concerning function and control is communicated among
the parts of a system but also between it and its environment. This
has the aim of achieving a condition of equilibrium which is the
maintenance of order. In living systems, this holding of physiological
variables within certain limits is called homeostasis. Cybernetics,
then, concerns the restoring of stability within all kinds of systems.
Stability in this context is the opposite of a steady-state which means
the maintenance of entropic randomization — being the most stable
and statistically probable state. Themodynamical steady-state is the
hallmark of a non-living world.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              77


    The fact that cybernetic control systems operate with a low, often
insignificant, expenditure of energy means that their degree of
efficiency is high. This is possible inasmuch as their basic function is
to process information, not to transform energy. Cybernetic regulation
must not be confused with any amplification of the affected flow
which may happen when amplification exists as well.
    Cybernetic control is normally exercised with some defined
measures of performance. Three often used measures are the
following:
• Effectiveness. This is a measure of the extent to which a system
  achieves its intended transformation.
• Efficiency. The measure of the extent to which the system achieves
  its intended transformation with the minimum use of resources.
• Efficacy. A measure of the extent to which the system contributes
  to the purposes of a higher-level system of which it may be a
  subsystem.
  To understand the concept of control from a cybernetic perspective,
some further distinctions are necessary. Control can be defined as a
purposive influence toward a predetermined goal involving continous
comparision of current states to future goals. Control is:
• Information processing
• Programming
• Decision
• Communication (reciprocal)
   A program is coded or prearranged information that controls a
process (or behavior) leading it toward a given end. Teleonomic
processes are always guided by a program. Generally, it makes sense
to speak of the following standard programming levels:
• DNA and genetical programming.
• The brain with its cultural programming.
• The organisation with its formal decision procedure.
• Mechanical and electronic artifacts with their algorithms.
   Adaptation and development demands reprogramming.
78          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   In a broader view, it makes sense to speak of four control
levels:

• DNA's control of the cell.
• The brain's control of the organism.
• The bureaucratic control of the social system.
• The big computer system's control of society.

     With them, the following general control-problems are associated:

• To maintain an internal structure (resist entropy)   BEING.
• To complete a goal (in spite of changing conditions) BEHAVING.
• To remove bad goals and preserve good ones           BECOMING.

   As a starting point for the comprehension of the basic terms of
cybernetics, a system may be represented by three boxes: the black,
the grey and the white. The purposeful action performed by the
box is its function. Inside each box there are structural components,
the static parts, operating components which perform the processing,
and flow components, the m a t t e r / e n e r g y or information being
processed.
   Relationships between the mutually dependent components are
said to be of first order. Here, the main example is symbiosis, the
vitally important co-operation between two organisms. Relationship
of second order is that which adds to system performance in a
synergistic manner. Relationship of third order applies when seemingly
redundant duplicate components exist in order to secure a continued
system function.
   Each box contains processes of input, transformation and output.
(Note that output can be of two kinds: products useful for the
suprasystem a n d / o r waste. Also, note that the input to one system
may be the output of its subsystem.) Taken together these processes
are called throughput, to avoid focus on individual parts of internal
processes.
   The box colours denote different degrees of user interest in the
understanding or knowledge of the internal working process of a
system. A black box is a primitive something that behaves in a certain
                     BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY                79


way without giving any clue to the observer how exactly the result
is obtained. As Kenneth Boulding wrote:

                      A system is a big black box
                   Of which we can't unlock the locks
                     And all we can find out about
                  Is what goes in and what comes out.

   A black box approach can therefore be the effective use of a
machine by adjusting its input for maximum output (cold shower
to bring down fever). A grey box offers partial knowledge of
selected internal processes (visit nurse for palliative treatment).
The white box represents a wholly transparent view, giving full
information about internal processes (hospitalize for intensive
treatment). This command of total information is seldom possible or
even desirable.
   Below a certain level, questions cannot be answered, or posed;
complete information about the state of the system can therefore not
be acquired. See Figure 2.7.
   However, when good understanding of the whole transformation
process is necessary, the following five elements have to be calculated.


                             White box
         Inputs                                  Outputs
                     DOO^                             •



                             Gray box
                                                             Increasing
                                                             internet
                                                             knowledge


                             Black box




                  Figure 2.7 Degrees of internal understanding.
80         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• The set of inputs: These are the variable parameters observed to
  affect the system behaviour.
• The set of outputs: These are the observed parameters affecting
  the relationship between the system and its environment.
• The set of states: These are internal parameters of the system which
  determine the relationship between input and output.
• The state-transition function: This will decide how the state
  changes when various inputs are fed into the system.
• The output function: This will decide the resulting system output
  with a given input in a given state.

    System processes may or may not be self-regulated. There is no
halfway between. Living systems are always controlled. The primary
control is within the system, never outside.
    System processes may or may not be self-regulated. A self-regulated
system is called a closed-loop system and has its output coupled to
its input. In the open-loop system, the output is not connected to its
input for measurement. An example is an automatic sprinkler system,
depicted as an open-loop system in Figure 2.8.



           Input            k.
                                 Process               ^   Output
                            w                          w

                        Figure 2.8 Open-loop system.



   In a sprinkler system, a smoke or heat sensor activates the opening
of water valves in order to extinguish a fire. Once activated, the
system continues to deliver water until the reservoir is empty or
somebody shuts it off.
   Although an open-loop phenomenon, buffering must be
considered as a simple kind of regulation. It signifies passive
moderation or absorbation of deviations or perturbations and lacks
active intervention. In the long run buffering is unable to maintain
any desired values. An example is the walls of a heated room that
                      BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY         81


act as a temperature buffer. Another is a dam which also can be
considered as a rain buffer.
   The regulatory mechanisms of closed-loop systems are called
feedforward and feedback. Feedforward is an anticipatory control
action, intended to produce a predicted, desired state in the future.
(To meet the events in advance as preparation for the future, living
systems are always adjusted to a future state which.not yet exists.)
The process uses information from the input by contrast with negative
feedback (as we will see) which uses information from the output.
It acts on any systemic element after the activation of the input, but
before the outputs actually occur. This action is chosen so that its
effects on the output cancels out the effect of the deviance in the
same output. In a feedforward system, system behaviour is preset,
according to some models relating present inputs to their predicted
outcome. Thus the present change of state is determined by an
anticipated future state, computed in accordance with some internal
model of the world.
    Feedforward occurs before an event and is part of a planning loop
in preparation for future eventualities. It provides information about
expected behaviour and simulates actual processes. Feedforward
behaviour therefore seems goal directed or teleological. The goal is in
fact built in as part of the model which transduces between predicted
future states and present changes of state. To make a budget and to
state goals for an organization are examples of feedforward activities.
See Figure 2.9. Another example is the planning of the captain onboard
a super tanker in order to pass a confined strait. He uses feedforward
to be able to arrive in the right place in right time.


             Inputs                                   Outputs   w
                            w Process           i k             *




                               Simulator

                          Figure 2.9 Feedforward loop.
82         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Feedback is a basic strategy which allows a system to compensate
for unexpected disturbances. This is done through feedback loops
that maintain certain variables constant or regulate the types and
amounts of particular components. It is often defined as the
'transmission of a signal from a later to an earlier stage'. Information
concerning the result of own actions is thus delivered as a part of
information for continuous action. As a control mechanism it acts on
the basis of its actual rather than its expected performance. Hereby
it is error-actuated, and serves to correct a system performance which
is already deteriorating. Feedback is a key concept in cybernetics.
When the negative feedback of a system disappears, the stable state
of the system vanishes. Gradually its boundaries disappears and after
a while it will cease to exist. A metaphysical limerick has been
dedicated to it by an anonymous poet.

                      Said a fisherman at Nice,
                  'The way we began was like this
                      A long way indeed back
                       In chaos rode Feedback
                  And Adam and Eve had a piece.'

   A generalized theory has been developed to describe the behaviour
of closed-loop systems and of systems containing a number of
interacting elements using feedback.
   Understanding of feedback phenomena started in the 1800s.
James Maxwell, father of the famous Maxwell equations of the
electrodynamics, and creator of Maxwell's demon was once contacted
by steam engineers. They wanted him to figure out why the governors
on their engines did not always work right; sometimes the steam
engine exploded. Maxwell analyzed the engine under changing load
as a system of non-linear differential equations, and concluded the
system would follow one of four alternatives. The nature of these
alternatives are explained in Figure 2.12. His analysis was the first
explicitly cybernetic investigation of a regulatory systems.
   System conduct may however become very complex if several
feedback elements are interconnected; the resulting dynamics will
often be difficult to calculate. The main concepts of this generalized
theory are presented in the sections below.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY             83


   Negative feedback is a fraction of the output delivered back to
the input, regulating the new output to a multiplier smaller than one.
This kind of feedback tends to oppose what the system is already
doing, and is thus negative. An increase on the feedback level
generates a decrease in the output, providing self-correction and
stabilization of the system. 'More leads to less, and less to more'.
Measured values of output activities are compared with desired values
or reference standards, continously or at intervals, and the belonging
input activities are increased or reduced. All in order to bring the
output to the desired level. This is sometimes referred to as error
nulling. Systems with feedback automatically compensate for
disturbing forces not necessarily known beforehand. The principle of
the negative feedback loop is seen in Figure 2.10. Negative feedback is
the idea of diminishing return or dying away tendency. In the market,
this phenomenon ensures that no company or product can grow big
enough to dominate the market. That the more you do of anything,
the less useful, less profitable or less enjoyable the last bit becomes.
    A device which acts continuously on the basis of information in
order to attain a specified goal during changes, called a servo-
mechanism, is an example of applied negative feedback. Its minimal
internal structure consists of a sensor, an effector and a connecting
link. Simple servomechanisms are James Watt's centrifugal regulator
from the 18th century and the contemporary rudder machinery on
steamships which adjusted the steering angle. For Watt's centrifugal
regulator, see Figure 2.11.
    The perfect servomechanism corrects errors before they occur. Its
smooth and co-ordinating activity is dependent upon the amount of
compensatory feedback. Both under- and over-compensation generate
oscillations that are more or less harmful to the regulated system.
Another example is the simple but reliable pneumatic autopilot in
the DC-3 aircraft. Corrections within predefined settings (altitude,
course) are handled by the system while changes of the system itself
(new course, etc.) are determined by its suprasystem, here — the pilot.
Directions (route, schedule) are given by the supra-suprasystem, the
flight traffic control.
    A control mechanism can also be discontinuous. An example is the
simple thermostat which can only perform two actions: turn the heat
84           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                    Goal or
                                    standard


               Inputs    ^r                                Outputs   ^
                                        Process
                                                                     w
                              Figure 2.10 Feedback loop.




                                        c^>


                         Feedback T
                         regulation I




Figure 2.11 James Watt's speed controlling centrifugal regulator. Engine speed change
generates counteracting forces from the regulator. The steam is choked or released,
thereby returning the engine to normal operating speed.



on or turn it off. Discrete control of this kind is common in all kinds
of modern electronic equipment.
   If the multiplier is greater than one, a state of positive feedback
exists. In this kind of regulation, each new output becomes larger than
the previous, with an exponential growth and a deviation-amplifying
effect. A positive feedback mechanism is always a 'run-away'
and temporary phenomenon. Positive feedback implies deviation
amplification, often like a vicious circle while negative feedback is
deviation correction. It can be recognized in events like exponential
                      BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY                       85


population growth, the international arms race, financial inflation
and the compound interest of a bank account. Its self-accelerating
loop is normally brought to a halt before the process 'explodes' and
destroys the system. A negative feedback inside or outside of the
system will sooner or later restore more normal behaviour. See
diagrams in Figure 2.12 which present the nature of negative and
positive feedback.

      Regulation
         k




                                    -Time                                ••Time




      Regulation
          k




                                  -*~ Time

             Figure 2.12 The nature of negative and positive feedback.


   In diagram A, a normally functioning negative feedback loop is
shown. Here, the deviation is smoothly bringing the process back to
the standard or reference value. In diagram B, the correction is slightly
over-compensated, resulting in successively damped oscillations. A
smoothly growing positive feedback loop is shown in diagram C.
In diagram D, a negative feedback loop with over-compensation
resulting in a positive feedback situation, is shown.
   The combined effects of an emerging positive feedback being
inhibited by a growing amount of negative feedback most often follow
86          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                                  /   Negative
                §                             /       feedback
               —                          s
               a.                   "7|
               £     Positive     /   I
                     feedback y f     j



                                      '                           •
                                                           Time

     Figure 2.13 Shifting of loop dominance in population-growth diagram.



the non-linear logistic equation which exhibits sigmoid growth.
The effect of a shift in loop dominance in a population-growth
diagram is shown in Figure 2.13. The loops change when the
population reaches half of its maximum. The negative feedback keeps
the system in check, just as positive feedback propels the system
onwards.
    The elementary negative feedback presented here operates
according to a preset goal. The only possibility is to correct the
deviation. Conditional response is impossible inasmuch as no
alternative exists and the regulation normally works exponentially
toward the equilibrium state. This kind of direct deterministic
regulation is called first order, negative feedback. Second order,
negative feedback is defined as feedback based on other feedback. It
is thus more indirect than that of the first order, which comes either
from an immediately preceding step or directly from monitoring.
This more indirect second order regulation causes sinusoidal
oscillations around an equilibrium if undamped. If damped by a first
order feedback, the regulation will follow a damped sinusoidal curve.
See curves in Figure 2.14.
    Higher order, negative feedback regulation also operates with
oscillations around an equilibrium. Over-reacting feedback chains
can bring about a growing reaction amplitude, thus rendering the
system unstable. To be stable, the regulatory mechanisms have to be
                    BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY                 87




                             Amplitude




                        *                                •
                                                  Time

        Figure 2.14 Second order feedback with sinusoidal oscillations.


adequately damped. The system's own friction is often enough to
have this function.
   Different levels of goal-seeking as a cybernetic feedback process
have been proposed by Karl Deutsch (1963). His goal-seeking
hierarchy with four levels may be compared with Ackoff's behavioural
classification of systems (see p. 72).

• First order goal-seeking: This stands for immediate satisfaction,
  adjustment, reward.
• Second order goal-seeking: Self-preservation is achieved through
  the preservation of the possibility of seeking first order goals by
  controlling the same.
• Third order goal-seeking: Preservation of the group, species, or
  system requires control over first and second order goal-seeking
  beyond the individual life-span.
• Fourth order goal-seeking: Preservation of the process of goal-
  seeking has priority over the preservation of any particular goal or
  group as above. This is in effect the preservation of the relationships
  of the ecosystem.

   Sometimes it is necessary to distinguish between extrinsic and
intrinsic feedback. Extrinsic feedback exists when the output crosses
the boundary and becomes modified by the environment before re-
entering the system. Intrinsic feedback prevails when the same output
is modified internally within the system boundary. While the concept
of feedback is generally defined as being intrinsic, from the system's
88         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                              Extrinsic feedback

                                ^tnvi«%
                                                */•


                                    System

                   Input                              Output




                              Intrinsic feedback




                                    System

                   Input                              Output



                                   Feedback
                                   internally
                                  influenced



                 Figure 2.15 Extrinsic a n d intrinsic feedback.



point of view, both types are equal. Normally the system is unaware
of the actual feedback type. See Figure 2.15.
   In cybernetic control cycles, time plays an important role. Variations
in speed of circulation and friction between different elements of the
system can occur. Such delays and lags are important regulatory
parameters which counteract inherent oscillatory tendencies of a
feedback control process. They are often employed to set physical
limitations on the system, slowing down the action, but dynamically.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY             89


Important variables (especially the output) are prevented by this
limitation from jumping abruptly from one value to another. To give
a wider perspective, the signification of time is given in the following
systems:

System                         Modification time
central nervous system         seconds to hours
immune system                  hours to days
business firm                  months to years
species                        days to centuries
ecosystem                      years to millennia

   A delay can completely inhibit a regulatory action for a certain
amount of time, after which action starts with full impact. A lag is
a gradual regulatory force, reaching its full impact after a certain
amount of time. Feedback systems with lags may have destabilizing
effects with the pertinent loss of control. The effects of delays and
lags combined are even more devastating (see Figure 2.16).
   The feedback processes presented here operate in a variety of
control systems. Their main function is to keep some behavioural
variables of the main system within predefined limits. The end
objective is to maintain an output that will satisfy the system
requirements. The ideal control system produces a regulation which
cancels out the effect of possible disturbances completely. It behaves
different during different states but only in one way during identical
states.
   One must understand that the working principle of cybernetic
control systems is to generate information, not to transform energy.
In that way they have a nearly nonexistent consumption of energy
and a high efficiency. This regulation may not be confused with
some kind of amplification of the regulated flow even if such an
amplification may exist in this connection.
    The general control system with its basic five control steps works
according to the following:

1. A control center establishes certain desired goal parameters and
   the means by which to attain them.
90           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



            Regulation
                .                                  Input




                                                 Response with delay




                                                   Response with lag




                                                   Response with delay and lag



                 I                         ^                                  ^
                                                                       Time

                     Figure 2.16 Delays a n d lags in control cycles.
(Reprinted with permission from J.P. van Gigch, Applied General Systems Theory, Harper &
Row, NY, 2nd Ed., 1978.)



2. Goal decisions are transformed into action outputs, which result
   in certain effects on the state of the system and its environment.
3. Information about these effects are recorded and fed back to the
   control center.
4. The control center tests this new state of the system against the
   desired goal parameters to measure the error or deviation of the
   initial output response.
5. If the error leaves the system outside the limits set by the goal
   parameters, corrective output action is taken by the control center.

   The first fundamental component of the regulatory mechanism in
the basic control cycle is the receptor (sometimes called sensor or
detector), a device registering the various stimuli which, after
conversion into information, reach the controller unit (see Figure 2.17).
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              91


                                             Controller


                                             Goal setter


                   [Activator]

                    Effector     Cr           Decider




       \Z           Receptor           y     Comparato
                                                              ^>
                    [Detector]                               Output
                                           [Discriminator]


                   Figure 2.17 A general control system.




A comparison is made between the receptor value and a desired
standard stored in the comparator (discriminator). The difference
provides a corrective message which is implemented by the effector
(activator). Through monitoring and response feedback to the receptor,
self-regulation is achieved. Figure 2.17 shows that the regulation takes
place on the input side and the sensing mechanism is situated on the
output side. In more sophisticated systems with third-order feedback,
the controller also includes a goal-setter with its reference standard, a
decider (selector) and possibly a designer which formulates both the
goals and the decision rules of the system.
   A summary tells us that a controlled system must be able to read
the state of an important variable and examine if this is under, on, or
above the permitted value. This is done by the system's detector.
Therefore the system has to possess certain preferences. The handling
of these preferences is managed by the selector which choses the
alternative best corresponding to the preferences. Moreover, the
system must be able to act in order to realize the existing preferences
if they do not exist. This function is performed by the effector.
Detectors and effectors are the analogs of eyes and muscles.
92              GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                      >-*|   A            >       B            +   C   —'
                                              A        A




                                          m       U        *




                                                  -*
                                                  ui
                        Figure 2.18 Diagram of a learning system.
     A = Receptor; B = Educable decision unit; C = Effector; D = Comparator; E = Goal-setter.



• The detector receives information from the environment
• The selector chooses an appropriate reaction
• The effector executes the chosen response

    We have seen earlier that one of the most significant advantages
of living systems was adaptation achieved by learning. This advantage
is however not restricted to living systems only; machines working
according to cybernetic principles may also be able to learn. If
information moving backward from a system's performance is able
to change the general method and pattern of performance, it is
justifiable to speak of learning. A general cybernetic pattern for a
system capable of learning is shown in Figure 2.18.
    The input information enters the system via the receptor and
reaches the educable internal decision unit. After processing, the
information will reach the effector and there become an output.
The behaviour of the decision unit is however not predetermined.
(Through a double path the same input, and the output decision as
well, are simultaneously led to an evaluating mechanism.)
    From the evaluating mechanism, the comparator, a parallel path
leads to the decider. This receives simultaneously the same input as
is given to the receptor, and also the same output as delivered from
the effector. The decision unit compares the cause in the input with
the effect of the output on the basis of the evaluation criteria stored
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              93


in the comparator. If the decision is correct or 'good', the decider is
'rewarded', and if incorrect or 'bad', the decider is 'punished'. In
reality this results in a modification of its internal parameters which
is a kind of self-organization and learning.
    There is of course a risk of confusing self-organization with
learning. All systems able to learn must necessarily organize
themselves, but systems can organize themselves without learning.
The faculty for modifying its behaviour and adapting is not in
itself sufficient for it to be regarded as a learning system. The point
is that the rules must be adjusted in such a way that a successful
behaviour is reinforced, whereas an unsuccessful behaviour results
in modification. Thus, the important thing is the internal modification
of the information transfer.
   When defining living systems, the term dynamic equilibrium is
essential. It does not imply something which is steady or stable. On
the contrary, it is a floating state characterized by invisible movements
and preparedness for change. To be in dynamic equilibrium is
adapting adjustment to balance. Homeostasis stands for the sum of
all control functions creating the state of dynamic equilibrium in a
healthy organism. It is the ability of the body to maintain a narrow
range of internal conditions in spite of environmental changes. All
systems do, however, age and, from a certain point of maturation,
slowly deteriorate toward death. This p h e n o m e n o n is called
homeokinesis and gave rise to the concept of the homeokinetic plateau,
depicted in the diagram of Figure 2.19.
    This constant deterioration can be compensated for by extended
control and mobilization of resources within the limits of the
homeokinetic plateau. Here the negative feedback is stronger than
the positive and a temporary homeostasis can be maintained within
the thresholds of the plateau. Below and above the thresholds, the
net feedback is positive, leading to increased oscillations and finally
to the collapse of the system. The only alternative to break-down for
a system going outside the homeostatic plateau is an adaptation
through change of structure. This adaptation is however beyond the
capabilities of an individual organism.
94         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                        Threshold                Region of
                         or lower                 positive
                        boundary                 feedback


               1   Region of B1
                    positive
           o-o     feedback
                                       Region of
                                    negative feedback        Threshold
          c2
                                                              or upper
                                                             boundary




                            Amount of control

                    Figure 2.19 The homeokinetic plateau.


   The homeokinetic plateau is a quite natural part of what can be
called a system life cycle. In living systems this consists of birth,
evolution, deterioration, and death. In non-living systems, such as more
advanced artefacts, the system life cycle can be divided into following
phases:

— identification of needs
— system planning
— system research
— system design
— system construction
— system evaluation
— system use
— system phase-out
   The coherence between the different phases are further
demonstrated in Figure 2.20. Note that the first phase can be
considered a consumer phase, the intermediate phases producer
phases, and the last two again a consumer phase.
   Living or non-living, the following four options for system
annihilation exist: accident, predation (murder), suicide and, natural
causes.
                                  BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY                                                95




                                          Feedback loop for corrective action/system improvement

                                                      T                                   Y
                                                                                                           I
                   2
                          •
                        System
                                    3 ! t
                                      System
                                                     * !       •   5      !  t
                                                                        Production                      System
  Identification                                      System             And/Or         System
                       Planning      Research         Design                          Evaluation       Use And
    Of Need                                                            Construction                 Logistic Support
                       Function      Function        Function                          Function
                                                                         Function                      Function
                                                           n                ,,
                                       PathB
                                                                                                      Phase-Out,
                                                                                                       Disposal,
                                                                                                     Reclamation,
                                                PathC                                              And/Or Recycling


                       Path A (includes all steps)



                   Figure 2.20 System life cycle of advanced artefacts.



   Finally, a concept sometimes used is that of second order
cybernetics. The distinction between this and first order cybernetics
is based on the difference between processes in a subject which
observes and in an object which is observed respectively. Another
definition is the difference between interaction between observer and
observed in an autonomous system (second order) and interaction
among the variables of a controlled system (first order). Second order
cybernetics thus implies that the observer is always a participant,
interacting with the system.




General scientific and systemic concepts

The accumulation of scientific knowledge may be considered to be
one of the most extensive intellectual processes of humanity. The
organization of the enormous material, a science in itself, is influenced
by systemic principles. (See Namilov and the systems view of science,
page 189.) A survey of the content in a specific knowledge area
is best carried out using a top-down approach, beginning with
the area's prevalent world view. For readers unfamiliar with the
scientific vocabulary related to the hierarchic organization of scientific
96         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



knowledge, some main concepts are presented below. According to
the scientific tradition, theories should be explicit (not based on inter-
pretation or intuition), abstract (not referring to concrete examples),
and universal (valid in every place and at anytime). This implies that
a theory regarding the behaviour of certain physical particles therefore
relates to every individual particle in the universe, without exception.
In spite of this, science can always be regarded as an asymptotic
approach to the truth.
   A theory may be considered a compressed description of the world.
Thus, the length of its initial assumption is much shorter than a
detailed description of the events themselves. Typical in this respect
is physics whose theories are just mathematics in the shape of
formulas.

A world view is
  a grand p a r a d i g m including the beliefs and philosophical
  preferences of the general scientific community.
A paradigm is
  a common way of thinking, held by the majority of members of a
  specific scientific community.
A theory is
  a broad coherent assembly of systematic explanatory schemes,
  consisting of laws, principles, theorems and hypotheses.
A law is
  a generalization founded on empirical evidence, well-established
  and widely accepted over a long period of time.
A principle is
  a generalization founded on empirical evidence but not yet
  qualifying for the status of a law.
A theorem is
  a generalization proven in a formal mathematical, logical way.
A hypothesis is
  a proposition which is intuitively considered to be true but which
  has to be falsified or verified.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              97


An axiom is
  impossible to prove or deduce from something else, but is a starting
  point for the hierarchy of scientific abstractions presented here.

   It is important to understand that present scientific 'truth' descends
from observation and experiments. These are also the starting point
for the construction of a theory which hopefully corresponds to the
observations. The theory itself must be considered as an instrument
to handle a formal symbolic system in order to exceed the limitations
of thought. If so, this does not, however, prove its truth; it is 'only'
the best we have for the moment. The truth of science is always
provisional, and accordingly, the theory must be subject to change as
new information appears on the horizon. The search for a better
theory is a perpetual challenge for new generations of scientists.
   A concept closely related to the theory is the model, which can be
considered a link between theory and reality. To use a model is to
visualize a theory or a part of it. A closer look at the model tells us
that it is a phenomenon which somehow mimics or represents another
primary entity. It may also be expressed as 'one thing we think we
hope to understand in terms of another that we think we do
understand' (Weinberg 1975). As a theoretical construct it fits the
known, available facts into a neat and elegant package. It is an
imitation or projection of the real world, based on the constructor's
problem area of interest. In this simplified version of reality certain
features are stereotypical. The model brings out certain characteristic
features in the object of study, simultaneousely excluding others. The
quality of a model can only be judged against the background of the
purpose of its origin.
   Models are employed to develop new knowledge, to modify
existing knowledge or to give knowledge new applications. From a
pedagogical point of view, models are used to render theories more
intelligible. Models can also be used to interpret a natural phenomenon
or to predict the outcome of actions. Through the use of models it
becomes possible to know something about a process before it exists.
The model can be subjected to manipulations that are too complex or
dangerous to perform in full-scale. Also, to use a model is less costly
than direct manipulation of the system itself would be.
98         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   When a model does not work in reality this can sometimes be
ascribed to the fact that the model has been confused with
reality. The tool must be separate from the solution and the method
from the result. Models are nevertheless in a sense indispensable
as most often reality is far too complex to be understood without
their help.
   Models are commonly classified as iconic, analogue, symbolic,
verbal and conceptual. Iconic, or physical, models look like the reality
they are intended to represent. One example is a scale model of a
ship's hull, used to collect information concerning a proposed design.
Full-scale models are always iconic; they are used for the same purpose
although their dimensions coincide with those of the real object. Even
a living mannequin is a full-scale iconic model.
   Analogue models represent important qualities of reality through
similarity in relations between entities expressed in entirely different
forms, that are easier to handle. Such models behave like the reality
they represent without looking like it. An example is a mathematical
graph or a terrain map.
   Symbolic models use symbols to denote the reality of interest.
Normally general and abstract, they are often more difficult to
construct but easier to use than other models. Examples are
mathematical, linguistic or decision-making models. A schematic
model reduces a state or event to a diagram or chart. A circuit
diagram of an electronic amplifier exemplifies a schematic model of
the actual hardware. Another kind is a flow chart describing the
order of events in different processes.
   A mathematical model uses mathematical symbols to describe
and explain the represented system. Normally used to predict and
control, these models provide a high degree of abstraction but also of
precision in their application. A warning regarding the inevitable
dilemma associated with mathematical models has, however, been
given by Einstein (1921) when he says: 'When mathematical
propositions refer to reality they are not certain; when they are
certain, they do not refer to reality.'
   A verbal model depicts reality through the use of verbal statements
that set forth the relationships between the concepts. Conceptual
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY              99


models are theoretical explanations; in accordance with their final
purpose these models are prescriptive, predictive, descriptive or
explanatory.
   A model of an as yet untested construction can be used to predict
how it will behave initially. Similarly, to establish what kind of
properties a non-existing original will possess, reality can be imitated
by using the model in a simulation. With regard to the time aspect,
models may be either static or dynamic. Models which exclude the
influence of time are typically static, while those including time are
dynamic. In a dynamic simulation, a model is rapidly exposed to a
continuous series of inputs as it passes through artificial space and
time. Simulation is only possible if there exists a mathematical model,
a virtual machine, representing the system being simulated. Today
this machine is represented by the computer.
   A special kind of simulation is gaming which most often involves
decision making in critical situations. The decisions relating to
hypothetical conditions are taken by real decision makers. Sometimes
the situation includes a counter-measure team which increases the
degree of difficulty.




Widely-known laws, principles, theorems and hypotheses

Systems knowledge of a more general nature, particularly within
systems behaviour, has been expressed in different laws, principles,
theorems and hypotheses. This knowledge is considered to be within
the core of General Systems Theory even if its origin is to be found
in another area. Some of the formulations presented here cover a
broad scope of systems aspects and are extensively applicable,
although most of them concern living systems.
   The different parts of General Systems Theory are reiterated below,
beginning with the laws.

• The second law of thermodynamics: In any closed system the
  amount of order can never increase, only decrease over time.
100           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• The complementary law: Any two different perspectives (or
  models) about a system will reveal truths regarding that system
  that are neither entirely independent nor entirely compatible
  (Weinberg 1975).
• The law of requisite variety: Control can be obtained only if the
  variety of the controller is at least as great as the variety of the
  situation to be controlled (Ashby 1964).
• The law of requisite hierarchy: The weaker and more uncertain
  the regulatory capability, the more hierarchy is needed in the
  organization of regulation and control to get the same result (Aulin
  and Ahmavaara 1979).
• The law of requisite parsimony: Human short-term memory is
  incapable of recalling more than seven plus minus two items. Three
  elements and the four interacting combinations of them will consist
  of such seven items (Miller 1956).

      The following general principles are valid for all kinds of systems.

• System holism principle: A system has holistic properties not
  manifested by any of its parts. The parts have properties not
  manifested by the system as a whole.
• Suboptimalization principle: If each subsystem, regarded
  separately, is made to operate with maximum efficiency, the system
  as a whole will not operate with utmost efficiency.
• Darkness principle: No system can be known completely.
• Eighty-twenty principle: In any large, complex system, eighty per
  cent of the output will be produced by only twenty per cent of the
  system.
• Hierarchy principle: Complex natural phenomena are organized
  in hierarchies wherein each level is made up of several integrated
  systems.
• Redundancy of resources principle: Maintenance of stability
  under conditions of disturbance requires redundancy of critical
  resources.
                  BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY             101


• Redundancy of potential command principle: In any complex
  decision network, the potential to act effectively is conferred by an
  adequate concatenation of information.
• Relaxation time principle: System stability is possible only if the
  system's relaxation time is shorter than the mean time between
  disturbances.
• Negative feedback causality principle: Given negative feedback, a
  system's equilibrium state is invariant over a wide range of initial
  conditions (equifinality).
• Positive feedback causality principle: Given positive feedback in
  a system, radically different end states are possible from the same
  initial conditions (multifinality).
• Homeostasis principle: A system survives only so long as all
  essential variables are maintained within their physiological limits.
• Steady-state principle: For a system to be in a state of equilibrium,
  all subsystems must be in equilibrium. All subsystems being in a
  state of equilibrium, the system must be in equilibrium.
• Self-organizing systems principle: Complex systems organize
  themselves and their characteristic structural and behavioural
  patterns are mainly a result of interaction between the subsystems.
• Basins of stability principle: Complex systems have basins of
  stability separated by thresholds of instability. A system dwelling
  on a ridge will suddenly return to the state in a basin.
• Viability principle: Viability is a function of the proper balance
  between autonomy of subsystems and their integration within the
  whole system, or of the balance between stability and adaptation.
• First cybernetic control principle: Successful implicit control must
  be a continuous and automatic comparison of behavioural
  characteristics against a standard. It must be followed by continuous
  and automatic feedback of corrective action.
• Second cybernetic control principle: In implicit control, control is
  synonymous with communication.
102        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Third cybernetic control principle: In implicit control, variables
  are brought back into control in the act of, and by the act of, going
  out of control.
• The feedback principle: The result of behaviour is always scanned
  and its success or failure modifies future behaviour.
• The maximum power principle: Those systems that survive in
  competition between alternative choices are those that develop more
  power inflow and use it to meet the needs of survival.

   Living systems also follow a number of main systemic principles,
foremost in connection with preserving stability. The twelve below
have been defined by Watt and Craig in their book Surprise, Ecological
Stability Theory (1988).

• The omnivory principle: The greater the number of different
  resources and of pathways for their flow to the main system
  components, the less likely the system will become unstable. In other
  words: spread the risks or 'Don't put all your eggs in one basket'.
• The high-flux principle: The higher the rate of the resource flux
  through the system, the more resources are available per time unit
  to help deal with the perturbation. Whether all resources are used
  efficiently may matter less than whether the right ones reach the
  system in time for it to be responsive.
• The variety-adaptability principle: Systemic variety enhances
  stability by increasing adaptability.
• The flatness principle: The wider their base in relation to their
  number of hierarchic levels, the more stable organizational pyramids
  will be. A larger number of independent actors increases stability.
• The system separability principle: System stability increases as
  the mean strength of interaction between components is decreased.
  Stability is enhanced by separating the elements of the system from
  one another.
• The redundancy principle: Generally, arithmetic increases in
  redundancy yield geometric increases in reliability. In self-
  organizing systems, negative feedback regulates reproduction where
                  BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY             103


  too little redundancy leads to the species dying out and too much
  to over-reproduction.
• The buffering principle: Stability is enhanced by maintaining a
  surplus. An unused reserve cannot however help the system.
• The environment-modification principle: To survive, systems have
  to choose between two main strategies. One is to adapt to the
  environment, the other is to change it. The beaver, for example,
  changes the environment for its own benefit.
• The robustness principle: The ability of a system to passively
  withstand environmental change may derive from simple physical
  protection or it may involve a complex of mechanisms similar to
  those used by the butterfly to overwinter as a pupa.
• The patchiness principle: The lack of capacity to use a variety of
  resources leads to instability (the external counterpart to the
  omnivory principle). Rule-bound systems, stipulating in advance
  the permissible and the impermissible, are likely to be less stable
  than those that develop pell-mell.
• The over-specialization principle: Too much of a good thing may
  render systems unstable in the face of environmental change. It is
  through this principle that the conflict between the parts and the
  whole is played out.
• The safe environment principle: Based upon the environment-
  modification principle, it states the importance of creating a
  permanently stable environment whereby the system is protected
  from change.
• The principle of adaptation: For continued system cohesion, the
  mean rate of system adaptiation must equal or exceed the mean
  rate of change of environment (Hitchins 1992).
• The Red Queen Principle: A system must continously develop
  in order to merely maintain its fitness relative to the system it co-
  evolves with (Van Valen 1973).

   The following theorems together contribute further perspectives
to the above material.
104        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Godel's incompleteness theorem: All consistent axiomatic
  foundations of number theory include undecidable propositions.
• Redundancy-of-information theorem: Errors in information
  transmission can be prevented by increasing the redundancy in the
  messages.
• Recursive-system theorem: In a recursive organizational structure,
  each viable system contains, and is contained in, a viable system.
  (In a military context, for example, it says that group, platoon,
  company, etc. all have the same functions and structure as integrated
  parts of the battalion.)
• Feedback dominance theorem: In an efficient system, feedback
  dominates output in spite of extensive variations of input. That is,
  regulation is more efficient on input side.
• Conant-Ashby theorem: Every good regulator of a system must be
  a model of the system.

   The following hypotheses have been selected from the approximate
total of one hundred in Miller's book Living Systems (1976), in which
he introduced the General Living Systems theory (GLS). Their social
and managerial implications are obvious.

• A system's processes are affected more by its suprasystem than by
  its supra-suprasystem or above, and by its subsystems more than
  by its sub-subsystems or below.
• The amount of information transmitted between points within a
  system is significantly larger than the amount transmitted across
  its boundary.
• The larger the percentage of all matter/energy input that a system
  consumes for the information processing necessary to control its
  various system processes, as opposed to matter-energy processing,
  the more likely the system is to survive.
• Strain, errors and distortions increase in a system, as the number
  of channels blocked for information transmission increases.
• In general, the farther components of a system are from one another
  and the longer the channels between them are, the slower is the
  rate of information flow among them.
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY            105


• The higher the level of a system the more correct or adaptive its
  decisions.
• Under equal stress, functions developed later in the phylogenetic
  history of a given type of system break down before the more
  primitive functions do.
• The greater the resources available to a system, the less likely there
  is to be conflict among its subsystems or components.
• The vigour of the search for resolutions of conflicts increases as the
  available time for finding a solution decreases.
• A component will comply with a system's purposes and goals to
  the extent that those functions of the component directed towards
  the goal are rewarded and those directed away from it are punished.

   Some of the axioms related to GST can be found on p. 51-56. The
nature of axioms has been explicitly expressed in Godel's theorem,
presented on p. 104. His theorem is a very elegant series of proofs
about the nature of mathematics. There he concludes that an axiom
system in mathematics that is sufficiently complex to support
arithmetic will either be inconsistent or incomplete (not both). You
cannot prove a system with the system itself...!




Some generic facts of systems behaviour

System behaviour, such as is expressed in the formulations on the
foregoing pages, can always be related to the concept of complexity.
The more complex a system, the more intricate its behaviour. It is,
however, necessary to bear in mind that, given enough time and
space, even the simplest system can produce quite unexpected and
surprisingly complex phenomena. To emphasize the characteristics
of a complex system, the following comparison between simple and
complex systems has been made by R. Flood and M. Jackson (1991).

Simple systems are characterized by
• a small number of elements
• few interactions between the elements
106        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• attributes of the elements are predetermined
• interaction between elements is highly organized
• well-defined laws govern behaviour
• the system does not evolve over time
• subsystems do not pursue their own goals
• the system is unaffected by behavioural influences
• the system is largely closed to the environment

Complex systems are characterized by
• a large number of elements
• many interactions between the elements
• attributes of the elements are not predetermined
• interaction between elements is loosely organized
• they are probabilistic in their behaviour
• the system evolves over time
• subsystems are purposeful and generate their own goals
• the system is subject to behavioural influences
• the system is largely open to the environment

   A large system per se normally signifies a greater complexity
inasmuch as more subsystems and more processes are in operation
simultaneously. The degree of organization inherent in the system,
defined as predetermined rules guiding the interaction, is another
basic determinant. Non-linear and stochastic processes with many
feedback loops of higher order and time delays are also important.
   A complex system often behaves in an unexpected manner and
the relations between cause and effect are often difficult to understand.
Measures taken to understand or control may sometimes yield the
opposite of our intentions. Measures seemingly reasonable in the
short-term often prove to be harmful in the long run. Human
interference with delicate regulation mechanisms may cause changes
which lead quite abruptly into a new state, essentially irreversible
and continuing for a very long time.
   A system is generally less sensitive to external structural influences
than to internal. The complex system can nonetheless be unsusceptible
to changes in the internal parameters. Increases or decreases in their
values are neutralized by many kinds of negative feedback and these
                     BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY                     107


changes have little influence on system behaviour. Linear negative-
feedback systems are either stable or unstable regardless of the input
signal applied. Non-linear feedback systems may be stable for some
inputs but unstable for others.
   The general unifying forces keeping a systemic hierarchy together
vary according to their evolutionary direction. Systems which evolve
upward possess strong cohesive forces joining the subsystems and
are thereby less easily disrupted. Lower levels generally function
better than the later established suprasystem. In systems which evolve
downward, developing specialized subunits, the suprasystem is
stronger than the younger subsystems.
   All feedback systems are apt to oscillate, affecting the behaviour,
to a lesser or greater extent. Within the existing network of coupled
variables each variable has a highest and lowest threshold. Within
these limits the system can vary freely; if they are exceeded, disorder
and finally collapse will occur. If they do not maintain a defined
value, other variables will then occupy the available variation space
and take over. For the systems researcher it is a constant problem to
know whether certain feedback loops reveal significant differences,
or merely amplify insignificant ones.
   In Figure 2.21, A shows a state of stable oscillations where the
input is a feedback from the output. This occurs when the feedback
(thin line) has a phase which is the opposite to the system disturbance




                      -'\xxxxxr
Figure 2.21 Different oscillation patterns in feedback systems (from Tustin 1955).
108        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE


and is of equal amplitude. In B, the oscillations are damped and
diminish when the feedback is less than the output. Finally, a feedback
signal inducing corrective action greater than the error will amplify
the same, causing growing oscillations and instability, according to
C in Figure 2.21.
    A special kind of system behaviour is associated with system
growth and adaptation. The introduction of a unique input at some
critical time may suddenly permit a semi-organized system to organize
itself into a hierarchy and to grow. The general unifying forces keeping
a systemic hierarchy together vary according to their evolutionary
direction. From these facts follows the inevitable conflict in all growing
systems, that existing between the supra and subsystems.
    The fact that living systems -per se tend to complicate their
interactions with their surroundings over time, is an inherent feature
of their growth. This applies also to non-living systems — the growth
of a computer network is a good example. Growth is mostly a
consequence of an adaptation; bigger systems survive better than
small ones. Inasmuch as it is not possible to adapt to everything, a
system is prevented from growing to infinite size. Beyond a certain
point integration and communication problems within the system
exceed the benefits of large size. To maintain diversity and balance,
un organism may not exceed the norm of its species. It eventually
reaches its maximum stage, beyond a growth without deterioration
is not possible.
    Structural growth and the associated increase of size demand a
specialization or modification of some components which in turn
produce emergent systemic properties. A wider range of functions in
a system with specialized subsystems makes it better equipped to
cope with even unforeseen difficulties. The total system may thus
have a longer life than its subsystems.

                                      *

Review questions and problems

1. Systems theory tries to define a law about laws. Does such a law already
   exist within other disciplines?
                   BASIC IDEAS OF GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY               109



2. Give some examples of dissimilar definitions of the concept system and
   point out some of the main differences.
3. What is the difference between an abstract system and a conceptual
   system?
4. Do emergent properties exist in every system?
5. How do entropy and negentropy influence a man-made system?
6. Describe how systems with feedback regulation can neutralize disturbing
   forces not known beforehand.
7. Einstein's proposition regarding mathematical models seems to have a
   certain connection to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. Explain why.
8. Why do bigger systems survive better than smaller systems?

                                    *
                                3

                 A Selection of
                Systems Theories
• Boulding and the Hierarchy of Systems Complexity
• Miller and the General Living Systems Theory
• Beer and the Viable System Model
• Lovelock and the Gaia Hypothesis
• Teilhard de Chardin and the noosphere
• Taylor and the Geopolitic Systems Model
• Klir and the Epistemological Hierarchy of Systems
• Laszlo and the Natural Systems
• Cook and the Quantal System
• Checkland and the Systems Typology
• Jordan and the Systems Taxonomy
• Salk and the categories of nature
• Powers and the Control Theory
• Namilov and the organismic view of science
• Bowen and Family Systems Theory
• Jaques and the Stratified Systems Theory

'It is the theory which decides what we can observe/ (Albert Einstein)



S  ome of the properties peculiar to theories of general systems were
   identified in Chapter 2. When considering the systems theories
and models presented in this chapter we find that they fulfil the
demands to varying degrees. A feature common to all (with one
exception) is that they are hierarchies of both complexity and size.

                                 110
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 111


Another common property is that their structures seem to exist at all
levels and on all scales.
   It is obvious that the originators of these systematic structures
shared interests, albeit from various perspectives. With their
backgrounds as philosophers, sociologists, biologists, physicists, etc.
they formulated their theories of systems in different terms. Their
fundamental and also common belief is that certain main aspects of
the world can be tied together through the myriad of systems into
one rational scheme.
   Nothing can be understood in isolation. All systems theories are
therefore in a sense explanatory structures intended to correspond to
something in the real world. As an explanatory structure, certain
theories give the framework for a specific systems methodology,
described in Chapter 11. A further distinctive mark of systems theories
is their focus on the principles of organization per se, regardless of
what it is that is organized and the quality thereof.
   A common practice when presenting systems theories is to begin
with Boulding, Miller and Beer. Their concepts and vocabulary are
easily comprehended and they provide a language with which to
penetrate the other theories. This order of presentation can be seen
as an attempt to lay a foundation with the most general and
overarching theories on which the more specialized can be built.




Boulding and the Hierarchy of Systems Complexity

As one of the founding fathers of the Systems Movement, Kenneth
Boulding presented his classical paper, General Systems Theory — The
Skeleton of Science, in 1956. In this paper the author is deeply concerned
about the existing over-specialization of science and the lack of
communication between the different areas. He proposes as a way of
overcoming this dilemma the use of an over-arching language of
concepts, and an arrangement of theoretical systems and constructs
in a hierarchy of complexity. This should be a 'system of systems'
possible to use in all areas. Each scientific area studies some kind of
112        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



system and a classification is necessary if a general methodology for
their study is to be developed.
    The first level in Boulding's hierarchy is the level of static
structures and relationships or, using his term, frameworks. Examples
are the arrangement of atoms in a crystal, the anatomy of genes,
cells, plants or the organization of the astronomical universe. These
can all be accurately described in terms of static relationship, of
function or position. Organized theoretical knowledge in many fields
emanates from static relationship, which is also a prerequisite for the
understanding of systems behaviour.
    The second level is called clockworks. The solar system offers an
example of a simple dynamic system with predetermined motion.
Machines such as car engines and dynamos, as well as the theoretical
structures of physics, chemistry and economics, belong to this
category; they all strive for some kind of equilibrium.
    The third level is that of control mechanisms or cybernetic systems.
A thermostat with its teleological (purpose-geared) behaviour is an
often used example for this level; another is the regulation called
homeostasis. This level is characterized by feedback mechanisms with
transmission and interpretation of information.
    The fourth level is the level of the cell or the self-maintaining
structure. Since life begins and develops here this is also called the
open-system level. Life presupposes throughput of matter and energy
and the ability to maintain and reproduce itself.
    The fifth level can be called the plant level and is identified by its
genetic/societal processes. The main qualities of these processes are
differentiation and division of labour respectively, and mutual
dependence between the various components for both. Since the life
processes of the plant level take place without specialized sense
organs, the reaction to changes in the environment is slow.
    The sixth level is the level of the animal where the main
characteristics are various degrees of consciousness, teleological
behaviour and increased mobility. Here, a wide range of specialized
sensors convey a great amount of information via a nervous system
to a brain where information can be stored and structured. Reactions
 to changes in the environment are more or less instantaneous.
                           A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 113


   The seventh level is the human, wherein the individual is defined
as a system. Man possesses in addition to the qualities of the animal
level, self-consciousness. This is a self-reflective quality: he not only
knows but knows that he knows. A consequence of this is the
awareness of one's own mortality. Another quality is a sophisticated-
language capability and the use of internal symbols through which
man accumulates knowledge, transmitting it from brain to brain and
from generation to generation.
   The eighth level is defined as that of social organization. A single
human being, that is, one isolated from fellow human beings, is rare.
The units of this level are the assumed roles and these are tied together
by the channels of communication. Many cultural factors — value
systems, symbolization through art and music, complex areas of
emotion, history — are significant for this level.
   The ninth level is the transcendental, or that of the unknowable.
While one can only speculate about its structure and relationships, it
is presupposed that this level does exhibit systemic structure and
relationship.
   A system of systems or a hierarchy of complexity indicating the
relationships between the different levels is shown in Figure 3.1.


          Level                            Systems           Complexity
                                             A                  A


           9                           /Transcendentah

           8                       /        Social
                               /         organization
           7               /               Human
           8
                       /                    Animal
           5       /                    Genetic-societal
           4     /                      Open systems
           3   /                         Cybernetics
           2 /                           Clockworks
           1/                            Frameworks

     Figure 3.1 A hierarchy of systems complexity according to Boulding.
114        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    A closer examination shows that the first three levels belong to
the category of physical and mechanical systems and are mainly the
concern of physical scientists. Classical natural science is most at
home at the clockwork level. Levels of the cell, the plant and the
animal are typically the levels of biologists, botanists and zoologists.
The next two levels of human and social organization are mainly the
interest of the social scientists. Speculation concerning the nature of
transcendental systems belongs primarily to the area of philosophy.
    One of the motives behind Boulding's hierarchy was to present
the status of the scientific knowledge of his time. Obviously, relevant
theoretical models existed up to and including the cell level. Higher
levels have only rudiments of relevant models. Boulding emphasized
the gap between theoretical models and pertinent empirical referents
which in his opinion were deficient within all levels. Another idea
was that valuable knowledge can be obtained by applying low level
systems knowledge to high level subject matter. This is possible
inasmuch as each system level incorporates all levels below it.
    In 1985, Boulding presented The World as a Total System, a book in
which his original systems hierarchy is reworked and the levels
are extended to eleven and are given slightly different names and
contents. The first and most basic category in the level hierarchy can
be described as a static and descriptive structure of space. The next
category contains the description of dynamic systems — that is, of
changes in static structures over time. The final category contains
explanatory systems which, besides the pattern of structure in space
and time, explain several basic regularities. Levels of complexity and
regulation and control of the different subsystems are also to be found
in the new hierarchy. All levels have their counterparts in the real
world.
    The first level consists of mechanical systems controlled by simple
connections and few parameters. The connections are in mathematical
 terms seldom more complex than equations of the third degree.
 Examples are the laws of gravitation, Ohm's law and Boyle's law.
    The second level is that of cybernetic systems. These more complex
 systems strive towards a state of equilibrium through negative
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                115


feedback. Such a process exists in living bodies under the name of
homeostasis and is dependent upon the processing of information.
The basic units of receptor, transmitter and effector are always present.
    The third level is called positive feedback systems. Owing to the
nature of positive feedback these systems are seldom long-lived; they
accelerate toward breakdown, or breakthrough. The faster a forest
fire burns, the hotter it gets, and the more one learns, the easier it is
to learn more. Evolution can also represent an anti-entropic positive
feedback process.
    The fourth level is the level of creodic systems (from Greek,
meaning 'necessary path'). It includes all systems which strive towards
a goal and which may be called planned in a wide sense as they are
guided by some kind of initial plan. The morphogenesis in the
development of both egg to chicken and the economy of a society can
illustrate this level.
    The fifth level is one of reproductive systems which implies
that genetic instructions guide both reproduction and growth.
Besides that for individuals, a reproductive process takes place in
social organizations. Language and printed matter disseminate
ideas; a member who is promoted, retired or dismissed is, through
mechanisms for role occupancy, replaced.
    The sixth level concerns demographic systems and consists of
populations of reproductive systems. A population is a collection of
comparable objects, not necessarily identical but similar enough to
create a meaningful classification. A biological population increases
through birth and decreases through death. If birth and death rates
are equal and if normal age distribution is paralleled by the survival
distribution, the population is said to be in equilibrium, a situation
which is, however, rare.
    The seventh level, ecological systems, consists of a number of
interacting populations of different species. The size of a population
is determined by its own structure and the size of its competitors. If
in a given environment of other populations a specific population
has reached equilibrium, it is said to occupy an ecological niche. If
more populations are stable in their interactions they form an
ecological system. The tropical rainforest is a useful example.
116        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Ecological interaction between different populations takes place
by means of mutual competition, cooperation or predation. In a sense a
similar interaction takes place between the artificial ecosystems of
human artefacts, for example cars predate on people. The main
difference is that the biological organisms can reproduce themselves,
human artefacts cannot. Since a 'genetical structure' of artefacts exists
in human minds as well as in artificial memories, artefacts can be
said to reproduce in a figurative sense ('noogenetics').
   The eighth level is that of evolutionary systems. Such systems
can be both ecological, changing under the influence of selection
and mutation, and artificial, obeying the same influence but in
the transferred sense of new ideas. The fact that the evolutionary
process moves towards ever-increasing complexity may be seen in
the emergence of human self-consciousness or in the growth of
the city.
   The ninth level, human systems, differs from other living systems
owing to the superior information processing capability of the brain.
Advanced pattern recognition and communication abilities with
speech, writing and the use of sophisticated artefacts are distinctive
marks. (There are more species and subspecies of human artefacts
than plants in Linne's sexual system.)
   The tenth level is that of social systems, a result of the interaction
between human beings and/or their artefacts. They arise thanks to
the capability of human minds to form images and to convey
complicated concepts from one mind to another. An interactive
learning process where various types of experience and evaluations
are communicated through the system is essential. The nature of
these interactions can be classified as threat, exchange or integration.
The social activity itself may be classified as belonging to economic,
political, communicative and integrative systems. Processes of
mutation and selection are at work both within the mass of human
individuals as well as among their artefacts. The biological concept
of an empty niche makes sense also when speaking of these artefacts.
Cars fill up empty spaces all over the world; CocaCola competes
successfully with a myriad of available beverages.
                                   A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                                                        117


   The nature of social systems and their internal and external
interactions has been thoroughly dealt with in Boulding's book
Ecodynamics (1978). In Figure 3.2, the resulting combinations of threat,
exchange and integrative systems are represented.

                                                                  Pure
                                                               Integration




                                                                                                              Pure
                                                                                                            exchange


Figure 3.2 Combination of threat, exchange and integration in society (from Boulding
1978).


                                                                Systems                                      Complexity




                                                               Transcen-
                                                                 dental
                 10                                     /        Social         \
                  9                                 /            Human              \
                  8                             /             Evolutionary              \

                  7                         /                  Ecological                   \
                  6                    /'                     Demographic                       \

                  5                /                          Reproductive                          \
                  4            /                                Creodic                                 \

                  3        /                                Positive feedback                                \
                  2    /                                       Cybernetic                                        \

                  '/                                           Mechanical                                            \


  Figure 3.3 The second hierarchy of systems complexity according to Boulding.
118        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The eleventh level is that of transcendental systems. Here certain
religious or philosophical experiences may serve, at least in part, as
examples. Being a level of the unknowable, the eleventh is one of
speculation.
   The hierarchical relationships between the different levels are
shown below in Figure 3.3.



Miller and the General Living Systems Theory

James Miller, an American psychologist and psychiatrist, became
one of the most prominent scientists within systems science after the
publication of his book Living Systems in 1978. The General Living
Systems theory or GLS theory presented in the book is concerned
with a special subset of all systems, the living ones. It is general, or
universal, in that it cuts across species, size of systems and type of
behaviour and is interdisciplinary in that it integrates both biological
and social science, ranging from cellular chemistry to international
relations.
   Its basic proposition is that a living system is a physical
phenomenon existing in space and time. Only a universe which
exists in three space dimensions and one time dimension is likely to
provide the richness, predictability and stability to generate a lasting
structure which includes life. Space time accociated with more than
three dimensions does not allow anything to exist in stable orbits.
Particles either spiral together or shoot off to infinity. It does not
allow the existence of solar systems and also rules out the existence
of atoms.
   Certain general propositions are true of all living systems,
regardless of their size, origin and complexity which may not be true
of artificial systems. This is due to the fact that individual sets of
relationships are required to enhance and conserve order over time
in a universe governed by uniform laws.
   GLS theory recognizes the following five kingdoms:

— monerans
— protistans
                       A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                       119

— fungi
— plants
— animals

   A living system is a complex, adaptive, open, negentropic system
and can thus be characterized as purposive. It maintains within
its boundary a less probable thermodynamic energy process by
interaction with its environment. Such a process is called metabolism
and is possible through the continuous exchange of matter and energy
across the system boundary. This process also gives the energy
necessary for all essential activities, such as reproduction, production
and repair. The metabolism or processing of information is of equal
importance, making possible regulation and adjustment of both
internal stress and external strain. Information processing and
programmed decisions are the means by which matter and energy
processing is controlled in living systems. See Figure 3.4.
   Living systems have attributes shared by all kinds of open system.
They import matter/energy and information from the environment.
The reception of input is selective. Not all inputs can be absorbed
into every system. Regarding information, systems can react and
process only that information to which they are attuned. The selective
mechanism works by coding. The throughput and transformation of
the imported (a process of negentropy) result into some product which


                                 Throughput
    Information                                               Information
        input                                                    output
              •                                                       •
                                       Internal regulation
   Matter/energy                                             Matter/energy
       input                                                    output



                               System boundary

  Figure 3.4 Throughput in a living system of matter/energy and information.
120        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



is characteristic for the system. The product is then exported into the
environment. Simultaneously, the system is reengergizing itself from
sources in the environment.
    In order to maintain a constancy over time, a living system must
be able to self-maintenance and self-repair. These abilities take place
according to the following points:

• Information processing.
• Energy processing.
• Material processing.
• Synthesis of parts by combining materials.
• Rearrangement and connection of disarranged parts.
• Energy storing for fuel reserves and necessary structure.
• Removal of worn parts.

    All living systems, irrespective of species, consist of remarkably
similar organic molecules and a general evolutionary progression
toward increasing complexity. Starting with the amoeba and finishing
with the United Nations, living systems can be divided into eight
very real and concrete hierarchical levels. Each new level is regarded
as being higher than the preceding; it comprises all lower level systems
and is more differentiated. The vital system components of one level
are systems in their own right on the level below. In other words, the
larger and higher levels with their component lower level subsystems
constitute a suprasystem. Miller employs the metaphor of a ship's
cable: a single unit which can be separated into the ropes of which
it is twisted. These, in turn, can be unravelled revealing the finer
strands, strings and threads. The specific system structure can be
seen as the most economical problem solution done by the biological
evolution which can cope with a given environment.
    Each level has its typical individual structure and processes. The
levels are distinguished by the following labels:

• Cells: These are composed of non-living molecules and multi-
  molecular complexes and represent the least complex system that
  can support essential life processes. Cells exist either free living or
  as specialized components of the organs or tissues of organisms.
                       A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                   121


• Organs: All organs are composed of structures of cell aggregates.
  An example is the liver.
• Organisms: Their components are organs. This level includes multi-
  cellular plants and animals.
• Groups: Two or more organisms which interact form a group. No
  higher level than this exists among animals. Structure and processes
  discernible among social insects such as bees and ants are more
  similar to those of the group than those of the next level.
• Organizations: With their main components of groups, orga-
  nizations present a diversity of types: governmental sectors, private
  universities, churches and business enterprises. The organization
  has more than one structure in its decider function.
• Communities: When different types of organizations interact
  they form a community. A town, with its schools, hospitals and
  fire brigade, is an example which illustrates the community's
  characteristic independence in decision making.
• Societies: With components of communities of various kinds and
  functions, this level is defined by Miller as totipotential. This indicates
  that, within itself, it contains all the essential capabilities as a
  self-subsistent system. A typical society is the nation which claims
  and defends a territory.
• Supranational systems: Here, two or more societies cooperate to a
  certain extent in decision making and in submitting power to a
  decider superordinate to their own. This level is represented by
  blocks, coalitions, alliances and pacts. NATO represents a single
  purpose; the European Union and the United Nations exemplify a
  multipurpose supranational system. Societies express themselves
  through delegates within the decider function.

   While living systems according to Miller's theory are all systems
which support the phenomenon of life, social theory has no definite
answer to whether social entities that are not organisms have a real
existence 'in nature' or not. Some scientists prefer to see them as
methodologically necessary theoretical constructs with no existence
per se.
122        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    It has also been questioned if systems at levels above the organism
can be considered to be alive: the components have no physical
connections (as in the lower levels). The component individuals need
physical contact similar to that of mechanical systems but only for
sexual union or physical combat. Furthermore, at the higher levels,
components can move from one system to another. These systems
also include a great many non-living components or artefacts that are
crucial for the system. Living systems create and live among their
artefacts. Non-living components in the form of prostheses, for example
plastic aortas, can be present at lower levels, where even free-living
components such as the white blood cells exist.
    The importance of spatial cohesion is dependent upon the nature
of the system. To preserve themselves as an effective existing unit
the members of a riot squad quite naturally have to work shoulder
to shoulder. The family as a system may function well even although
grown-up children are geographically dispersed. Generally, the higher
level, the less physical contact. Instead, the system keeps the parts
together through information, common goals and interests. The
occupied space and boundaries of such systems are entirely
conceptual, that is, they exist in the minds of people and not in
physical reality.
    Lack of physical cohesion among components of a living system
is often compensated for by advanced communication systems which
tie the components together. The low frequency acoustic long distance
communication between big whales can in this respect be compared
with man's corresponding telecommunication system.
    Living systems at all levels have some critical processes essential
for living and reproduction. GLS theory identifies 20, each of which
is performed by special units or components of systems. These exist
at each of the eight levels, except for the two units necessary for
learning, that is, associator and memory, which only exist in the animal
organism. A critical process lacking in one system can sometimes be
performed by some other. For an observer, some of the subsystems
may be transparent, that is, they are systems which one actually do
not think of or see until they malfunction or break down. The 20
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES               123



subsystems are divided into three groups: for the processing of
matter/energy and information. (A system can survive without a
reproducer, but not without any of the other subsystems.)
   All living systems have to carry out the 20 essential subsystem
functions in order to survive. Some systems, in which both structure
and processes of some of the essential subsystems are missing, survive
by substituting with either their own processes or processes of
other systems at the same or different levels, or in Miller's words by
dispersing missing processes. All the subsystems are presented below
in the order and with the numbers given in 1990, when the timer was
added (Miller 1990).
   Subsystems processing matter/energy/information:

 #1 Reproducer is capable of giving rise to other systems similar to
    the one it is in.
 #2 Boundary at the perimeter of a system holds together the
    components which make up the system, protecting them from
    environmental stress, and which exclude or permit entry to
    various types of matter/energy and information.

   Subsystems processing matter/energy:

 #3 Ingestor brings matter/energy from the environment across the
    system boundary.
 #4 Distributor carries inputs from outside of the system or outputs
    from own subsystems to each component within the system.
 #5 Converter changes certain inputs to the system into forms more
    useful for the special processes of that particular system.
 #6 Producer forms stable associations among matter/energy inputs
    to the system or outputs from its converter. The materials so
    synthesized are for growth, damage repair, or replacement of
    components of the system. They also provide energy for
    constituting the system's outputs of products or information
    markers or moving these to its suprasystem.
124          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



 #7 Storage retains deposits of various types of matter/energy in
    the system, for different periods of time.
 #8 Extruder transmits matter/energy in the form of products and
    waste out of the system.
 #9 Motor moves the system or parts of it in relation to its whole or
    partial environment, moves components of the environment in
    relation to each other.
#10 Supporter maintains the proper spatial relationships among
    components.

      Subsystems processing information:

#11 Input transducer, with its sensory function, brings markers
    bearing information into the system, changing them into other
    matter/energy forms suitable for internal transmission.
#12 Internal transducer, with its sensory function, receives, from all
    subsystems or components within the system, markers bearing
    information concerning significant alterations to the same. It
    changes these markers to other matter/energy forms which can
    be transmitted within the system.
#13 Channel and net, composed of a single route in physical space,
    or multiple interconnected routes, transmits markers bearing
    information to all parts of the system.
#14 Timer transmits to the decider information about time-related
    states of the environment or of components of the system. This
    information signals to the decider of the system or deciders of
    subsystems when to start, stop, alter the rate, or advance or
    delay the phase of one or more of the system's processes, thus
    coordinating them in time.
#15 Decoder alters the code of information input to it through the
    input transducer or the internal transducer into a 'private' code
    that can be used internally by the system.
#16 Associator carries out the first stage of the learning process,
    forming enduring associations among units of information in
    the system.
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES              125


#17 Memory carries out the second stage of the learning process,
    storing various types of information in the system for different
    periods of time.
#18 Decider receives information inputs from all other subsystems
    and transmits to them information outputs that control the entire
    system. This executive decider has a hierarchical structure, the
    levels of which are called echelons.
#19 Encoder alters the code of information inputs from other
    information-processing subsystems, from a 'private' code used
    internally by the system into a 'public' code which can be
    interpreted by other systems in its environment.
#20 Output transducer puts out markers bearing information from
    the system, changing markers within the system into other
    matter/energy forms which can be transmitted over channels in
    the system's environment.

   A main feature of the GLS theory is a level/subsystem table of
living systems with 160 cells (8 levels x 20 subsystems). Here the
components of the subsystems are listed for the various levels,
altogether 153, with 7 missing as not recognized. The arrangement
has a remarkable resemblance to the periodic table of the elements
and in a sense it has a similar function for living systems. For an
extract from the table, see Figure 3.5.
   To adapt to a continually changing environment and to handle
stress from both within and without, living systems embody
adjustment processes. System variables are hereby kept within their
normal ranges and the system as a whole, as well as its subsystems,
maintains homeostasis in spite of continuous changes. The adaptation
take place according to the following points:

• Modify function and structure.
• Adapt interflows with other systems.
• Adapt intraflows within the system.
• Utilize changing resources.
• Grow/shrink without disrupting system operation.
• Replace worn parts without disrupting system operation.
126                  GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




      Subsystem       Reproducer         Boundary        Ingest or        Dktrlbutor       Converter          Prodvcer
      Level

      Cell            DNAand             Matter-energy   Transport        Endoplasmic      Enzyme in          Chlorop.ast in
                      RNA                and             molecules        reticulum        mitochon-          green plant
                      molecules          information:                                      drion
                                         Outer
                                         membrane

      Organ           Upwardly           Matter-energy   Input artery     Intercellular    Gastric            Islets of
                      dispersed to       and                              fluid            mucosa cell        Langerhans of
                      organism           information:                                                         pancreas
                                         Capsule or
                                         outer layer
                                         lit
      Organism        Testes.                            Mouth, nose,     Vascular         Upper gastro-      Organs that
                      ovaries,                           skin in some     system of        intestinal tract   synthesize
                      uterus,                            species          higher animals                      materials for
                      genitalia                                                                               metabolism
                                                                                                              and repair

      Group           Parents who        Matter-         Refreshment      Father who       Work group         Family
                      create new         energy.         chairman of      serves dinner    member who         member who
                      family             Inspect         social club                       cuts cloth         cooks
                                         soldiers;
                                         Information:
                                         T V rules in
                                         family

      Organization    Chartering         Matter-         Receiving        Assembly line    Operators of       Factory
                      group              energy:         department                        oil refinery       production
                                         Guards at                                                            unit
                                         entrance to
                                         plant;
                                         Information:
                                         Librarian

      Community       National           Matter-         Airport          County school    City stockyard     Bakery
                      legislature that   energy:         authority of     bus driven       organization
                      grants state       Agricultural    city
                      status to          inspection
                      territory          officers;
                                         Information:
                                         Movie censors

      Society         Constitutional     Matter-         Immigration      Operators of     Nuclear            All farmers
                      convention         energy:         service          national         industry           and factory
                      that writes        Customs                          railroads                           workers of a
                      national           service;                                                             country
                      constitution       Information:
                                         Security
                                         agency

      Supra-          United             Matter-         Legislative      Personnel who    EURATOM,           World Health
      national        Nations when       energy:         body that        operate          C E R N , IAEA     Organization
      System          it creates new     Troops at       admits nations   supranational
                      supranational      Berlin Wall;                     power grids
                      agency             Information:
                                         NATO
                                         security
                                         personnel




Figure 3.5 Extract of the level/subsystem table of living systems (from Miller 1990).
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                127


    The adjustments, however, entail a cost (time, money, etc.). The
least costly processes are engaged in the first instance, followed by
the more resource demanding when necessary. A kind of adjustment
procedure which should not be forgotten is collapse. Collapse is a last
resort adaptive response when no other means remain. It sometimes
permits survival on a lower system level. The continuous use of
adjustments which are more costly than necessary is a kind of systems
pathology. Another kind of process, the historical, is the system life
cycle. This includes growth, development, maturation, ageing and
death (see p. 95).
    As it has not been proven practical for organisms to live for an
indefinitely extended period of time, they have got the built in ability
to procreate but also to die. This ability allows (through selection)
refinement to and improvements of the life forms. In a wider meaning,
it therefore makes sense to speak of death as a part of autopoies.
    Higher levels among living systems are both larger and more
sophisticated and have therefore structure and processes not existing
at lower levels. This phenomenon is called emergents and gives these
systems a better capability to withstand stress and adapt or exploit
a greater range of environments.
    The role of information processing has been thoroughly dealt with
in GLS theory. In living systems, insignificant amount of energy is
consumed in information processing which controls big energies and
forces producing a well-organized result. At least on higher levels,
living systems depend upon a full flow of the following three types
of information in order to survive:

— information of the world outside
— information from the past
— information about self and own parts

    Living systems in general are typically confronted with more
information of their environment than is necessary or relevant for a
calculated response. It is therefore essential to block or reject most of
it. Another important quality of information processing is to be able
to erase or to forget information. Significant fact, on the other hand,
128        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



is remembered. The immune defence remembers unfamiliar material
exposed to the organism and sometimes mobilize an exaggeratedly
defence. The forgetfulness is the key to life's ability to incorporate
the future with the present.
    Living systems recognize three types of codes of increasing
complexity used in the information metabolism.

• An alpha code is one in which the ensemble or markers is composed
  of different spatial patterns, each representing a coded message or
  signal. Signal agents like pheromones belong to this category.
  (Hormones are chemical messengers acting in the organism's
  internal environment while pheromores act between organisms,
  thus co-ordinating and regulating interactions of group members).
• A beta code is based on variations in process such as temporal or
  amplitudinal change or a different pattern of intensity.
• A gamma code is used when symbolic information transmission
  takes place, as in linguistic communication.

   Information processing involving these codes often gives rise to
stress, known as information input overload, especially on higher system
levels. This phenomenon is well-known in Western urban civilization
which in a sense exists in this state continuously. Here the citizen
withdraws within his own world as a result of adjustment processes
or a quite logical attempt to survive in a seemingly chaotic world of
excessive information. Of the possible adjustment processes, the
following are the most common in connection with overload.

— omission neglecting to transmit certain randomly distributed
  signals in a message
— error incorrect transmission of certain parts of a message
— queueing delayed transmission of certain signals in a message
— filtering certain classes of messages given priority
— abstracting finer details in the message omitted
— multiple channel transmission parallel transmission over two or
  more channels
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES               129


— chunking messages with intelligible meaning organized in chunks
  rather than individual symbols
— escape information input cut off

   Information stress which occurs with information input underload,
or sensory deprivation (for example, a patient in a respirator — the
isolation syndrome), also requires adjustment. While these processes
incur some costs, the system normally begins with the least costly.
The possible adjustment processes in this case are the following.

— sleepiness, eventually falling asleep
— inability to think clearly, growing irritation, restlessness and
  hostility
— daydreaming, use of fantasy materials to supply information
  inputs
— regression, revert to childlike emotional behaviour
— hallucinations, sensation of 'otherness'
— psychological breakdown, total mental disorder

   Some of the main features of GLS theory have now been outlined.
This theory, itself too far-reaching to be presented in detail here, has
many practical applications. For this purpose the chart of living
systems symbols is used when depicting system flows between the
twenty essential subsystems, as shown in Figure 3.6.
   When applying GLS theory to a problem of the real world a key
task is to identify the components of the 20 essential subsystems for
the object, within its level. The example below shows how an
identification can be established for a supermarket.

 #1 Reproducer                   A The recruitment function
                                 B The owner's mental venture model
                                 C Accumulated funds
 #2 Boundary                     A The walls of the building
                                 B Decrees and laws
130             GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




  Information                                                              Information
     input                                                                    output



      M/E


      input




       Figure 3.6 Main flows between essential subsystems of a living system.




 #3 Ingestor                           A Oil inlet
                                       B Electricity inlet
                                       C Air inlet
                                       D Merchandize inlet
                                       E Commodity inlet
                                       F Water inlet
  #4 Distributor                       A Corridors
                                       B Pipework
                                       C Cables
  #5 Converter                         A Unpacking
                                       B Arrangement
                                       C Raw food converted to fast food
                                       D Electricity converted to cooling
                                       E Oil converted to heating
  #6 Producer                          A Shop assistants
                                       B Store personnel
  #7 Storage                           A Cold-storage room
                                       B Oil tank
                   A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                131


                              C Store room
                              D Counters
#8 Extruder                   A Customer checkouts
                              B Customer delivery car
                              C Sewer
                              D Ventilation outlet
                              E Waste disposal
#9 Motor                      A Employees
                              B Cleaning agency
                              C Machinery
#10 Supporter                 A Building site
                              B The building
                              C Artefacts
                              D Caretaker agency
#11 Input transducer          A Assistant at counter
                              B Office (mail, phone, papers)
                              C Representative at sales meeting
#12 Internal transducer       A Weighing
                              B Testing
                              C Tasting
                              D Customer conversation
#13 Channel and net           A Written internal messages
                              B Internal telephone
                              C Telephone
                              D Internal conversation
#14 Timer                     A Seasonal variations
                              B Changes of customer's taste
                              C Book-keeping and budget cycles
                              D Business-hour regulations
#15 Decoder                   A Owner
                              B Clerks
#16 Associator                A Owner
                              B Accountant
132        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



#17 Memory                        A Archive
                                  B Register
                                  C Owner
#18 Decider                       A Authorities
                                  B Trade union
                                  C Owner
#19 Encoder                       A Marketing consultant
#20 Output transducer             A Information media




Beer and the Viable System Model

The Viable System Model (VSM) was first presented in 1972 by
Stafford Beer in his book Brain of the Firm. The VSM, a model just as
complicated as its prototype the human body, consists of elements
analogous to extremities, backbone, nerves, nerve centres and brain.
These counterparts are the five managerial subsystems. As a survival
instrument of the organism, the human nervous system has to process
an excess of information and regulate a tremendous number of
variables. Taking its way of functioning as a starting point, Beer calls
his model neurocybernetics. This is directed toward information flows
and communication links within the enterprise. The way information
circulates in the various channels gives a hint of how both the
organization as a whole and its different parts perform in relation to
their goals.
    A viable system has the properties of self-repair, self-awareness,
recursion and maintenance of identity. According to Beer the structure
and working principles of a viable nervous system are applicable to
all kinds of organizations for their regulation, adaptation, learning
and development. When the performance is faulty, it is assumed that
the cybernetic principles are being violated. Organizations exist in a
very complex reality — 'a terrible mess' in the words of Beer. To
handle their organization, managers have to tame the mess according
to some basic principles presented in the model where the main
                       A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                  133


concern is the control function and the concept of variety. The general
solution to the problem of organizational complexity or variety is to
use the fact that variety neutralizes variety. This is defined in the Law
of Requisite Variety (see p. 100) thus: the variety of the control unit has
to be at least the same as the variety of the governed system. A
massive variety reduction is possible through organizational recursion
which implies that every systemic level is a recursion (organizational
copy) of its metasystem.
    Variety has sometimes to be multiplied and sometimes to be
damped, giving the terms amplifier and attenuator. A transducer is
also necessary as a translator in a communication process which
crosses several subsystem boundaries. Information crossing a
boundary is always transformed.
    Using these key concepts, Beer formulated four principles which
all viable organizations must obey.

• The First Principle of Organization
  Variety, diffusing through an institutional system, tends to equate;
  it should be designed to do so with minimum cost and damage to
  people.
• The Second Principle of Organization
  Channels carrying information between the management unit, the
  operation and the environment must each have a higher capacity
  than the generating subsystem.
• The Third Principle of Organization
  Whenever the information carried on a channel crosses a boundary,
  it undergoes transduction; the variety of the transducer must be at
  least equivalent to the variety of the channel.
• The Fourth Principle of Organization
  The operation of the first three principles must constantly recur
  through time, and without hiatus or lag.

   All viable organizations also consist of the five levels
discussed below. System One refers to those units that are to be
controlled. These are exemplified by departments in a firm or
134       GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                       Environment       /             -^

                                                            Manage-
                                                             ment




                       Attenuator1""*! Operation j   ——^ttenualor




          Figure 3.7 Basic organizational elements of the enterprise.



subsidiaries in a group of companies. The basic organizational
elements are shown in Figure 3.7.
   The square encloses the managerial activity needed to run the
organization. The circle encloses the operations that constitute the
total viable system in focus. The amoebic shape represents the total
environment. The arrows refer to the vital interactions between the
three basic entities; each arrow stands for a multiplicity of channels
whereby the entities affect each other. The amplifier is intended for
the low-variety input and the attenuator the high-variety input,
thereby balancing the variety.
   The figure shows the dynamic content of any enterprise.
Manipulation of the four Ms, Men, Materials, Machinery and Money,
exists as part of the more fundamental management of complexity.
Complexity and its measure, variety, indicate the number of possible
states of a system. Variety in a complicated entrepreneurial system is
calculated with the help of comparative statements (this has more
variety than that) and of the arithmetic of ordinal numbers (this
product is the second most profitable).
   It is obvious that the square management box has a lower variety
than the circle containing the operations, and that the circle in turn
has lower variety than the environment. Variety is cut down, or
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                135


attenuated, to the number of possible states that the receiving station
can actually handle. Variety may also be increased, or amplified, to
the number of possible states that the receiving station needs if it is
to remain regulated and under control.
    System Two co-ordinates the parts of System One in a harmonious
manner. It comprises the information system necessary for decen-
tralized decision making within System One and for problem solving
between the separate System Ones. This is carried out through formal
reporting and through people who build their own networks of
contacts. Uncontrolled oscillations between the parts are dampened
by System Two, a kind of service organ. A continuously working
System Two is essential although its requisite variety only works in a
dampening way. Audit is a typical System Two function creating a
channel between System Three and the operational in System One.
    System Three is the 'here and now' of the enterprise and its
functional components are typically Marketing, Accounting, Personnel
and so on. Two of its main tasks are maintaining the inner-connectivity
of its own infrastructure and the exact configuration of System One.
It also has to interpret policy decisions of higher management and to
allocate resources to parts of System One. Its own policy vis-a-vis
System One should be effectively implemented.
    System Four is the forum of 'change and future'. While System
Three handles the inside of the enterprise, System Four handles the
outside, that is, the managing of external contacts, development work
and corporate planning. The future does not happen, it has to be
designed. This is the task of System Four.
    The distribution of environmental information upward or down-
ward according to its degree of importance is the responsibility of
System Four. Urgent information and 'alarm signals' from the lower
levels must be received and eventually forwarded to System Five.
    System Five completes the system and closes the model. It monitors
the operation balancing Systems Three and Four. System Five, a
metalevel with an irregular appearance, is responsible for main
policies and the investments for the infrastructure. Examples such as
shareholders, the governors of a university, or the board of directors
136        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



of a multinational enterprise show how System Five represents the
'whole system'. Since only significant signals passing through the
filters of all of the lower levels will bring about a response, this level
can be seen as representing the cortex of the brain.
    A diagram of the complete model of the above is shown in
Figure 3.8.




        Figure 3.8 Beer's Viable System Model with its five subsystems.
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 137


   For a full understanding of Figure 3.8, it is necessary to be
acquainted with the Recursive System Theorem. In Beer's own
words: 'any viable system contains, and is contained in, a viable system.'
To study this phenomenon is to consider a trio of viable systems: the
organization we wish to study, the one within which it is contained,
and the set of organizations contained within it (one level of recursion
down). A most important feature of a viable system is this self-reference,
as illustrated in Figure 3.9. Note that the connectivity between any
recursive pair is the same. Any organization, already and quite
properly depicted as belonging to a special level of recursion, also
belongs to a number of other recursion levels. To clarify: based on
recursion, all five subsystems exist on every level of recursion. This
implies that no matter what level of recursion is chosen to study the
model it still looks the same.
   The ultimate aim of operation control is the maintaining of
the homeostasis. A company's cost control, quality control, stock
control and management inventory, among others, are examples of
homeostatic regulation. This takes place through decisions in
hierarchical order or a 'chain of command'. To emphasize the
parallels between VSM and the human body, let us examine the
planning for future events in the enterprise. This is initiated by way
of directions from a deciding organ (the brain or the annual meeting
of shareholders). Information concerning decisions is transmitted
to units (nerve centre or the board of directors) which transform
directions to execution orders (nerve impulses or messages). These
orders are then interpreted by affected units (extremities or depart-
ments) which execute the order (the reaction or the directive). When
everything is accomplished, the unit receives a task-completed
message (response or report).
   When something unexpected happens a reflex reaction takes over.
This is a spontaneous response to a stimulus in the autonomous
nerve system without the immediate knowledge of the deciding unit
(the brain or the managing director). Afterwards an interpretation
concerning the event takes place when the decider becomes aware of
what had happened.
138          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




  Figure 3.9 Partial enlargement of Figure 3.8 showing organizational recursion.



   Every viable system has controlling units (the spleen or a chartered
accountant) which check that the right things are done in the right
manner. Some units have an evaluating function (the brain or the
auditor's department). Inadequate results are fed back and measures
are taken to rectify whatever is faulty.
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 139


   As Beer's focus was the improvement of organizational performance,
he also introduced three indices for levels of achievement which are
defined in the following way:

1. Actuality      The current achievement using existing resources and
                  constraints.
2. Capability     The possible achievement with existing resources and
                  within existing constraints.
3. Potentiality   What could be achieved by developing resources and
                  removing constraints.

   If these indices are related to each other in the way presented
below, the concepts of productivity, latency and performance are created.

      A / C = productivity   C / P = latency    A / P = performance

   The aim of the VSM is to demonstrate a well-functioning system.
Several well-informed statements concerning organizational well-
being and malfunctioning are delivered with the model. A few of
these are as follows.

— Organizational freedom or autonomy is defined by means of
  interactions between operational horizontal forces and vertical
  unifying forces. If autonomy becomes synonymous with isolation,
  the cohering forces will disappear.
— The degree of organizational coherence depends upon the purpose
  of the system. Metasystem intervention is necessary only to the
  degree which guarantees a coherent viable system.
— Complicated systems malfunction owes to inherent instability,
  not for a defined reason.
— Systems 2, 3, 4 or 5 of an organization often become autocratic
  and strive for viability in their own right, that is, they become
  bureaucratic. They should not be allowed to continue to function
  at the expense of the system as a whole.
— System 5 sometimes collapses into System 3 if System 4 is too weak.
— System 3 managers interfere too often in the management process
  of System 1.
140        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



— System 2 is not fully established because managers of System 1
  resent the interference.
— System 4 is weak because it is regarded as a staff function.
— System 5 is not creating an identity and is not representing the
  essential qualities of the whole system to the wider system and
  the environment.
— Internal communication channels and channels linking the
  organization to the environment are often under dimensioned for
  the flow necessary to ensure a viable system.
— Mistakes in articulating different levels of recursion.

                                      *

Lovelock and the Gaia Hypothesis

In 1972, James Lovelock and his co-worker Lynn Margulis introduced
a hypothesis regarding the earth as a living superorganism. This
hypothesis was later given the name of Gaia by the Nobel literature
prize-winner William Golding, who recognized the parallel between
the mother earth of Greek mythology and Lovelock's idea. A further
development of the hypothesis was presented in Lovelock's books
Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth (1979) and The Ages of Gaia (1988).
As a well-known and ethically neutral hypothesis it has, however,
been more neglected rather than criticized by the scientific community.
    The hypothesis of Gaia is a contemporary expression of ancient
wisdom concerning nature. The conception that the earth is 'living'
is probably as old as humanity itself. Many cultures and religions,
and speculators, since Aristotle had their convictions about the
existence of a harmonious order in nature. The physician and
alchemist Paracelsus (1493-1541) regarded nature as a complex
organism in contact with an investigator. The Scot James Hutton
(1726-1797) wrote in 1788, in his book Theory of the Earth, about the
restoring and healing forces of nature. In his lectures he is reported
to have stated: 'I consider the earth to be a superorganism and that
its proper study should be physiology.' In line with his predecessors,
Lovelock has introduced the term geophysiology. This term stands for
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 141


a systems approach to biospheric life analogous to the physiological
study of an organism.
    At the heart of the Gaia hypothesis is the fact that life creates its
own milieu — something Lovelock became aware of when he realized
that the chemistry of atmosphere offend against laws of chemical
equilibrium. Existing qualities of the atmosphere, oceans and
continents are not prerequisites for life, they are instead consequences
of life. Life influences the milieu in an extraordinary way, not possible
for ordinary physical/chemical forces. Life has taken control of the
whole earth and transformed a lifeless planet into a self-regulating,
self-sustaining organism. During it, life has demonstrated itself
as an all- or-nothing phenomenon. Life existing on certain parts
of the earth only is a contradiction of terms like a living, half,
animal. Furthermore, life is immortal. Once established, it cannot be
eradicated. It can be extinct in one place or planet but will always
continue to exist in other locations. Life is a kind of network which
is always plural and extended through space and time with the
capacity to infiltrate all matter. Nowhere a solo living organism is to
be find. It is an individual property only for a short fleeting moment.
This organism continuously adapts the planet's physical, chemical
and biological processes to maintain optimal conditions for the
development of life. It does not strive to adapt to a changing
environment.
   Life and its environment are so closely coupled that evolution
per se concerns Gaia, not the organism or the environment taken
separately. They should be seen as one single system. The dead
basis of Gaia, the mountains, the deserts, the oceans and the ice
surrounding the poles are an integrated part of Gaia. The biologist
Jerome Rothstein reminds us, in a very useful analogy, how the old
Redwood trees (Sequoia Gigantea) are built up. These trees remain of
the structure of Gaia as 97 per cent of their tissue lacks life. Only a
small shallow part along the stem can be considered living. The stem
resembles the earth's litosphere with a thin layer of living organisms
spread out over its surface. The barque resembles the atmosphere,
protecting the living tissue, allowing the exchange of biological
142        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



important gases like carbon dioxide and oxygen. Even if something
is considered dead, the wholeness thus can be considered living.
   The emergence of photosynthesis created an atmosphere in which
countless new species could evolve. Photosynthesis itself could only
provide enough energy for a vegetative existence, but with the
emerging oxygen metabolism animals could generate the power they
needed for movement and activity. Nevertheless, the main system of
Gaia are the plants. All the non-plant members of the biosphere are,
by definition, reduced to supporting roles. The specific forms of life
were all carriers of functions of the wholeness, following the principle
that the most varied ecosystems are the most robust. Climate in turn
has been dramatically affected by the presence of life.
   Many ingredients vital to the function of the earth's atmosphere
have been produced by the biosphere itself, such as oxygen which
has a central position in the interpretation of the Gaia hypothesis. Air
is not just an environment for life but rather a part of life itself. One
per cent rise in oxygen increases the probability of fire by 60 per cent.
In one sense, the atmosphere is an artefact, like the honey or wax of
a beehive, but atmospheric oxygen might also be thought of as a
bloodstream connecting the various parts of the Gaia organism.
The same can be said about soil, created in co-operation between
geosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere and biosphere and being the
very basis for all kind of life. Soil provides the necessities of life like
shelter, food, water and may be considered Gaia's ultimate interface.
See Figure 3.10.
   Soil is formed by a combination of processes where physical
weathering involves the fragmentation of rocks; where chemical
weathering involves the alteration of the minerals that make up the
rocks. The decomposition of plant and animal residues deposited on
and in the soil and the movement by percolating water of suspended
solids and dissolved materials down through the soil, also consitute
this process. The processes of life thus co-operate to transform the
planet into a safer place for life itself.
   While other planets of our solar system are either extremely hot
(Venus) or extremely cold (Mars), the earth has been successful in
regulating its surface temperature for several billion years. It is
                       A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 143




          Figure 3.10 Soil as interface between Gaia's main spheres.



estimated that the sun is between 30 and 50 per cent hotter now than
when life began 3.5 billion years ago. In spite of this increasing heat
radiation, the surface temperature has been maintained within limits
favourable for life.
    Lovelock claims that the continued existence of life per se is
therefore not a question of adjusting to a warmer environment; it
is a question of maintaining the status quo through control of the
environment. Symbiosis, and the reciprocal actions between organisms
and the environment, is seen as the source of evolutionary novelty
and the chief agent of natural selection. The example par excellence
is that plants absorb carbon dioxide and exhale oxygen, while animals
do the reverse. Even altruism or purposeful intent is expected to play
a role. The Gaia phenomenon is a collective property of the growth,
activities and death of the innumerable populations that compose the
biomass.
   This contradicts the conventional evolutionary paradigm which
asserts that life adjusts to the environment and sees the accumulation
of chance mutations as the mainspring of development. The Gaia
hypothesis in fact predicts that systems of this kind may arise
144        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



automatically out of a mindless striving for survival. It adds, however,
that life must be planetwide and powerful if it is to be present at all.
    Lovelock states that biological control mechanisms always
intervene when the earth grows too warm, too cold, too dry, too
moist, etc. The various processes of life co-operate and regulate the
global climate in order to create suitable conditions for life itself.
Certain significant organisms can function on several levels and
influence both the biomass, geology and chemistry of the earth. Their
presence can alter land surfaces, water surfaces, albedo of clouds or
act as nucleating agents for condensation. The chemistry of soil, water
and air can be changed and thereby the distribution and transport of
material may be changed. All parts of Gaia are interlocked through
a series of complex feedback loops.
    To illustrate the working principles of a global control mechanism
Lovelock has constructed a computer model called Daisyworld. It is
a hypothetical ecosystem consisting of black and white flowers. The
black flowers thrive in a cold climate but, by acting as solar collectors,
they induce heating. The white flowers thrive in a hot climate but
reflect the sunshine and grow more numerous, thereby inducing a
colder climate. Together these flowers can, without having an internal
purpose, stabilize the temperature even if the incoming radiation
increases.
    According to the law of requisite variety (see p. 100), to maintain
stability a system must have at its disposal a sufficient number of
regulatory mechanisms. The following are some examples of such
regulatory and protecting global homeostasis mechanisms, where
life serves as an active control system.

— When solar radiation increases, the oceans grow hotter. The water
  volume expands and its level rises. Nutritious substances from
  coastal areas are released into the water. With the consequent
  increase of plankton, dimethylsulfide accumulates in the oceans
  and evaporates into the atmosphere. Through this process the
  density of the heat-reflecting cloud cover is controlled and the
  temperature is held within a range of +5° to +35°C, the optimum
  for life. At the same time the growing amount of plankton
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES              145


  absorbs the atmospheric carbon dioxide, decreasing the greenhouse
  effect.
— Seasonal variations of the atmospheric carbon dioxide content are
  dependent upon the foliage of plants. In the summer the green
  foliage absorbs carbon dioxide; in the winter it is emitted by the
  decomposition process on the ground. This is a predominant
  climate regulator in the northern hemisphere with its greater land
  mass.
— An ozone layer in the upper atmosphere protects all kinds of life
  from devastating ultraviolet radiation from the sun. This layer
  has possibly been created by oxygen originating mainly from algae,
  themselves sheltered from radiation by the ocean water.
— Tropical rainforests control the circulation of water. The vast
  forests of the Amazon account for more than half of their own
  water circulation, that is, precipitation, outflow and evaporation.
  Devastation of these forests would result in huge amounts of
  water leaving the region and a global climate change (the tropical
  rainforests act as a global air-condition!). The rain produced by
  the forest is in itself vital; normally containing small amounts of
  ammonia it supplies acid to the soil for optimal vegetation.
— Lichen colonize inhospitable mountain and cliff surfaces and assist
  in their decomposition. Decomposition products form topsoil, a
  prerequisite for the life of other plants. The composition of the
  atmosphere is also influenced by this process.
— The maintenance of an average salinity of 3.4 per cent is essential
  for life in ocean water. While a concentration of four per cent
  would have produced quite different life forms, six per cent would
  make life in water impossible. Salts released by weathering should
  long ago have made the water too salty for life. It is assumed that
  excess salt is neutralized by the corals that build reefs, in turn
  forming lagoons wherein large quantities of salts are trapped as
  the sea water evaporates. Salt, together with other minerals, also
  provide raw materials for sheaths where bacteria live.
— The sudden drop in both carbon dioxide and temperature a billion
  years ago chilled the upper mantle. This in turn might have
  destabilized the lower crust causing the continental drift. Ongoing
146        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



  life processes may also drive geological plate tectonics necessary
  for the renewal of the earth surface.
— Major grass and forest fires may act as regulators, keeping the
  oxygen concentration in the atmosphere at an average of 21 per
  cent. Above an upper threshold of 25 per cent fires would destroy
  the biosphere.
— Volcanos are an important regulatory mechanism of the world's
  climate. Their eruptions eject enormous quantities of sulphur
  aerosol particles into the stratosphere, effective at reflecting solar
  radiation back into space, thus cooling the atmosphere. Volcanic
  eruptions, in their turn, seem to have direct connections with the
  rise or fall of sea level. Intensive coastal volcanic activity had
  been established when sea levels were rising rapidly, e.g. in the
  final stage of the last ice age when the ice was melting down to
  water. Rising sea level, however, seems to have the opposite effect
  when it regards island volcanos. Because such volcanos are
  completely surrounded by water, rising sea level actually increases
  the confining pressures, thereby reducing the ability of magma to
  reach the surface. Similar numbers of coastal and island volcanos
  give the effect that one type of eruption will offset the other,
  keeping the total constant. The conclusion is that rising sea level,
  by increasing volcanic activity, can help to counteract warming.
  For the same reason, falling sea levels can also exacerbate cooling.

   The Gaia hypothesis postulates that the earth is a living organism
— an enormous, complex and self-regulating web of life capable
of influencing and regulating her environment. It gives us a
perspicuous conception how a high-complexity feedback system can
maintain stable conditions also during drastic external disruptions.
All living matter on earth, from virus to whale, from algae to tree,
is regarded as constituting a single living entity. Gaia cannot be
separated from the different parts of her body. The circulation of
water from sea to land to sea is her flow of blood; her atmosphere is
both the cuticle regulating temperature and moisture within her body
and a protection against dangerous cosmic radiation from without.
This tight coupling between life and environment and the constant
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 147


preparedness for change and to adapt suggests distinctly different
types of interactions, qualifying Gaia as a planetary superorganism.
   Like other organisms Gaia has her life-cycle. Childhood implies a
series of major changes alternating with long periods of relative little
transformation. In adulthood the presence of life becomes the
dominant quality of the planet. The niches are filled and the resistance
to change is at its maximum. Inevitable old age is reached probably
with the loss of internal heating and atmosphere. The parent star, the
sun, reaches its Red Giant phase and Gaia is consumed by the
expanding shell.
   Lovelock's train of thought can be further clarified if Gaia is seen
as a ninth level of the GLS theory, albeit of a slightly different logical
type (Gaia existed before the emergence of the cell and is in a sense
a zero level). The 20 essential subsystems of Gaia according to Miller's
GLS theory can be identified as follows.

 #1 Reproducer                  A Man as spores?
                                B Interplanetary travel?
 #2 Boundary                    A The earth's crust downwards
                                B The atmosphere upwards
 #3 Ingestor                    A The atmosphere from above
                                B Volcanos from below
 #4 Distributor                 A Winds
                                B Streams
                                C Grazing animals
 #5 Converter                   A Mosses
                                B Lichen
                                C Plants
                                D Animals
 #6 Producer                    A Coral reefs
                                B Volcanos producing lava
 #7 Storage                     A Soil (dead animals and plants)
                                B Water
                                C Oil
                                D Minerals
148         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



 #8 Extruder                       A Atmospheric gas discharge
                                   B Oceanic sedimentation
 #9 Motor                          A Tidal water
                                   B Plate tectonics
                                   C Air streams
#10 Supporter                      A The earth crust
#11 Input transducer               A Plants and animals (reacting to a
                                     daily rhythm, seasons, earthquakes,
                                     etc.)
#12 Internal transducer            A Plants and animals (reacting to
                                     climatic changes, pollution, etc.)
#13 Channel and net                A Grazing animal
                                   B Spread of plants
#14 Timer                          A Movement of earth
                                   B Phases of the moon
#15 Decoder                        A Plants and animals (reacting to the
                                     behaviour of other living beings)
#16 Associator                     A Plants and animals (changed
                                     behaviour and functions)
#17 Memory                         A Information stored in genes
                                   B Information stored in landscapes
#18 Decider                        A Possibly the human race
#19 Encoder                        A Atmospherical changes
#20 Output transducer              A Upper atmosphere (gas release/
                                     radiation)
                                   B Changes in planetary albedo

    With a growing population, human activities within the global
ecosystem are ever increasing, converting natural ecosystems to self
life-supporting systems. What some scientists call the 'The Greenhouse
Civilization' has tampered with the planetary cycles of energy
and materials. Agriculture, forest logging, industrialization and
urbanization are devastating land uses which bring about extensive
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                149


pollution of land, air and water. By converting natural negative
feedback to unnatural positive feedback, human civilization has
interfered with and blocked some of Gaia's control systems.
    Gaia has thus been deprived of vitally important control systems
and the preferences of the Greenhouse Civilization do not coincide
with Gaia's. For example, Gaia's preferred temperature and ours are
not the same. Interglacial periods like the present one, although
existing for ten thousand years, may prove to be a global fever and
the ice age may be the more stable state. The greenhouse effect itself
is sometimes compared with a global fever used by Gaia to drive out
devastating parasites.
    Destructive activities of humans have also caused great damage to
biodiversity. Loss of biodiversity by an accelerating extinction of all
kinds of species is a devastating threat to the robustness of all the
regulatory systems of Gaia. Furthermore, it will fundamentally and
irreparably restrict our total understanding of Gaia as our planetary
home.
    The role of human beings in the Gaia system is, however,
controversial among geophysiologists. Lovelock himself has a very
cool attitude to humanity and its significance for Gaia; he views
human civilization as largely irrelevant. He would sooner expect a
goat to succed as a gardener than expect humans to become stewards
of the earth. We are neither owner nor preserver of the planet but
are solely one species among others. Nature survives without
man — man on the other hand cannot survive without nature. If
the human race will be exterminated by natural disasters (or by
herself) the earth will reach homeostasis again (compare with the
disappearance of the dinosaurs). She does this by giving birth to a
new form of life that can manage the new living conditions. In the
history of Earth complex life forms evolved 500 million years ago.
Then the biota collapsed five times in mass extinctions involving
more than 95 per cent of existing species. After each extinction the
biota recovered in diversity, usually with different species on the
stage but with the pattern of interaction remaining the same.
    Gaia therefore can be seen as fragile in that the biosphere can be
the victim of biospheric collapse through severe perturbations. It is,
150        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



however, resilient because recovery is always fast and complete. This
procedure can, however, take hundreds of thousands of years. Typical
is the transition of the early ammonia-based atmosphere into an
oxygen-based system which implied a deadly threat to the existing
anaerobic organisms. These should have been extinct due to
the increasing oxygen content. Instead some of them suvived by
emigration to new environments (without oxygen) like marsh-
bottoms, rivers-bottoms etc. Today, several million of years later, we
find them in a safe and comfortable environment like the bowels of
animal and man.
    As a dynamic system, Gaia will always regain her balance but
with no special preference for any particular life form. Contrary to
popular quasi-philosophical movements like New Age which readily
use the Gaia concept for their own purposes, Lovelock has no intention
to put man and his well-being in centre.
    In comparison with earlier global catastrophes, the Greenhouse
Civilization leaves only a small scar in Gaia's skin. It seems unlikely
that human activities can threaten the life of Gaia but very likely that
her response to our destruction is not to our advantage. If we choose
to break the rules of life, Gaia will exterminate us. In other words,
humanity will not destroy Gaia, Gaia will destroy humanity. Gaia, as
any living organism, cannot remain passive in the presence of threats
to her existence and she will always be the stronger party.
    Some scientists, standing outside of mainstream science, assert
that Gaia maintains optimal conditions for life according to a purpose
and thereby displays some kind of intelligence. Although life is
fundamentally self-organizing and self-determined we do not know
its final goal. We, as components of the superorganism Gaia, cannot
(from without) study her ultimate goal (the cell sees a very limited
part of the inside of the body!).
    Other scientists state that the analogy of Earth with an organism
is false. In contrast to other complex organisms, the ecological system
of Gaia lacks central information processing. Another reason is that
the planet is not the product of evolution like a true organism and
that it does not reproduce. Furthermore, Darwinian natural selection
cannot be applied to a quasi-immortal entity like Gaia. Also, Gaia as
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES               151


an ecological system has no purpose of its own. Earth's biota nurtures
its own existence, but only in a non-purposeful way. However, it
contains social and organismic systems that do, and deterministic
systems that do not. The purpose of an ecological system is to serve
its parts.
    Gaia has nevertheless acquired a goal with the emergence of
the human mind; through human beings, a central nervous system
developed giving knowledge about herself and the rest of the universe.
The capability to anticipate and neutralize threats to life itself has
thereby been considerably augmented. Regarding Gaia's reproduction,
life is a planetary scale phenomenon. With this scale, it is practically
immortal and has no need to reproduce.
    Seen through the eyes of Teilhard de Chardin (see p. 152), the
ultimate goal of Gaia should be the creation of a noosphere, Gaia's
thinking layer and the equivalent of the human neocortex. A human
brain has at least 1012 neurons interconnected at 1014 junctions or
synapses. Zoologists are of the opinion that a critical mass in brain
volume is achieved at 1010 neurons, a level occurring in higher
primates. This has an equivalent in the number of stars in our own
galaxy which also is estimated to 1010. If therefore each human being
is regarded as a neuron in the brain of Gaia, and given that the world
population will soon reach 1010, a new kind of global consciousness
might emerge. This new mental quality would not be the property of
particular individuals; it would be manifested on a global level.
    The interconnections between the neurons create the global nervous
system, which has an analogue in the global communication and
information networks. The slower hormonal communication system
existing in all human bodies also has its counterpart: the world-wide
post office system. Even the two brain hemispheres, the right and the
left, may have an analogue in the Western and Eastern spheres of
culture.
    Other scientists state that mankind can be likened to a malign
cancer in Gaia's body. We have cut down the forests and polluted
both water and air. But, like cancer cells, we are not aware that our
 own destructive activities will destroy Gaia's web of life — the basis
 of our own existence. Which of the above views is the most realistic
152        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



is at the moment not certain. It is quite possible that both views will
be correct; nothing prevents a growing organism from struggling
with cancer. Geophysiology is a new mode of synthesis and only
time will tell.
    In an attempt to sum u p what has been discussed regarding the
Gaia hypotesis, James Kirchner (1991) states that it must be viewed
as a collection of related hypotheses. These in turn can be seen in a
spectrum from weak to strong Gaia, from known biochemical cycles
to global physiology. Kirchner found the following hypotheses, ranked
from weakest to strongest Gaia:

• Influential Gaia — The biota has a substantial influence over certain
  aspects of the abiotic world such as temperature and composition
  of the atmosphere.
• Co-evolutionary Gaia — The biota influences the abiotic environ-
  ment and the environment in turn influences the evolution of the
  biota by Darwinian processes.
• Homeostatic Gaia — The interplay between biota and environment
  characterized by stabilizing negative feedback loops.
• Teleological Gaia — The atmospere is kept in homeostasis not just
  by the biosphere but also by and for the biosphere.
• Optimizing Gaia — The biota manipulates the environment for the
  purpose of creating biologically favorable conditions for itself.

    Finally, another kind of overview has been made by the scientist
Kevin Kelly (1994) who said the following: "If Earth is reduced to the
size of a bacteria, and inspected under high-powered optics, would
it seem stranger than a virus? Gaia hovers there, a blue sphere under
the stark light, inhaling energy, regulating its internal states, fending
off disturbances, complexifying, and ready to transform another planet
if given a chance".




Teilhard de Chardin and the noosphere

Already in the 1920s, the impact of the growing state of knowledge
and consciousness in humanity on the planet was the subject of an
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                153


advanced discussion. For the first time in history, due to technical
progress, large fractions of humanity experienced the same events,
and shared the same emotions at the same time. Participators in this
discussion were among others the Russian geochemist Vladimir
Vernadsky and the paleontologist and Jesuit Father Teilhard de
 Chardin (1881-1955). Together they coined the term noosphere (from
the Greek word noos for mind), implying an emerging mental sphere
of intelligence covering the whole earth. This sphere, superposed on
the biosphere, the sphere of life, is the main topic in Teilhard de
 Chardin's book The Phenomenon of Man. Both the noosphere and the
 'principle of Omega', also presented in the book, are examples of
finalistic theories postulating some kind of cosmic teleology, purpose,
 or programme.
     The book discusses the development of man as part of a universal
 process and presents both scientific, philosophical and theological
 perspectives. It is an attempt to synthesize the physical world with
 the world of the mind, the past with the future and variety with
 unity. It has its starting point in the concept of convergence, denoting
 the evolutionary tendency of mankind towards non-specialization
 and unification. Man is the only successful race remaining as a single
 interbreeding species, that is, without splitting into a number of
 biologically separated branches. He has reached maturity; his body
 no longer changes. Transformation does take place but in mental and
 social contexts. Convergence is clearly visible in human cultures where
 differentiation is more and more levelled out, especially in the modern
 technological society.
     The main force behind various modes of human convergence is
 the earth's shape as a spherical restricted surface. A rapidly growing
 number of individuals must share less and less available land. In
  spreading out around a sphere, man sooner or later meets his own
  kind; idea meeting idea produces an interconnected web of thoughts,
  the noosphere. Human existence is thereby under the influence of a
  general complexification as ever more psychosocial energy is created.
  The impact of complexification is seen in nature, which before the
  appearance of man was only an unorganized pattern of ecological
  interaction. With mankind the mental properties of organisms become
  the most important characteristics of life.
154        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   As a step in the development of man, the present self-consciousness
stage will transcend into a new mode of thought for his evolutionary
future and the emergent noosphere will grow even stronger. This
stage will integrate the self with the outer world of nature and also
facilitate a complete exchange with the rest of the universe. Man
has then reached his ultimate goal, or the Point of Omega, the final
convergence. Teilhard de Chardin uses the metaphor of the meridians;
as they approach the pole, science, philosophy and theology are forced
to converge in one final point. The Point of Omega is here the opposite
of a state of Alpha representing the elementary particles and their
pertinent energies.
   The origin of man and his development toward the Point of Omega
is shown in Figure 3.11. The numbers on the left indicate thousands
of years. The zone of convergence is not to scale.
   To clarify his thoughts, Teilhard de Chardin, being a paleontologist,
uses a geophysical model in which the noosphere is the outermost
of the six layers of geogenesis.

— barysphere
— lithosphere
— hydrosphere
— biosphere
— atmosphere
— noosphere

  These layers are a consequence of a goal-directed evolution where
matter becomes conscious of itself in a self-organizing biogenesis by
way of the following steps:

1. energy is successively transformed into
2. matter which gives rise to
3. life with
4. instincts and later
5. thoughts and finally
6. noosphere, the thinking layer

   Here we can see how geogenesis via biogenesis is extended to
psychogenesis. With the emergence of self-consciousness, man has
                          A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                    155



                                        a point of OMEGA
                 t                  y/t\tav         ^
                                            \ \ \   /"Process o f \




                          (\ \ \( \ \ \ ^ I t / t / y^""Process  of
                                                    Vcomplexificatio


                               ^        V    Neanderthal

                                        f           ( Process of ^
                                        1           K divergence J
                      Pithecanthropus

                                \
                                     N      Australopithecus



                                        /
              Beginning                 a point of ALPHA

Figure 3.11 Human development toward the Point of Omega (from Teilhard de Chardin
1947).



crossed some kind of threshold and exists on an entirely new
biological plane approaching the culmination of a cosmic process of
organization. Thereby cosmos fulfils its own goal systematically
through reflective perception when building itself in the inverse
direction of matter (which vanishes). Such a concentration of a
conscious universe would be unthinkable if it did not include all the
existing consciousness.
   In his philosophizing on the development of man, Teilhard de
Chardin focuses on phenomena of special importance. One is that
the event of science provided the means to meet the material needs
for life. Its effectiveness brought us the freedom of the modern city
which in turn became a prerequisite for man, a predominantly mental
156        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



being. Another phenomenon is the nature of human synthesis which
leads to the noosphere. Teilhard de Chardin states that union
differentiates as the elements of every organized whole fulfil and perfect
themselves. The element becomes personal first when it universalizes
itself; a synthesis is not the disintegration of the individual.

                                      *

Taylor and the Geopolitic Systems Model
Geopolitics as a discipline tries to explain the influence of geographical
factors behind sociocultural organization and politics. Many models
have been conceptualized within the area. One of the least specialized
and easiest to understand was introduced by Alastair Taylor, a
professor of geography and political science at Queen's University in
Canada (Taylor 1973).
   The model has two parts: the levels of organization and the
regulating mechanisms. It was designed mainly to explain the
quantum leaps of social development in human history by correlating
specific levels of societal and political organization with different
stages of environmental control.
   The first part of the model includes the following phenomena.

— the systemic levels of sociocultural organization
— processes demonstrating self-stabilization within a given level of
  organization and integration
— systemic transformation resulting in a sociocultural quantum leap
  across an environmental frontier

   Five levels of organization, defined by the main m a n / environment
relationships, are shown in Figure 3.12.
   Interpreted horizontally, each column denotes exchange between
the physical environmental factors and the control of the same through
technology, science, transportation, communication and government.
   Vertically, the five main levels of environmental control are
presented as a geometrical sequence: point, line, plane, volume, as the
                          SYSTEM OF
    SOCIETAL        ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL                                                                      EMERGENT QUALIT
     LEVEL
                   EXPLETED             IMPLETED        PROPERTIES TECHNOLOGY                                       TRANSPORT
                    SPACE                 SPACE

                Three-dimensional         Megalopts
                 (extra-terestrial)   ('EcumenopoHs")

                                                                   Electrical-nuclear      Einsteinian relativity   Supra-surface
                                                                   energy                  Quantum mechanics        Inner space sy
                                                                   Automation              Systems theory           Outer space
                                                                   Cybernetics                                      explorations
                                                                                                                    Surface system
                                                                                                                    Sub-surface ve
                 Two-dimensional
               (oceans, continents)
                                                                   Transformation ol       'Greek miracle'          Maritime techn
                                                                   energy (steam)          Scientific method        and navigation
                                                         BELOW +   Machine technology      Newtonian                Thalassic and
                                                                   Mass production         world-view               networks
                                                                                                                    Highway netw
                                                                                                                    Railroad techn

                One-dirnensionaJ
               (riverine societies)                                Non-biological prime    Mathematics              Sailboats
                                                                    movers (wind, water)   Astronomy                Riverine transp
                                                                   Metal tools                                      Wheeled vehic
                                                                                                                    Intra- and inter
                                                                   Continuous rotary                                urban roads
                                                                     motion (wheel)
                                                                   Irrigation technics


                                                                   Animal energy           Neolithic                Animal transpo
                                                                   Domestication of        proto-science            Paths, village r
                                                                   plants and animals                               Neolithic seafa
                                                                   Polished stone toots
                                                                   Spinning
                                                                   Pottery


                                                                   Human energy                                     Human transp
                                                                   Control of Are                                   Sleds
                                                                   Stone and bone tools                             Dug-outs, cano
                                                                   Partial rotary action




                                                  Figure 3.12 Levels of human societal organizat
(From Ervin Laszlo's The World System, copyright © 1972 by Ervin Laszlo. Reprinted b
158        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



control capabilities grow. All these levels are integrative or recursive,
that is, they build upon each previous lower level. As time passes, an
increased complexity and heterogeneity takes place. Interpreted as a
matrix, the model provides a time/space grid, giving societal/
environment quantization when examined vertically and stabilization
when examined horizontally.
    The quantization takes place at a very slow rate on the lowest,
foodgathering level and gains speed as passes through the different
levels.
    The stabilization shifts from reactive — adaptive to active —
manipulative as it progresses through the different levels. Negative
feedback ensuring overall stability is created by the social institutions
and predominant general morality. Science and technology have a
central role in creating the mechanism of positive feedback.
    The second part of the model shows the importance of both positive
and negative feedback processes and the interplay between them on
all levels of sociocultural organization. The following phenomena are
shown in Figure 3.13.

— biospheric and sociocultural inputs from the total environment
— the functioning of the existing system as a converter with
  numerous subsystems
— the regulation of the system's social and material output through
  negative and positive feedback
   From the model it is possible to see how material and societal
technique interaction results in systemic self-stabilization or
transformation. In the model, self-stabilization is denoted as
Cybernetics I and transformation as Cybernetics II.
   A major systemic transformation always implies an increase in
information gathering, converted into knowledge and raising the total
amount of system negentropy. Thereby the system's control capability
expands, making it possible to cross existing borders with its output
and rise to a new level of societal organization. Taylor has defined
this kind of positive feedback as follows: 'Quantization occurs when
deviation is amplified to the point where no deviation-correcting
           •t^tfc                                    ENVIRONMENTAL FRONTIER


                                                        CYBERNETICS II

              BIOPHERIC INPUTS

              Physical
              Biological
              plants                         ^                                             <^
              animals                                                                  *
              etc.                                      SOCIOCULTURAL SYSTEM

                                                         Including sub-systems
                                                          Political
                                                          Economic
                                                          Social
                                                          Educational

                           If
              SOCIOCULTURAL INPUTS
                                            «9iS-
                                                          Technological
                                                          Religious
                                                           Political
                                                          etc.

              Technics (t„, - y

       I      from other sociocultural
              systems at similar level
              of organization
                                            *d?&>
                                          <&
                                                                   Positive feedback

                                                                   Negative feedback

                                                       CYBERNETICS I
                                                  (Systemic self-stabilization)

                                  z*     ENVIRONMENTAL FRONTIER (Systemic Quantum)
                                                 CYBERNETICS II




           Figure 3.13 Systemic self-organization, transformation and stabiliz
(From Ervin Laszlo's The World System, copyright © 1972 by Ervin Laszlo. Reprinted b
160        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



mechanism can prevent the rupturing of the basic systemic frame-
work, that is, when the latter can no longer contain and channel the
energies and thrust which have been generated.' Examples of self-
stabilization with negative feedback can be detected in mature sub-
hominid societies where the struggle for life is fully operative and
the prevailing technique exercises maximal environmental control.
   Transformation with positive feedback works in two ways: as self-
organization and development and as systemic change with
environmental quantization. An example of the first can be Eskimo
societies showing an extensive command of available technique and
environmental potential in the far North. By exploiting fire and usable
tools like microliths they entered into a vital low-energy symbiosis
with their extreme environment. Limits for such an existence given
by way of negative feedback soon established societal stabilization
on the SI level.
   Systemic transformation through access to less sophisticated tools
in another environment can be seen in Mesolithic Asia. The use of
stone sickles for harvesting, the domestication of wheat and barley
and the taming of livestock created the 'neolithic revolution' on level
S2. Here arose a new overall control, habitat patterns and social
organization, with in turn a better division of labour, increased food
supply, that is, the basis for a larger population.
   A more dramatic quantum leap in connection with a new technique
and favourable environment can be found in ancient China and Egypt.
A food surplus and better societal organization opened the way for
the 'urban revolution' on level S3. This is characterized by the rise of
towns, refined administration, the division of population into classes,
etc. These earliest civilizations, localized along rivers, could control
and cultivate a whole valley and develop hydraulic technology. The
city state was born.
   An alternative way to visualize and interpret Taylor's model is
shown in Figure 3.14. Here the five levels are shown as growing
territories, connected to the development of human civilization.

                                      *
                                 A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                                        161



                  Federation of States                                        PLANETARY S Y S T E M
                     Interstate Organizati
       W
                                                                                    Ecumenism
                                                                          Internationalism Automation
                                                                             Electronic Transmission
                                                                                   of Information
                                                                                iinsteinian Science



         Noncontinuous Empire
                                                                          EMPIRE SYSTEM
                                 Federal State
                                     Unitary State


                                                             Democracy
                                                                            Machine Technology
                                                                          Transformation of Energy
                                                                          Mechanical Transmission
                                                                               of Information
                                                                             Newtonian Science

      Continuous Empire
        A d m i n i s t r a t i v e DI&'.I ct                          NATION-STATE S Y S T E M
              Special Purpose Tcwi               CD
                                                      y
                                                   I k Theocracy Autocracy


                                                                            Metal Tools
                                                                         Inorganic Energy
                                                                       Integrated Economy
                                                                              Writing


    Group of Village-;
                                                              VILLAGE SYSTEM




                                                                       Special-Purpose Tools
                                                                          Animal Energy
                                                                         Farming Economy
                                                                            Ideograms

        Nomnrlic
         Hunting                                           KINSHIP S Y S T E M
        Territciir.s

Multi-Purpose Stone Tools
      Human Energy
    Hunting Economy
       Pictograms                               Kinship Organization


                          BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS


             Figure 3.14 The emergence of geopolitical systems.
162        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Klir and the General Systems Problem Solver

According to George Klir his taxonomy of systems is intended to
provide a pragmatically founded classification useful within various
disciplines and engineering modes. It was first presented in his
book Architecture of Systems Problem Solving in 1985. The empirical
application demonstrated in this work, the General Systems Problem
Solver, GSPS, is a computer-based expert system.
   Klir's conceptual framework builds upon strictly mathematical
definitions (not presented here) and demands some experience in
formal thinking to be wholly understood. Before defining a system
as such, he identifies the system traits. These are compiled from the
inherent variables (behaviour, states, etc.) and thereafter classified
and formalized. If any of the primary traits participating in the
definition change, the system also changes. The pertinent hierarchy
consists of at least five fundamental levels of systems based on the
following essential perspectives: that of an investigator and his
environment, an investigated object and its environment, and an
interaction between the investigator and his object. Each level embodies
and supplements all lower levels.
    Level zero, also called source system is determined by the way
an investigator interacts with the investigated object. This interaction
is partially guided by the preferences of the investigator but
should include the following aspects: definition of a set of variables,
a set of potential states for each variable and a description of the
meaning of the variables with their states (real world attributes and
manifestations). The variables must be partitioned as either basic or
supporting.
    Basic variables can be either input or output variables and belong
to directed systems. Systems without basic variables are called neutral
systems. All supporting variables together form a support set wherein
changes in the state of the basic variables take place. Examples of
often-used supporting variables are space, time and aggregations of
entities of the same kind (products, peoples, etc.). As the name zero
level implies, it is a source of empirical data concerning the attributes
of the object in focus.
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 163


   Level one supplements the source system of level zero with data
regarding the variables which are therefore called data systems. This
level comprises all knowledge contained in level zero plus additional
knowledge now available. Data is gained from measurement or
observations or from the definition of desirable states.
    Level two (and all higher levels) possesses knowledge of support-
invariant relational characteristics of inherent data generating variables
for boundary conditions. Invariance implies that however the support
set may change, certain features defining the function of the data set
remain invariant to such changes. The support-invariant relation
describes a process generating states of the basic variables of the
support set. The level is thus one of generative systems.
    Level three belongs to structure systems and is defined in terms of
a set of generative systems, also called subsystems of the total system.
The subsystems share different variables and interact in various ways.
    Level four is described as metasystems and consists of a set of
systems defined at levels 1, 2 or 3 and a support-invariant metacharac-
terization. Lower level systems must share the same source system.
    Level five defines meta-metasystems. Here, the metacharacterization
is allowed to change within the support set according to support-
invariant representation. Metasystems of higher order are defined in
the same way.
    A simplified overview of this epistemological hierarchy is shown
in Figure 3.15.
    Klir states that a system, a requirement or a problem is identifiable
if it can be formulated in terms of his systems hierarchy of GSPS
language. It is admissible if both identifiable and able to be handled
in terms of a certain GSPS application. It is solvable if admissible and
can be solved using the methodological tools available in a GSPS
implementation.
    The computer system built on Klir's conceptual framework enables
the user to deal with systems problems. Figure 3.16 shows its four
functional units: a control unit, a metamethodological support unit,
a knowledge base and a set of methodological tools.
    Methodological tools are methods having programs designed to solve
admissible problems. Certain procedures specify the order in which
164          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                          LEVELS 4. 5,...
                                     META SYSTEMS
                             Relations between relations below
                          LEVEL3
                                  STRUCTURE SYSTEM
                              Relations between models below
                         LEVEL2
                                 GENERATIVE SYSTEM
                             Models that generate data below
                         LEVEL 1
                                     DATA SYSTEM
                         Observations described in language below
                         LEVELS 0                             tj~
                            \\      SOURCE SYSTEM          //
                             Y\Data description language J J


                               EVENTS      PREDICTION ACTION

                                   ^           ^

               Figure 3.15 Klir's epistemological systems hierarchy.
(Reprinted with permission from G. Klir, Architecture of Systems Problem Solving, Plenum
Publishing Corp., New York, 1985.)




individual algorithms are used. The metamethodological support unit
contains information indicating how to order the problems according
to how general they are. Information concerning problems which
cannot be solved by the system is stored in the knowledge base unit.
This unit also contains useful information regarding different kinds
of system and systems problems, as well as relevant laws and rules
of thumb. A user interface works either through the conceptual
framework or via a direct connection to the main unit. While the
conceptual framework is used in the formulation of problems, the
direct connection is used for metamethodological considerations and
consultations from the database.
   While Klir's classification can be adequate for well-structured
situations, it is less adequate for social problems with their indistinct
and unmeasurable nature.

                                           *
                             A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                        165


                                                 User



                  GSPS
                                               External ^ =
                                               interface ^^



                                     System                  Requirement
                                      types                     types


                                                Problem
                                                 types

                                                     Conceptual framework


                                                Internal
                                               interface




                          General                                    Knowledge
                         packages             Control unit
                                                                      base unit


                         Package 1
                                              Metamefhodo-
                         Package 2               logical
                      Specialized              support unit
                       packages
                    Methodological
                        tools                                         GSPS proper



              Figure 3.16 A block diagram of the GSPS architecture.
(Reprinted with permission from G. Klir, Architecture of Systems Problem Solving, Plenum
Publishing Corp., New York, 1985.)




Laszlo and the Natural Systems

Ervin Laszlo, a Hungarian philosopher, has written a number of
books covering systems philosophy. In one from 1972, Introduction to
Systems Philosophy, he presents his concept of Natural Systems. Like
so many other philosophers, he turns first to metaphysics to acquire
the answers to questions concerning the ultimate nature of reality.
Laszlo states that, in contrast to religion, the propositions of
166        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



metaphysics rest on the intrinsic coherence and simplicity — on the
elegance — of its answers.
   Laszlo begins with the following two primary presuppositions.

• The world exists.
• The world is, at least in some respect, intelligibly ordered (open to
  rational inquiry).

   For Laszlo (as for Boulding, see p. 51), the concept of order has its
own, intrinsic beauty. He regards order as the highest ideal of the
human mind and thus order of thought motivates the existence of
science. Likewise, order in feeling inspires art and existential order
becomes the mainspring of religion. It is also quite reasonable to
presuppose that the world beyond present human knowledge and
experience is in some respect rationally ordered. (A theory of a chaotic
universe is a contradiction of terms.)
   Laszlo continues with two secondary propositions.

• The world is intelligibly ordered in special domains.
• The world is intelligibly ordered as a whole.

   In this world, physical phenomena are viewed as systems according
to modern mechanics or to field theory with complex subsidiary
patterns such as the subsystems reflected in chemistry. Further
counterparts of this view can be found in biology, where organisms
are wholes forming a continuum demarcated by relative boundaries
from still larger systems such as continental ecologies and social
systems. From this starting point, Laszlo arranges all of the systems
in two different planes: a macrohierarchy and a microhierarchy.
   In the macrohierarchy, where the gravitational forces have the
evolutionary role, the following entities of astronomy are found.

— planets and their subbodies
— stars
— star clusters
— galaxies
— galaxy clusters
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 167


   In the microhierarchy, where the electrical and related forces are
instrumental, entities of physics, chemistry, biology, ecology, sociology
and internal relations are found.

— atoms
— molecules
— molecular compounds
— crystals
— cells
— multicellular organisms
— communities of organisms

   While only a rudimentary state of knowledge exists of the macro-
hierarchy, scientific knowledge of microevolution is extensive. Why
the universe is fragmented into planets, stars and galaxies is not yet
wholly understood. We have neither knowledge of the exact number
of levels in the observable universe nor rational evidence that the
series is infinite.
   The theoretical hierarchical organization of nature with the
microhierarchy superimposed on the macrohierarchy is shown in
Figure 3.17. The intersection between the two hierarchies is on the
level of the atom. This integrated hierarchy with its different levels
is called the Natural Systems by Laszlo.
   The development of natural systems from simple levels to more
complex takes place according to adaptive self-organization, inevitably
leading toward the known biological and psychological systems. Self-
organization with its emerging complexification brings a decreasing
stability to the system. Sudden disorganization is thus more
probable at higher system levels than at lower ones. The inverse
relation between structural complexity and self-stability is shown in
Figure 3.18.
   The higher we climb the hierarchical ladder, the more diverse the
functions and properties, albeit in a decreasing number of systems.
Atoms exist in greater numbers than molecules but have fewer
structural variations and fewer properties than the latter. Although
organisms are fewer in number than molecules they exhibit a hugely
greater range of functions and properties. Laszlo points to the about
168              GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                                            metagalaxy
                                            (= astronomical       0=H
                                            universe)
                                  galaxy aggregations

                                              galaxies

                                     stellar clusters

                                 stars, planets ,
                                                    ' world
                                                      systei
      H = macrohierarchy                    socio and
      h" = microhierarchy (terrestrial)     ecosystems
      hn = microhierarchies (other)1
                                            organisms
                                  cells, /
                                  protoorganisms
                                          crystals,
                                        /colloids
      atoms of the elements           molecules
      (Hi - LW1"3)
                                                                                         -H5(=-h6)
      electrons, nucleons
      photons, radiation
      quanta
      fundamental energy-
      condensations
      (quarks?)
      space-time field
      and energy continua

                         F i g u r e 3.17 T h e N a t u r a l S y s t e m s hierarchy.
(Reprinted with permission from E. Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy, Gordon & Breach
Publishing Group, Lausanne, 1972.)




ten million existing species of plants and animals as an example of
possible variation. While existing ecologies and societies are fewer in
number than organisms, their properties and variations far exceed
those of the single, or small groups of, organisms.
   When examining the natural systems we find that they consist of
both things and relationships. In Figure 3.19, the concept of things and
relationships is related to the levels of microhierarchy. Things below
but close to the human level are easy to grasp mentally; above this
level the concept of things tends to transcend into relationships. On
much lower levels of the hierarchy things are known only as an
                                  A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                                            169



                                                           adaptive
                                                      self organization
                                                          (evolution)
                  world system

                 socio and
                 ecosystems

                organisms
         cells,
         protoorganisms
              crystals,
              colloids

          molecules

         atoms
         (on earth)                                        h5(=-H6)
                       overall structural stability                    range of self-stabililizatory
                              of modules                                 functions of modules

Figure 3.18 Relationship between structural complexity and self-stability in the
microhierarchy.

(Reprinted with permission from E. Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy, Gordon & Breach
Publishing Group, Lausanne, 1972.)



                                                                                 Aggregate
                                    World system . 0 _ n i                      relationships
            Control of
                                                                                    14
                                   socio and                           'relation-
           constituted             ecosystems
          relationships                                                  ships'               Individual
                                   organisms /            X -h 1 2                   J j r_relatio_ns_hips

                                cells, proto-
                                organisms
                                                                       ]     'living
                                                                            things'
                                                                                              individual
                                                                                                things

           Control of            crystals,
                                                                 -h«         'things
          components            colloids
          and simpler                                                -h'5
            things           molecules

                               atoms                                  h5(=-H6) J
                                                                             Aggregate
                                                                               things
                      behaviour                Systems                   Common-sense
                                           conceptualization            conceptualization

Figure 3.19 Concept of things and relationships correlated to the levels of micro-
hierarchy.

(Reprinted with permission from E. Laszlo, Introduction to Systems Philosophy, Gordon & Breach
Publishing Group, Lausanne, 1972.)
170        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



aggregate of smaller entities, such as crystals made up of molecules.
Relationships become gradually weaker as we rise above the human
level. From a personal point of view, the relationship vis-a-vis
humanity is naturally more diffuse than one with a neighbour.



Cook and the Quantal System
Norman Cook, a researcher in the area of neurosurgery, presented in
1980, his version of the Natural Systems in the book Stability and
Flexibility. His theory describes how the functional duality of
flexibility/ stability influences five main levels of natural organization
in our surrounding world. Together these levels are called the quantal
by Cook.
   These five levels represent the following fundamental units of
nature and society and show structural and functional similarities.
— atom
— cell
— human organism
— human family
— nation state

   Cook sees the atom as the only complete stable organization of
space/time at the temperatures and pressures found in our own solar
system. It is also the smallest entity known to physical science which
deserves the name system. The cell is seen as the optimal unit of
complex molecular organization on earth. It has emergent properties
necessary to be the basic building block of life. Man, at the third
level, is seen as the quintessence of biological evolution. The family
system is seen as an entity unified by genetic factors as well as by the
psychological need for self-expression. The nation state, finally, is
seen as the natural result of interaction between families, clans,
etc. fulfilling the human need for an arena where political and
philosophical ideas can be realized.
   The fundamentally antagonistic tendencies toward constancy and
change on each level must be handled in such a way as to preserve
                       A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                  171


internal stability of existing information. This also applies to flexibility
and the possibility to share information with the external world. The
functional duality of control allows for

— long-term viability of each system, a requisite for
— evolution of growing complexity within each system, making
  possible
— the functioning of the system within its suprasystem

  The control centres managing this functional stability/flexibility
duality on the five levels are as follows.

— in the atomic nucleus, neutrons and protons
— in the cellular nucleus, DNA and RNA
— in the brain, the right hemisphere and the left hemisphere
— in the family the parents, woman and man
— in the government, the legislative branch and the executive branch

   In his examination of the quantal, Cook finds a significant structural
similarity between the atom and the other levels of his system. The
neutron is specialized for atomic stability while the proton is
specialized for contact with an external electron structure. No doubt
a kind of genuine information exchange takes place in the atom
allowing for a kind of systemic synergism.
   As the building block of life, the cell is a highly ordered and
complex system of biomolecular information. Information is stored
in DNA molecules and expressed in the form of protein through
RNA molecules. Genetic change is seen as a result of a creative cellular
response to the biochemical milieu. Biological evolution per se may
be seen as a continuous struggle to cope with the challenge of a
changing and dangerous chemical environment. Cellular changes may
then correlate with different environmental changes.
   Man has a single personality in spite of his bicameral brain with
two control elements. The co-ordination of both hemispheres of the
brain is fundamental for the normal functioning of the unified
individual. The right hemisphere is conventionally defined as soft,
female, emotional; the left as dominant, male, intellectual. A right-
sided lifestyle could be represented by Eastern meditational religions
172        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



and use of drugs, music and poetry, and ecological awareness. The
left-sided lifestyle could then be represented by the hard-working
business man with his fixation on rational thinking, money and
power.
    The family is the natural means for one of the most essential
activities of life: an expression of the h u m a n self through the
distribution of one's own genes and distribution of one's modes of
thought. To produce offspring who may (or may not) share one's
qualities and world-view is to live beyond one's own biological
existence. On the broader family level, anthropology has not found
a culture where the social roles of woman and man have not been
differentiated. There are also very few cultural exceptions to the
dominant pattern of the internal, domestic female and the mobile,
external man. As part of this stability/flexibility duality, the woman
has been the idealist and the keeper of a stable, self-consistent world-
view. Man has been the practical half and the realizer of family values
in the external world.
    In the social system of the nation state, Cook associates stability/
flexibility to the metaphor of conservatism and liberalism. He also
uses the analogy of the capitalist and the communist world to
demonstrate some real consequences of the concept. The challenge
on this level is to maintain a balance between collectivism and
individualism. Most Western societies have approached this task by
way of a division of the government into a legislative and an executive
branch. The laws should be formed and enacted so as to reflect the
needs of the nation rather than that of selected interest groups. Direct
contact is seen as a threat to the autonomy of the legislative branch.
The executive branch, however, should be in close contact with the
needs of the people and facilitate processes such as lobbying, polling
and voting. Stability on the national level is mainly concerned with
protection of the ecological base to ensure the material existence of
the nation and the existing rights of the people. Flexibility is a response
to the basic needs of the people and a rational reaction to new
economic and technological challenges.
  A recapitulation of the control-centre duality and the resultant
emergent qualities within the quantal levels is presented in Table 3.1.
                           A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                          173


Table 3.1 Control-centre duality with emergent qualities in the quantal levels.

              System       Stability     Flexibility      Emergent Quality

          Atom            Protons        Neutrons             Atomicity

          Cell            RNA            DNA                  Life

          Human           Left           Right                Mind
          organism        hemisphere     hemisphere

          Human           Woman          Man                  Civilization
          family

          Nation          Executive      Legislative          Justice
                          branch         branch


 Table 3.2 Control-centre predominance and associated systemic imbalances.

        System         Flexibility Over Stability      Stability Over Flexibility

       Atom              Nuclear radioactivity           Nuclear radioactivity
                         (alpha decay)                   (beta decay)

       Cell              Malignant growth                Benign growth
                         (RNA virus induced)             (DNA virus induced)

       Human             Schizophrenia                   Manic depression
       organism

       Human             Male chauvinism                 Feminism
       family

       Nation            Dictatorship                    Bureaucratism


   Table 3.2 shows the malfunctions which arise when the pre-
dominance of one of the control-centre functions leads to an imbalance
in the system.
   In the development toward higher levels of the quantal, Cook
identifies the following four evolutionary stages.

• The Primitive stage has only one control centre and consequently
  neither functional duality nor emergent qualities representative of
  higher levels.
174             GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                Table 3.3 The four developmental stages of the quantal.

       System        Primitive       Classical       Modern         Completed

      Atom          Hydrogen      Unknown           Unknown       All elements

      Cell          Viruses       Bacterial cells   Plant cells   Veterbrate cells

      Human         Infrahuman     Proconscious     Conscious     Enlightened
      organism

      Human         Tribal         Religious        Secular       Genuine
      society       hierarchy      society          society       democracy



• The Classical stage has an emerging control duality but an
  insufficient internal communication.
• The Modern stage has an existing control duality and sufficient
  internal communication. The nature of its flexibility is however not
  correlated to the system as part of the surrounding metasystem.
• The Completed stage has full internal communication. The changes
  in the flexibility element are synchronized to changes in the system's
  environment.

   The development of the four stages is of special interest with
regard to the human organism. Cook's theory is supported by a similar
train of thought originating from /. Jaynes in his book The Origin of
Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind (see bibliography).
Here the correlation between human evolution and the cerebral
hemisphere function is emphasized. With the liberation of the left
hemisphere from total domination by the right we see the beginning
of modern man with analytic, and later scientific, capability. An
overview of this four-stage development within all quantals is
presented in Table 3.3.
   Inasmuch as systems in the earlier stages of their development
lack complete control duality, the suprasystem must answer for this
function as part of a more complex, higher level system.

                                           *
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                175


Checkland and the Systems Typology

Peter Checkland, a British professor in systems science, published his
book Systems Thinking Systems Practice in 1981. With this book he
joins the scientists who have launched natural systems hierarchies,
in his case called the Systems Typology. According to Checkland, the
absolute minimum number of systems classes necessary to describe
the existing reality is four. They are natural, human activity, designed
physical, designed abstract, systems. (The typological map itself belongs
to designed abstract systems.) Natural systems provide the possibility
to investigate, describe and learn; human activity systems can be
engineered and the designed systems can be created and employed.
   Starting with natural systems, Checkland claims that 'they are
systems which could not be other than they are, given a universe
whose patterns and laws are not erratic' Their origin is the origin
of the universe and the processes of evolution. Within the natural
systems there exists an obvious hierarchy from atoms to molecules.
Combinations of molecules then give rise to a branched hierarchy.

                          Subatomic systems
                           Atomic systems
                          Molecular systems

                              give rise to

       Non-living Systems         and     Living Systems
       — inorganic crystals               — single cell creatures
       — rocks                            — plants
       — minerals                         — animals
                                          — ecologies

   The next main level to be considered is that of human activity
systems (HAS) which have a tendency to integrate in such a way
that they can be viewed as a whole. Most often other (designed)
systems are coupled to them. An example is the oil industry with its
oil rigs, tankers and fine meshed distribution system. Out of the
     TRANSCENDENTAL
     SYSTEMS




                                  Figure 3.20 A typology map of systems.
(From © 1981 P. Checkland, Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. Reprinted by permi
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                177


enormous number of human activity systems a few of the most typical
can be noted.

— agricultural
— defence
— trading
— transportation

   However, most fundamental on this level is the social system,
represented by family, tribe, clan, etc. Typical here is the basic need
of the members for mutual support within the frame of a community.
In a sense, with their central structure, social systems belong to both
natural and human activity systems. They have therefore been placed
on the boundary between the two categories in the typology map of
systems in Figure 3.19.
   Designed physical systems can be defined as systems fitted with
purpose of mind because a need for them in some human activity
has been identified. To this category belong:

— individual tools
— individual machines
— other designed and fabricated material entities

   Designed abstract systems are various types of theological,
philosophical or knowledge systems. While designed physical systems
in principle can be produced by animals and insects (the bird's nest,
the spider's web, the beaver's dam), designed abstract systems are
only associated with human beings.
   In Figure 3.20, all systems are related to each other on a global
map. The difference in logic types between natural and human activity
systems gives rise to separate kinds of investigations. The classical
method of science with its observer standing outside is quite relevant
for natural systems. When it comes to human activity systems,
Checkland emphasizes the importance of the point of view influencing
the observations.

                                   *
178        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Jordan and the Systems Taxonomy

 In an essay from 1968 published in Themes in Speculative Psychology
 an American psychologist, Nehemiah Jordan, presented his Systems
 Taxonomy. As a non-hierarchial structure it will only in part fulfil
 the conditions for being a general systems theory (see p. 53).
    Systems taxonomy has three basic organizing principles which
 enable an observer to define a system as an 'interaction between
 what is out there and how we organize it in here': rate of change,
 purpose and connectivity. Each principle defines two antitheses of
 the other, thereby giving three pairs of properties.
    Something which does not change within a defined time span
 (no rate of change) is structural or static; that which does change is
functional or dynamic. Quite naturally, the actual time span determines
 which of the two qualities is relevant to use. In a very short time
 span, the dynamics are concealed, giving a static impression; in a
 very long time span, nothing can be static and the structure changes
 through entropy.
     The organizing principle of purpose can generally have two
 directions: one towards the system itself and one towards the
 environment. Directed towards the system, the aim is to maintain
 homeostasis. Directed towards the environment, the aim is often to
 modify it to resemble a desired state or, if this is not possible, to
 bypass or override the disturbances.
     According to Jordan, the concept of purpose is manifested by
 systems throughput. Every system whose input is internally processed
 and transformed to an output, is purposive. The output of the system is
 the desired goal; man-made systems are thus purposive. There are non-
 purposive systems as well: physical systems when in equilibrium (for
 example a volcano) provide an illustration.
     Systems obeying the principle of connectivity can be assigned to
 either of two alternatives: the not densely connected or mechanistic
 and the densely connected or organismic. If an intervention into a
 system, with removal of parts and breaking of connections, produces
 no change of the remaining components, it is classified as mechanistic.
 In an organismic system the change of a single connection affects all
  others. A recapitulation is outlined in Table 3.4.
                        A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                179


      Table 3.4 The three organizing principles of Systems Taxonomy.

             Rate of Change          Purpose       Connectivity

                 Structural       Purposive        Mechanistic
                 Functional       Non-purposive    Organismic



   An analysis combining these principles and the pairs of properties
gives eight alternatives. Jordan has arranged and exemplified these
in the following order.

1. Structural                 A road network
   Purposive
   Mechanistic
2. Structural                 A suspension bridge
   Purposive
   Organismic
3. Structural                 A mountain range
   Non-purposive
   Mechanistic
4. Structural                 A bubble (a physical system in equilibrium)
   Non-purposive
   Organismic
5. Functional                 A production line (a breakdown in one
   Purposive                  machine does not affect other machines)
   Mechanistic
6. Functional                 Living organism
   Purposive
   Organismic
7. Functional                 The changing flow of water as a result of a
   Non-purposive              change in the river bed
   Mechanistic
8. Functional                 The space/time continuum
   Non-purposive
   Organismic
180        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The overall meaning of Jordan's Systems Taxonomy is to play
down and simplify the often-misused concept of a system. Jordan
states that 'the only things that need to be common to all systems are
identifiable entities and identifiable connections between them. In all
other ways systems can vary unlimitedly.' Concepts like feedback
systems or self-organizing systems create more confusion than they
solve and do not belong to his systems thinking. Finally, Jordan
analyzes fifteen different definitions of the word system found in
Webster's New International Dictionary. The result is that every one of
the definitions is given its proper place in the taxonomy. Music, for
instance as a system of sounds is defined in the dictionary as '(1) An
interval regarded as a compound of two lesser ones — so used in
Byzantine music. (2) A classified series of tones, as a mode or scale.
(3) The collection of staffs which form a full score.' As a time-bound,
functional system music fits alternative 7 above.
   That music should be non-purposive highlights a major weakness
of the taxonomy: the composer has a purpose, so do his listeners.
Jordan ascribes the purpose (or its absence) to the system itself, leaving
out its creator or observer. Should not a road network then be classified
as non-purposive, just like a mountain range?




Salk and the categories of nature

Jonas E. Salk (1914-1995), immunologist and father of the Salk vaccine
against polio, has proved himself to be a true natural philosopher in
his book Anatomy of Reality (1983). Here, Salk presents a number of
conceptual maps showing how evolution as the primary cosmic force
creates the order visible in the different categories of nature.
    Evolution arises from the interaction of mutation and selection
where mutation occurs by chance and selection by necessity for
survival. This kind of true evolutionary change is characterized by its
irreversibility. Salk uses the term evolution in a universal sense, as a
force acting in the prebiological, biological and metabiological eras. These
eras exemplify an evolution of the evolutionary process itself, with
successively more sophisticated processes and strategies. In his
                             A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                             181



              | | Physical matter g   Wk Living matter Sm       I I Human matter   fl


                                                            :                      •
                Universal evolution



    Non-       Manifest
   manifest     order
    order

        Emergence
        of cosmos

                   Figure 3.21 Main eras of the universal evolution.
(From © 1983 J.E. Salk, Anatomy of Reality. Reprinted with permission of Greenwood Publishing
Group Inc., Westport, CT.)



words it is as if 'the principal preoccupation of evolution is its own
perpetuation.'
    In the categorization of nature, Salk begins with a definition of the
three main eras of the universal evolution wherein the different types
of matter emerged. See Figure 3.21.
    The period of physical matter is prebiological; matter is successively
condensed to a more complex structure. The period of living matter
includes the foregoing period and is the same as the biological as life
has now emerged. The human matter period, the metabiological,
includes all -prior periods and extends into the future. In this period,
matter can be said to become conscious of itself. Man has thus
developed beyond all forms existing in nature but his full potential
is still unknown. The human mind itself is considered to be a reflection
of the surrounding cosmos, that is, contains the memory of the total
previous evolution.
    The era of the physical matter had the overwhelmingly longest
duration; the emergence of each consecutive era took place at an
increasing pace. The rise of order out of an initial chaos is also implicit
in Figure 3.21. The evolution of a manifest order with the three main
spheres is further demonstrated in Figure 3.22 (next page).
    The universal growth of complexity as part of this evolution is
demonstrated in Figure 3.23.
182                GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                                                Biosphere
                                                                                  I      Metabiosphere
                                                                                                         ]
                   I     Physical sphere    m

                                         Emergence
                                                                              Emergence
                                                                           of consciousness

                                           of life
          Emergence
          of cosmos

                    Universal evolution

          Figure 3.22 The three main eras and their evolutionary spheres.
(From © 1983 J.E. Salk, Anatomy of Reality. Reprinted with permission of Greenwood Publishing
Group Inc., Westport, CT.)


                                      MIMilllMlllIlllllllllMIIIIIM

                                 I    §|          Biosphe                      I ! Metabiosphere    J




                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                &            fe

                                                I 1I
                                                                                                3
                                                                                    •D
                                                                                   .C           —
                                                                                                p         c
                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                c        e
                                                                                               en
              CO
              CD                                                                               §         i^
             .O
             re:
             tr
             CO
                                 V
          X
             Q.
                                .a?          4?
                                             Q.
                                                          £          o
                                p
                                o                        o
         £o          £          -S>        or

        m
        w
         c
         !          1      1
                           1
                               5
                                 o


               1
             Prebiological
               evolution
                                1     11
                                      |j|
                                                   Biological
                                                   evolution

                                      Universal evolution
                                                                         III
                                                                         J
                                                                                HlVletabiologicalH
                                                                               gj   evolution    M




                         Figure 3.23 The universal growth of complexity.
(From © 1983 J.E. Salk, Anatomy of Reality. Reprinted with permission of Greenwood Publishing
Group Inc., Westport, CT.)
                              A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                             183


                  Unit                  Binary components                    Discipline


          Collective mind                 Culture/Society              Sociometabiology

          Mind                            Intuition/Reason             Metabiology

          Organism                      Species/Individual             Sociobiology


          Cell                              Gene/Soma                  Biology

          Atom                           Nucleus/Electrons             Chemistry

          Particle                         Energy/Mass                 Physics

          Form                          Continuous/Discrete            Mathematics

          Order                       Non-manifest/Manifest            Metaphysics


                         Figure 3.24 T h e basic a n a t o m y of reality.
(From © 1983 J.E. Salk, Anatomy of Reality. Reprinted with permission of Greenwood Publishing
Group Inc., Westport, CT.)




    The growing order and complexity has its first manifestation in
the coherence of the elementary particles. A contemporary expression
is the human mind and its culture, representing the highest degree
thus far of complexity. The open-ended nature of the diagram suggests
new metabiological stages, possibly a new kind of human morality
or superconsciousness, as suggested by Teilhard de Chardin.
    A more detailed order, called by Salk the basic anatomy of reality,
is presented in Figure 3.24. Central in this diagram is the binary
structure of the units at each level of complexity (for example, the
relationship between energy and mass). According to Salk, complexity
has its origin in the tendency towards complementary pairing, within
networks of pairs in functional relationships. In the right-hand part
of the figure the various academic disciplines concerned with the
different levels are shown.
    This binary relationship joining inseparable factors is focused
in the study of non-physical order in areas such as metaphysics,
184           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                                               Universal evolution


                          i   Prebiological j j j j l Biological | | | 1 Metabiological •
                          I     evolution H H         evolution H 1        evolution    1

           Emergence             Matter                Life          Consciousness

           Unit                  Atom                  Cell                Mind

           Components     Nucleus/Electrons       Gene/Soma          Intuition/Reason

           Attributes          Interaction         Procreation           Creativity
                                                    Selection
           Determinants        Probability                                Choice
                                                    necessity

              Figure 3.25 The fundamental evolutionary relationships.

(From © 1983 J.E. Salk, Anatomy of Reality. Reprinted with permission of Greenwood Publishing
Group Inc., Westport, CT.)




mathematics, philosophy, religion and art. Physical order per se is the
focus of studies in physics, the origin and development of life in
chemistry and biology. Social order, the conditions for survival of
both individuals and species, is studied in sociology. Here, the realm
of human culture and creativity are the focus of metabiology and
sociometabiology.
   The concept of relationship is basic in the natural philosophy of
Salk. It brings together the three dimensions of space and that of time
building a fifth dimension of wholeness. If the fundamental units of
the three main phases of evolution are defined as atom, cell and
mind, a more detailed table regarding the critical determinants of change
can be constructed. According to Salk these are probability, necessity
and choice; they are represented by their corresponding attributes
for each stage, namely interactivity, procreativity and creativity. See
Figure 3.25.
   In his examination of the evolutionary process, from the beginning
of the metabiological era, Salk found an ever-increasing pace in
development. The mechanisms of mutation and selection in biological
evolution have now been exceeded by human creation and choice,
more rapid and efficient means of adaptation and of transmission to
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES               185


succeeding generations. Just as genes are tested or selected for their
adaptive value, ideas have to be tested. An equivalent to the immune
system within prevalent paradigms serves to preserve useful ideas.
Human evolution will thus be determined in the future by the
capacity for anticipation and selection and not by physical/biological
mechanisms. Salk stresses the importance of both/and in critical
decision making, where either/or has proved to be devastating. Salk's
ideas regarding the supremacy of mental evolution may be compared
with Teilhard de Chardin's noosphere evolution (see p. 152).
   Salk sees evolution as both a problem-creating and a problem-
solving process where new solutions grew out of the merging old
solutions. But evolution has no preferences and only supports those
species that can help themselves. Another important aspect of the
evolutionary process is its correcting capability. Also, imperfect
systems with this capability can adapt and survive under all possible
circumstances. Correctability implies mechanisms sensitive to
feedback, as well as for feedforward or thinking ahead, necessary to
effect the best choices. All this is held in the human psyche, designed
by the development to correct mistakes in the past and present and
to invent strategies for the future.




Powers and the Control Theory

As a psychologist and cybernetician, the American researcher William
Powers had for many years pondered the question: 'Why does the
same disturbance sometimes result in different responses?' The
classical stimulus/response view and behaviourism had apparently
failed to give an explanation. Powers himself gives the answer in his
book Behavior: The Control of Perception (1973). Human behaviour is
based on the concepts of control of reference perceptions and of
feedback.
    Powers illustrated his interpretation of these concepts with a small
and ingenious metaphor: two rubber bands tied together with a knot.
See Figure 3.26.
186               GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                                                            ref
                                                   Index                     i
                                                                             i

                          Disturbance
                                                                           -¥-
                                                 • • c —                   ORG
                                                                                         -*9

                                                           *   x
                                                                       Feedback /
                                                                   v   path    /

                                  Effect                Position
      Position
      of                                                                                       Position of
      experimenter's                                                                           subjects
      finger                                                                                   finger
                                                                       -* Effect on q>


      Figure 3.26 Illustration of feedback a n d control by u s e of t w o r u b b e r b a n d s .
(Reprinted with permission from: Powers, William T., Behavior. The Control of Perception. New
York: Aldine de Gruyter. Copyright © 1973 by William T. Powers.)




    Two persons, A and B, standing on opposite sides of a table put
a finger into the loop formed when two rubber bands are tied together.
They stretch the rubber bands and adjust the knot above an index on
the table. If A now starts a small movement of his finger to displace
the knot, B reacts and is able to maintain its position. The position of
the knot as seen by B and related to the index on the table, is the
controlled quantity, q. The position of B's finger is the output quantity,
Q. B's rubber band represents the environmental feedback path,
whereby B's output affects his own input. The position of A's
finger represents the disturbance and his rubber band represents
environmental links through which a disturbance affects the same
controlled quantity affected by B's output. Every aspect of the
feedback control situation is thus both evident and explicit from the
example.
    Powers states that behaviour is governed by internal reference
signals and that there exists a hierarchy of negative feedback control
mechanisms which are discernible in a person's behaviour. Within this
hierarchy, the higher level mechanisms set the reference conditions
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                       187


                   Table 3.5 Powers' control hierarchy.

     Level         Core of Control                     Examples

 First-order     Intensity              Muscle tension, spinal reflexes
 Second-order    Sensation              Kinaesthetic perception
 Third-order     Configuration          Posture, grasping, phonemes
 Fourth-order    Transitions            Motion, time, change, warming
 Fifth-order     Sequence               Walking, word sequences
 Sixth-order     Relationships          Cause-and-effect, categorization
 Seventh-order   Programmes             Looking for a pencil to write with
 Eighth-order    Principles             Problem-solving heuristics
 Ninth-order     System concepts        Perception of unities in abstraction
 Higher orders   Spiritual phenomena?



for lower levels and receive information about deviations in the
comparison between controlled conditions and their reference values.
Powers' hierarchy of feedback control structures governs all kinds of
human behaviour. This hierarchy of at least nine different levels is
shown in Table 3.5.
   In the hierarchy only the first-order level interacts directly with
the surrounding world. Neurological evidence of the proposed control
levels exists up to the fifth order and Powers also indicates where it
resides anatomically. Above the fifth, the different levels are less
distinct and must be traced in a more indirect way.
   In all hierarchies of control, the lowest level system must have the
fastest response. Adjusting reference conditions for lower level
systems in order to correct own level errors must build upon the own
slower performance and the performance of the lower system as
well. Therefore, the higher the level in the hierarchy, the slower the
adjustment and the longer the endurance of a disturbance. (While it
is possible to see a clear correspondence between Beer's and Powers'
hierarchies, on higher levels Powers' seems more speculative.)
    Ultimately, the behaviour of an organism is organized around its
control of perceptions. Perceptions have no significance outside of
the human brain. A presumed external reality is not the same as the
experienced. Even if we acknowledge a real, surrounding universe,
188          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



our perceptions are not that universe. They are influenced by it but
its nature and impact is determined by the processing brain.
    Reference signals for natural control systems (see Figure 3.27) are
established inside the organism and cannot be influenced from
outside. In Powers' view, a natural reference signal can also be called
purpose. If a perception does not match its internal reference, the
result is a perceptual error. The higher the hierarchial level of this
perceptual error, the greater the psychological distress. Something
has to be done to reduce the error, something which quite simply can
be called behaviour. Therefore, in Powers' words: 'What an organism
senses affects what it does, and what it does affects what it senses.'



                                            Reference
                                            signal, r
                                       1'
                                   Comparator
                    Perceptual                                     Error
                     signal, p                                   signal, e

               ''                                            i   '
              Input                                      Output
            function               System               function



           F    v
                J
                '
                      Proximal
                      physical
                       stimuli
                                   Environment           Muscle
                                                        tensions


                                                                          'roximal results
                                                         \                  muscle tension
                                                                      ;
                    Physical
                     laws                                            Physical
                                                                      laws
                                 Remote physical
                                  phenomena
                                       ii
                                                                      Cause of
                                                                     disl urbance


        Figure 3.27 A general model of Powers' feedback/control system.
(Reprinted with permission from: Powers, William T., Behavior. The Control of Perception. New
York: Aldine de Gruyter. Copyright © 1973 by William T. Powers.)
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                189


   A more practical application of Powers' model is found within the
area of interpersonal conflict, defence and control. In Powers' view, a
conflict is an encounter between two control systems which try to
control the same quantity, but according to two different reference
levels. A conflict is only likely to occur between systems belonging
to the same orders; systems of other orders have other classes of
perceptions. Hence no single controlled quantity is shared. Levels of
orders other than those in conflict will therefore behave normally.
The psychological concept of cognitive dissonance seems to be
compatible with Powers' ideas with regard to this aspect.
   A general model of the feedback/control system and the
system's local environment sum up Powers' main train of thought in
Figure 3.27. The nine levels are implicit.




Namilov and the organismic view of science

Vasilii Namilov is a Russian researcher and philosopher of science.
In 1981, he presented, in Faces of Science, a cybernetic approach to the
phenomenon of science. In the book, the society of science is regarded
as a metaphoric or abstract system, residing within the biosphere. As
such it has the properties of a macroorganism obeying the same rules
as other species within biological evolution. The book focuses on its
self-organizing and self-regulating properties, with their equivalents
in the biosphere. These properties in turn develop and change as the
macroorganism evolves.
   Namilov thus finds that the most typical property of both science
and the biosphere is their organismic systems which develop over
time. As the contained information is renewed, it is also complexified.
Just as new species arise through the biological evolution, new ideas
and areas of knowledge come into being in science.
   The self-organizing system of science has its origin in the
emergence of a communication system based on theses, textbooks,
journals and other publications. The smallest component of the macro-
organism, that is, the equivalent of a cell, is the scientific paper. Its
190        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



development is determined by discoveries, by definition not possible
to predict and thereby the equivalent to mutations. Through mutation,
taken as a random generator together with some selection rules, an
adaptation system is created — principally the same in the systems
of both science and biology. An adaptation system always has a
memory where new and useful information is stored. Namilov talks
about a genetic memory in biological systems as well as a scientific
memory residing in journals, books and libraries (see also p. 276
regarding the different types of memories).
    All information/communication systems have their own language.
According to Namilov, while the genetic code is the language of
biology, science has its own language for communication (not to be
confused with conversational language). In this quite special language,
the information content of code signs used is constantly increasing.
One consequence of this evolution is that scientific papers and
articles become more compact, and increasingly incomprehensible
for ordinary readers. Also, the exponential production of scientific
papers has led to a publication crisis. Another consequence is the
differentiation of science into disparate fields, each with its specific
language. While such languages facilitate internal communication,
external communication is aggravated. Here, Namilov points out
another analogy to biology: information structures of different species
are incompatible.
    Language itself is regarded as a natural organism in the eyes of
Namilov. He refers to the words of the German linguist A. Schleicher
 (1888): 'The life of language does not essentially differ from the life
of any other organism — plants or animals.' Namilov sees a struggle
between the world of biology with its genetic language and the world
of man with its semiotic language. The ecological crisis and the
extinction of many species of plants and animals is the result of the
struggle for survival of the texts written in these languages.
    Changing external conditions in the biosphere, together with new
experiments in science, exert pressure upon the internal information
flow of the biosphere as well as of science. The consequence can be
one of the following alternatives.
                       A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                 191


• A state of growing external information and of the generation of
  much new internal information exists. In the biosphere, new
  species emerge and in science, new theories arise explaining new,
  experimentally observed facts.
• While the flow of external information remains unchanged, internal
  information grows. In the biosphere, original and often bizarre
  forms emerge and science degenerates into dogmatic and artificial
  constructs.
• The external information increases swiftly and the internal slowly.
  This will cause the dying out of species and a stalemate in science
  (as recently in elementary particle physics).

   Together with the tendency to develop new forms and new
ideas, there always exists a stability maintaining mechanism in both
of these macroorganisms. In biological systems, too pronounced
variation soon results in maladjustment and the threat of extinction.
In science, a new and revolutionary idea has to overcome the
paradigmatic barriers before being accepted. In reality this implies a
time constraint — no idea becomes common before the environment
is prepared for it.
   A basic strategy for all biological systems is that they transform
their environment in a way that is favourable for themselves. An
example is when plants take part in the decomposition of rocks in
order to gain access to minerals. The same goes for science: in
generating a favourable situation for itself, engineering developments
create more instruments and apparatus, releasing in turn manpower
for work in scientific areas. More scientists can join the pressure
group and more efficient lobbying can secure more funds.
   Another aspect with regard to the creation of maximum favourable
conditions is its exclusion of other alternatives. Just as alternative life
forms are hardly possible in the biosphere, Western-style science has
monopolized the only accepted way to knowledge accumulation in
the modern world.
    Concerning the forming of species, both in the biosphere and within
the scientific community, Namilov indicates obvious parallels. The
important factors in both areas are conditions leading to isolation. In
192        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



science, the elaboration of new ideas and pertinent information
exchange take place within certain scientific schools, creating the
necessary isolation. The phenomenon of symbiosis can also be
recognized as mutual help with no internal exchange of information
between different areas (for example cross-scientific research).
    All information systems must get rid of excessive and outdated
information. In the biosphere, the organism, with its successively
obsolete inherited and accumulated information, dies. Even whole
species become extinct and are replaced by new ones when their
information content no longer fits the surrounding world. In science,
the old paper and the old book disappear giving space for new ones,
something which can be traced in the citation bank. Disciplines may
have different half-lives but normally this time span varies between
five to ten years (who cites Kepler and Newton today?).
    Finally, to complete his view of science as a self-organizing macro-
organism, Namilov identifies the teleological traits of science. The
search for the ultimate truth regarding man and the universe manifests
itself in the development of evermore complex hypotheses and
theories.

                                      *

Bowen and Family Systems Theory

The concept of a natural system assumes that systems exist in nature
independently of man's creating them. Murray Bowen's Family Systems
Theory was derived from the study of one type of natural system, the
human family. It is a particular kind of natural system and viewed
as an emotional system (Kerr/Bowen 1988). As such, it is a network of
interlocking relationships, valid also among biological, psychological,
and sociological processes.
   The use of Bowen theory in family evaluation indicates that
it may also be considered as a systems methodology. Bowen uses
systems thinking as an alternative to linear approaches to the
treatment of family problems. Contrary to Freud's theory of
psychoanalysis which concerns the individual, Bowen's theory is a
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES               193


theory about the family group and its internal relationships. The
function of the individual is often incomprehensible without the
context of relation with a group.
    Function and behaviour of all organisms are influenced by a basic
emotional system, anchored in the life process itself. It has been in
place since the origin of life. Relationships between members of a
species are directed on common principles or universals. As part of
nature, modern man, therefore, is far more like other life forms than
different from them. This view can provide a basis for establishing a
behavioural link between humans and other animals.
    Man's family is a coherent unit because it operates in ways
consistent with its being a system and that the system's principles of
operation are rooted in nature. The same fundamental processes of
relationships could be consistently defined in every family. They are
at the one and same time, both simple and very complex. Following
the rules of the emotional system, man responds sometimes with a
basis in self-interest and sometimes on the interests of the group.
The ability to remember the past and plan for the future allows man
to engage in acts of reciprocal altruism. Such acts can be traded at
different times and spaced over long periods, even generations.
Here co-dependence, the other-centeredness that results in excessive
abandonment of self, is a key concept. This in turn is dependent on
the degree of differentiation of self and the capacity for autonomic
functioning which frees the person from reactivity and permits choice.
Emotional disturbance arises from, and is maintained by, relationships
with others.
    A basic statement in the theory is that thinking, feeling, and
emotion include processes operating throughout the whole organism,
not just in the central nervous system with its brain. What occurs
in the brain, often reflects concrete processes in the body. An
 interrelationship exists between the balance of closeness and distance
related to the anatomic shape and internal physiology of each
 individual.
    Emotionally determined function of a family member always
 create an atmosphere or field which in turn influences the emotional
 function of the whole family. The persons have different functioning
194            GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



positions in the family with reciprocal relationships. The operation
of the emotional system reflects the interplay between the two
counterbalancing forces of individuality and togetherness. Bowen uses
the metaphor of a planetary system with its gravitational field
balancing motions of the individual planets around each other and
the sun.
   A main part of Bowen's theory is the concept of triangling which
says that the relationship in families and other groups consists of a
system of interlocking triangles. It is never possible to adequately
explain an emotional process if links to other relationships are ignored.
The triangle is the basic emotional unit and the smallest stable
emotional system. Its main function is to neutralize tension or anxiety
within the system by creating a third focal point. Triangles seems to
be universally present in the human species. Nobody is immune
from being triangled and nobody is immune from triangling others.
When an emotional triangle has been established, it usually outlives
the people who participate in it. If one of the members die, another
person usually replace him. In Figure 3.28, a diagram of triangling is
presented. This particular diagram is often called genogram.
   The left diagram indicates a calm relationship. Neither person is
uncomfortable enough to triangle a third person. The centre diagram
shows growing relational conflict and the more uncomfortable person
A triangling a third person C. In the right diagram, the conflict has
changed from the original twosome and into a relationship between
B and C. The tension is decreased between A and B.



      A




      Figure 3.28 The emergence of an emotional triangle (from Kerr/Bowen 1988).
                          A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                    195


  The nature of triangles can be summarized like this:

1. A stable twosome can be destabilized by the addition of a third
   person.
2. A stable twosome can be destabilized by the removal of a third
   person.
3. An unstable twosome can be stabilized by the addition of a third
   person.
4. Un unstable twosome can be stabilized by the removal of a third
   person.

    Triangling processes vary among families and in the same family
over time. Triangling is minimal if people can maintain their emotional
autonomy.
    The process in which anxiety cannot be contained within one
triangle and overflows into one or more other triangles is creating a
situation of interlocking triangles. This may significantly reduce
anxiety in the central triangle of a family. See Figure 3.29.




                     •P                      o              <-
                                                                     o
        »    /                                                   <




                 D
                                 o       E                       F

  Figure 3.29 The emergence of interlocking triangles (from Kerr/Boiven 1988).
196        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    The figure depicts a family with a father, mother, an older daughter,
 and a younger son. In diagram A all the triangles are fairly inactive.
 In B, tension develops between mother and son. In C, the father
becomes triangled into the tension between mother and son. With D,
 the tension has shifted to a father and son relationship. In E, mother
has withdrawn and the original triangle had been inactive. Meanwhile,
 the daughter is triangled into the father-son tension. In F, a conflict
 erupts between the two siblings. This shows how tension originally
 presented in one triangle is acted out in another. There are thus
 families in which one person act as the anxiety generator, a second
 as the anxiety amplifier and a third as the anxiety dampener.
    In order to use the family systems theory in a therapeutic process,
family diagrams like them presented in the two figures, are employed.
 They are based on data collected in family evaluation interviews.
 Ideally, the diagrams should reflect the ebbs and flows of the
 emotional processes in the multi-generational nuclear family.
 Although useful shorthands, all diagrams of this kind must be
 considered highly simplified ways of diagramming the various
 patterns of emotional functioning.
    A concluding presentation of Bowen's ideas gives the emphasis
 on the following eight "interlocking" concepts which taken together,
 represent his theory.

• scale of personal differentiation
• triangling and interlocking triangles
• nuclear family emotional processes
• multi-generational transmission processes
• sibling position
• emotional cutoff
• societal emotional processes

   As a species, humans are uniqe as they appear to have more
capacity for emotional control than any other beings. This capacity
exists due to the evolutionary development of a massive cerebral
cortex. To think, to reason, to abstract and to reflect are functions of
this advanced brain. It has endowed human beings with the potential
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                197


for emotional autonomy while closely involved with others. When
man gets sick, showing physical, emotional and social dysfunctions,
the origin of the malady often transcends the emotional boundary of
the specific individual. It is an outcome of a process operating within
the multi-generational nuclear family. The family is the basic
emotional unit, operating in the background of all human beings.




Jaques and the Stratified Systems Theory

With the Canadian-born psychoanalyst and management expert Elliott
Jaques, a comprehensive body of insights that explains organizational
behaviour was produced under the name of Stratified Systems Theory
or SST (Jaques 1976). This is a general theoretical construction of how
organizations and human nature affect each other with special
reference to bureaucracy. Among other things, SST describes the kind
of decision-making which ought to be applied at different levels of
large organizations when complexity increases as one climbs the
corporate ladder. Each level, or strata, differ qualitatively from the
former as the work which should be done is included in a new and
more extensive connection.
   His main idea is that natural hierarchies assert themselves wherever
human beings organize in order to fight or work. This structuring is
true regardless of whether it is a factory in India or a mine in the
middle of the Namibian desert. Everywhere you will find the same
phenomenon. People and organizations develop and interact in the
same way all over the world. If normal behaviour prevails, the
collaborative interaction between people is reinforced by time.
   The interaction between people is demonstrated in a special
model presented at Figure 3.30, showing fields of behavioural
interaction as time passes. The three outer layers are culturally or
socially determined, and envelop the individual. The two inner
zones last only so long as the interaction is taking place. They give
the fine tuning to any social interaction within the broader background
given by the three outer layers.
198        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                                          Cultural zone
                                                           Legal zone
                                                           Institutional zone
                                                           Inter-subjective zone
                                                           Subjective zone


                                                           G




       Figure 3.30 Fields of behavioural interaction (from J at] lies 1976).




    What Jaques state contradicts current management doctrines which
assert the importance of teamwork, employee participation and
removal of hierarchical layers. Such fashion-thinking is disastrously
wrong, and if pursued will make especially European industry even
less competitive than it already is. It has totally undermined the
importance of effective managerial leadership.
    Jaques claims that some people are born with the ability to be the
Chief Execute Officer and some are not. The former should have the
position; no one else. If you can think years ahead instead of the next
week, which most people do, you should probably be the boss.
Several investigations confirm that by the age of 20 to 25, the level
and pattern of a persons work-capacity have been fixed. In fact,
work-capacity in very early childhood would be a good predictor of
work-capacity in adult life. That is regardless of family setting or
schooling.
    Organizations get into trouble when the layers of their hierarchies
fail to correspond to the natural universal structure. This happens
when the hierarchical division are blurred so that managers are not
clearly accountable for the work of their subordinates. The hidden
                      A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                199


mechanism which should distinguish one hierarchy level from another
is time.
    With the use of time, it is possible to distinguish seven main strata
existing in all bureaucratic hierarchies. At stratum one, the production
line or the typing pool, it might take a day to set up a milling machine
or thirty minutes to type a letter. At higher levels, tasks take much
longer time. To rebuild a marketing organization may take two years
for the sales manager. For a Chief Executive Officer, it may take five
years to turn around a company.
    Each person has an inherent potential for cognitive development
which develop through youth and maturity in predictable pattern.
This has nothing to do with positive thinking, the amount of which
never can change our inborn basic capability range.
    At a certain time in our development, the level of skill with which
we approach problems determines where in the hierarchy we belong.
A strong correlation exists between cognitive ability and the time
horizon of the roles in which each feels most comfortable. What
usually happens when a Chief Executive Officer fail to match the
level of hierarchy he occupies is that he shrinks the company down
to his own level.
    A cornerstone in the conceptual framework of SST is to achieve
 "requisite organization" which exists when the hierarchy of the
 organization correspond to the natural identified strata. Then people
 at each level clearly understand what is expected of them and
 allow them to work at their full potential. In this context, individual
 accountability can never be replaced by group responsibility.
    Regarding the always existing bureaucracies, Jaques states that
 they are to be sharply distinguished from the associations which
 establish them. They are quite simple the means by which people are
 employed to carry out work for the association. Bureaucratic system
 are thus secondary and dependent institutions.
    Jaques main findings is described in Figure 3.31. It points to the
 existence of a substructure composed of seven managerial strata
 with consistent boundaries measured in time-spans according to the
 figure. Such a general depth-structure of bureacratic stratification is
 universally applicable and can be used in the design of different
 organizations.
200        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                   Time-span                      Stratum

                                                    Str-7
                   (?) 20 yrs
                                                    Str-6
                       10 yrs
                                                    Str-5
                        5 yrs
                                                    Str-4
                        2 yrs
                                                    Str-3

                      3 mths
                                                    Str-1

               Figure 3.31 The seven managerial strata of SST.




   Figure 3.32 shows a series of lines of command in which time-
spans have been measured for each role. As one moves higher up in
the hierarchy there is a funning out of the time-spans, a phenomenon
occuring universally. The arrows from each role denote the occupant's
feeling of where his real manager is situated as against his manifest
manager. The time-span will give the stratum in which a certain role
should be placed. If the time span is 18 months, a stratum 3 role
should be applicable. Time-spans below 3 months are assigned in
concrete terms and are carried out in direct physical contact with the
output.
   At levels of 1 year to 2 years, the typical characteristics of tasks is
that it is impossible to oversee the whole of a person's area of
responsibility. Here a change from the concrete to the abstract mode
of thought and work is necessary. Most often, the possibility of direct
command is lost.
   In levels three to four, a qualitative mental jump is necessary
as neither the output nor the project can be foreseen. Even the
geographical environment is no longer conceivable in concrete
terms. It is too extended and comprise too many people. This change
                     A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES               201




                              CJ I Divisional Executive
                  7 years     T J
                              GC     Production Director
                  5 years      Tj\
                              O ) Factory Manager
                  3 years      T /
                              GC     General Manager
                  2 years      TTT~
                              O I Works Manager
               18 months      T /
                              CX     Departmental Head
                   1 year      4+\—
                              0 I Foreman
                6 months        4-4—
                              QC     Assistant Foreman
                3 months       TjV\
                              0 1 \ Supervisor
                 1 month       XJ
                              O     / Chargehand
                  1 week       T    /
                              CJ      Operator

              Figure 3.32 Lines of command with time-spans.




is often referred to as "becoming chairborne". In the military
organization, the battle-field colonel then has been a general with
oak leaves, dwelling in his headquarter. Here he works with problems
without dependence on physical or mental contact with existing
things.
   The highest levels, from fifth to seven, always show a shift away
from directing and coordinating the activities of subordinates with
collateral relations. Here the managing takes place with policy setting
and new institutions are created.
   How then may the connection between time-span and the working
capacity of the individual be explained? According to Jaques, it has
to do with the organizing capacity of the mind. The capacity to pattern
202          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



and order, to categorize, to generalize and to chunk information bits
is the critical point. The longer forward one has to look for the task
to be achieved, the greater is the amount of information or details to
be organized and complexity to be handled.
    Jaques speaks of the "helicopter principle" which refers to the
height from which the individual is able to survey the work situation
while still keeping his feets on the ground. The higher the helicopter
view, the greater a person's capacity. Therefore, to require a person
of stratum 5 to work in a stratum one role is to cage him. It would
be the same as that of employing Newton to pick apples and Fleming
to clean up the laboratory.
   Jaques also presents some statistical implications of his managerial
stratification which can be applied to an analysis of bureaucratic
systems. In Figure 3.33, a series of sub-populations of decreasing size
is presented.
    They represent the amount of the population capable of working
at succesive work-strata. Population P provides succession up to
stratum 6, Q up to stratum 7, and R up to 8. The letters represent
Holland, England and the US. An analysis of the three countries
show that Holland can sustain a fair number of stratum 6




Figure 3.33 Amount of the population capable of working at successive work- strata.
                       A SELECTION OF SYSTEMS THEORIES                   203


bureaucracies, but too little in higher strata. England can sustain
enough for stratum 7. The US, by contrast, is able to sustain a
number of super-corporations on a national basis with stratum 8
bureaucracies. In fact, most of them have become multinationals —
a result of having a population of more than 250 million people.
   A certain similarity exists between Jaques' SST and Beer's VSM
model. The two models often supplement each other and many
systems theorists use them together in management problem solving.

                                     *


Review questions and problems
1. Discuss which of the theories presented in this chapter arguably ought to
   have the greatest influence on the scientific community.
2. Which of the theories should be specially suited to be adopted in the
   management/business area?
3. Try to explain the practical implications of the Recursive System Theorem
   in a business organization.
4. In which of the theories is the concept of a noosphere specially relevant?
5. The conventional evolutionary paradigm asserts that life adjusts to the
   environment. On this topic the Gaia hypothesis states a quite different
   view. Account for this.
6. What is the smallest entity known to physical science that deserves the
   name of a system according to Cook?
7. According to Namilov the life of a language does not differ from the life
   of any other natural organism. Report on his train of thought in this
   matter.
8. Explain why and how Jaques' and Beer's models supplement each other.
                                 4

             Communication and
             Information Theory
• Basic concepts of communication theory
• Interrelations between time, place and channel
• Shannon's classical theory
• Basic concepts of information theory
• Information, exformation and entropy
• How to measure information
• Entropy and redundancy
• Channels, noise and coding

'Information without communication is no information at all.'
(Wurman 1991)



C    ommunication and information theory was first formulated in
      telegraph and telephone engineering, which makes it natural that
its benefits were first exploited by engineers in this field. Both areas
are closely interlinked as the identification of information separated
from its context is not possible. It is only idenftifiable as part of a
communication situation with transmitter and receiver.
    To communicate is to bridge a distance which sometimes can be
very short or sometimes very long. When, where and how this
distance should most efficiently be bridged over is considered by
communication theory. In this matter it is mainly concerned with the
process by which messages can be coded, transmitted, and decoded.


                                  204
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY              205


   It should be noted that the theory is completely general and
affects all kinds of transmitters and receivers as parts of biological,
mechanical or electronic systems. It thus concerns communication
between living organisms (including plants), between organisms and
machines or between machines. Such communication does not assume
the existence of a (spoken) language, neither awareness about the
ongoing process, nor conscious established understanding. The
communication can be used in a one to one, one to many, many to
one, or many to many situation.
   The most common application of communication theory involves
the conveyance of information in the form of acoustic or visual
messages. In human communication the only function of such
messages is to convey meaning. When communication involves
machines, the function is to command or control a process or to store
and retrieve information. From a more technical point of view,
communication theory is mainly concerned with the processes by
which messages can be:

• coded
• enchiphered
• compressed
• transmitted
• decoded
• dechiphered
• decompressed

   When telecommunication engineers thought of their devices as
something which could exist in any one of a certain number of possible
states and a message as something as chosen from a finite repertoire,
information theory was born. Calculations of how much information
the channel could carry per minute and how much was occupied
by the specific message were done routinely. In this way it was
meaningful to speak in terms of the informational effiency of, for
example, a telephone channel and to compare it with rival coding
systems. The indistinct and qualitative concept of information was
here transformed into something precise and quantitative.
206        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Of the many fields which benefit from information theory, we
will mention only a few here. Physiology, especially interpreted in
terms of GLS theory with its basic concepts of matter/energy and
information, is strongly dependent on information theory. Calculations
of how much information a special nerve fibre will carry per second,
or how much information is processed per second in a certain part
of the retina, are typical questions for information theory. The basic
proposition here is that organisms are information systems.
    Cryptography is another area which concerns the possibility to
hide the existence of a message, to make a message uninteresting
(trivialization, irrelevance, innocence) and to make a message in-
accessible. Linguistics, particularly that subarea engaged in synthetic
speech research and the voice control of computer systems, rely
heavily on information theory. The fact that physicists are massively
involved with information theory will be demonstrated in the
section of this chapter on information physics. Semiotics, the theory
of the phenomenon by which something acts as a sign to a living
organism is quite naturally closely related to information theory. Also,
infology, the science of presentation and reading of verbal and visual
information is again naturally related to information theory.
    The nearest application of information theory is, however, in
information science. This area, with its strong interdisciplinary nature,
is mainly devoted to structure and properties regarding information
and communication in connection with theories and methods for
acquisition, transmission, storing, retrieval, evaluation, distribution of
information and general requirements of knowledge. This area also
includes information systems, networks, functions, processes and
activities conveying knowledge from a source to a user. As such it
has also to examine problems of the information rich and information
poor, information policies, copyrights and personal information
integrity. The following areas are also considered within the sphere of
information science namely: automata theory, logistics, classification
theory, document retrieval theory, economic theory, and behavioural
theory.

                                      *
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                207


Basic concepts of communication theory

The theoretical problem of communication is possible to define as: to
make a representation in one place of a presentation already existing
in another place. This formulation is, however, not complete as
the communication process often is used to disinform or deceive a
receiver. To get a total definition the words trustful or misleading
have to be inserted before the word 'representation' according to the
intention of the transmitter. A successful communicated false message
is a favoured misunderstanding.
    The communication per se is usually transference of representative
substitutions for that which should be communicated. Concluded in
classic communication theory (Shannon, Weaver 1946) this theory
applies to all sorts of transference in one or more directions of matter
(as objects), energy or information. Shannon's own definition of the
communication problem was 'reproducing at one point either exactly
or approximately a message selected at another point'. A more
behavioural definition of communication offered by Warren Weaver
(1949) reads: 'All of the procedures by which one mind may affect
another.' Without losing its validity, this definition can similarly be
applied to communication between machines. The transference of
meaning between systems by the conveying of information is thus
by definition communication. Transference of valued phenomena
(most often matter/energy) is called transaction. Communication and
transaction are the only existing system interactions. As a sign is a
carrier of a content, only human beings can produce signs. Signs
possess their meaning by virtue of the inter-subjective system of other
signs. Most signs point to other signs like language which creates
words and not only reflects pre-given words.
    A message is composed by one or more signs consisting of signals
and/or symbols. A sign is everything which can be taken as adequa-
tely substituting for something else. 'A sign is something which stand
for anything for somebody"'. It thus designates an establishes relationship
between an idea and its expression. Most often the sign seems to be
more easily comprehended than the thing it signifies, while the thing
itself is more difficult to comprehend. A sign always exists in a context
of shared understanding.
208        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   A signal is a sign consisting of a physical phenomenon in the
environment which has a direct relation to its object and is itself a
part of what it represents. Formally, the signal represents nothing
and has no symbolic function. It has no need for active interpretation
and supplies its message directly thus evoking an immediate reaction
from the receiver. Signals do solely deal with what exists in the vicinity
of the user and concerns the external reality. Red rockets launched at
sea is an emergency signal understood by all seamen. Signals may be
transmitted in time, for example as whistle-blows, or in space as
print or pictures. Animals use signals in case of danger for attack,
discovery of food or as territory mark.
   A special kind of signal is the cue which tend to be permanently
ON as a source of information. The signal, on the other hand, can be
both in an ON and OFF state. In terms of energy expenditure the signal
is associated with certain costs of expression while the cue normally
not includes such costs. The yellow metal sheet boxes in Swedish
town areas are typical cues that inform us of the existing postal service.
At sea navigation marks is another example.
    A symbol is a mental representation regarding the internal reality
referring to its object by a convention and produced by the conscious
interpretation of a sign. In contrast to signals, symbols may be used
every time if the receiver has the corresponding representation.
Symbols also relate to feelings and thus give access not only to
information but also to the communicator's motivational and
emotional state. The use of symbols makes it possible for the organism
using it to evoke in the receiver the same response it evokes in
himself. To communicate with symbols is to use a language. Symbols
are equivalent to data in the classic language of information system.
    To sum up, communication originated from the transference of
objects and later came to be involved with the handling of signs
representing the object. Ultimately, it handled symbols representing
the signs. Signals regard the world around while symbols (and
language) regard the internal, mental world. Human communication
is therefore contextually independent while animal communication
is effectively tied to a given context by their use of signals.
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY              209


    A message propagating through space and time always includes
three main qualities, informability, detectability and localizability.
Normally the sender tries to optimize all of these qualities in order
to get the best possible communication. In certain environments and
situations, however, some of these qualities must be suppressed or
neglected. Thus it make sense to speak of a situational composition
of the message's main qualities.
    An emergency message from a shot-down fighter pilot must have
good detectability and informability, but preferably no localizability,
if his rescue team are to have a fair chance to retrieve him before the
enemy locates him. On the other hand, after successful receiving of
the message, the searchers need both direction and distance to their
goal. Hence the necessity for changing communication symmetry
between transmitter and receiver over time. As a matter of fact, the
concepts above lies at the heart of signal detection theory, in itself a
part of communication theory.
    In practice, however, the symmetry in communication often is an
assymetry as it has a direction going from the more to the less
competent. It is always possible to formulate a message describing a
behaviour but not always possible to reconstruct a behaviour from
its description. Another phenomenon influencing a communication
situation is metacommunication keys. They are always attached to
indicate how the recipient should interpret the message. Such
hints use specific behaviours like gestures, mimics etc. (see p. 215). A
communication situation is hierarchized on several levels where
symbols and behaviours alternate. As we will see, a long-range
correlation between used symbols in messages show up. The
variations are random within short series but correlated within series
exceeding a certain length.
    An epistemological problem related to communication is to detect
if there is any message at all. Every object in a sense will carry a
message. To ensure that it has no information it must be totally blank
or totally random. A pattern that is totally uniform repeating itself
like a square tile pattern of a bathroom floor has no information
content. This phenomenon is especially relevant for radio astronomers
listening for intelligent messages transmitted from extra-terrestrial
210        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



sources. In such a one-way situation, the first difficulty is to identify
the metamessage. A metamessage is an indication that there exists
some kind of intelligent message. A sealed envelope or a floating
bottle (if you are on the beach of an uninhabited island) are tangible
examples of a probably existing message.
   The radio astronomer has nothing tangible to expect, he must
rely on the regularities of certain electronic patterns detected by
himself or his computers. If something appears as a logic pattern, it
must be regarded as relating to a time scale. A metamessage might
very well be hidden in a time scale that exceeds the human life span.
Alternatively its time scale may be of a duration too short for a
human being to apprehend. If a metamessage is apprehended as
such, attention is concentrated on the external message. Decoding
of the external message requires knowledge of its implicit structure
and symbol pattern. It is possible to add general instructions to the
external message on how to decode it. The intergalactic gramophone
records loaded on board the two Voyager spacecraft launched in
1977 have instructions on their covers on how to play them. The
internal message is the real content of the transmission. Subtle ideas,
emotions, and the possibility of 'reading between the lines' are typical
of its content.
   In the definition of the theoretical problem of communication
theory, the possibility of misleading communication was mentioned.
An analysis of this phenomenon reveals the possible involvement of
a third, exploiting part in the communication process. This part can
be both a transmitter and receiver and intervene by:

• False signalling
• Deceptive signalling
• Supplementary signalling

   With false signalling, the purpose is to deceive the receiver and
thereby secure certain advantages. It is achieved by transmitting false
information related to sender, addressee or contents of a message. A
false origin of a message is often carefully created and concealed.
Deceptive signalling is generally used to create impressions of non-
existing activities and circumstances, favourable for the transmitter.
                   COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY               211


Irrelevant or heavy-biased information may be used. Supplementary
signalling is employed to maintain an established known signalling
pattern, the deviation of which could unmask sensitive information
concerning the sender. It may be concluded in 'communication as
usual'.
   Also jamming, an act of open hostility with the aim to disturb or
block ongoing communication, is common. The main concern for the
user of this strategy is how to conceal the origin of the blocking signal.
A large-scale example is the previous Soviet jamming of transmissions
from the Voice of America radio station.
   Communication is possible to categorize in two different methods,
the analogue and the digital. The analogue method of communication
has no either/or, instead it represents both/and. It is an ongoing
continuum and symbolizes an analogue or icon of a real process
and as such it is a process of relationships. Digital communication
represents the choice between either/or and is a reproduction of
structure and pattern. Hormone communication in the animal
body is chemical and analogue while nerve cell communication is
electrochemical and digital.
   Speech is digital communication in the presence of noise with the
help of error correction. Words are transmitted as strings of phonemes,
an equivalent of bytes. Existing languages only employ about 30
phonemes, the building block of speech. Error correction works by
use of redundancy which enables the receiver to restore the original
message in spite of errors and omissions. The redundancy of European
languages is between 50 to 75 percent.
   Speech may remain intelligible with up to 50% errors and
omissions. This is according to Shannon's theory which works for
any set of symbols if they are distinct and finite in number (See
p. 219). Speech is superior to analog animal call and sounds which
is much more sensitive for noise not possible to filter out. It can be
adopted to all human fields of activities. When no spoken common
language exists, people have to use older analog communication
methods like imitative gestures and icons.
    Natural language is characterized by an openness, permitting all
kinds of new messages and represents the most advanced form of
212        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



digital communication. Here the words represent fixed points for
concepts, and to manipulate the words is to manipulate the concepts
themselves. All living systems, however, employ both analogue and
digital methods in form and function at some level of the communi-
cation system. Verbalization and symbolization include the digitization
of the analogue. In human communication the translation from
analogue to digital often results in a gain of information but a loss of
meaning. Alteration between the two methods often takes place when
communication crosses certain types of boundaries (transducing).
   An illustration of the differences between the analogue and digital
mode is presented in the following list of opposites:

Analogue mode                      Digital mode
— Continuous scale                 — Discrete units
— Concrete                         — Abstract
— Territory                        — Map
— More/less                        — Either/or
— Continuous                       — Discontinuous
— Presence and absence             — Presence or absence
— Relativistic                     — Absolutist

   Although the concept channel is a main part of classic communica-
tion theory, it states nothing regarding their different qualities. In most
cases channels are defined as optic, acoustic or electric. A more exhaus-
tive presentation of channels possible to use in animal communication
has been done by the author according to the types of senses involved.
These channels may be called natural channels and work with different
carriers of the actual information (Skyttner 1993). The carriers are
sometimes called markers (Miller 1976). In the natural channels, air,
soil and water serve as markers. A marker is most often an object or
some form of matter that stores and forwards information. The natural
channels can be used either in two-way, interactive mode or in a
one-way, single-directed mode observing the fact that communication
requires at least two individuals.
   When a natural channel is used for observation, measurement,
detection or navigation only one individual is required under the
                      COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY           213


premise that nature does not communicate to us with language or
signs. Such a channel may be used either in an active or a passive mode.
For a list of the natural channels, see Table 4.1 below.


                          Table 4.1 The natural channels.

•   Acoustic channel: hearing
•   Optic channel: vision
•   Chemical channel: taste and smell
•   Mechanical channel: touch, vestibular and kinaesthetic
•   Thermal channel: chill/heat sensing
•   Electric channel: electric-field sensing
•   Magnetic channel: magnetic-field sensing
•   Echolocation channel: biosonar information


    Of the natural channels, the acoustic and optic are the main
conveyors of communication. Hereby visual and auditory components
of the message often interact. Acoustic signals are by nature both
transitory and one dimensional while optic signals may be considered
two or sometimes three-dimensional. Optic signals may sometimes
be transitory and sometimes non-transitory. Compare the nature of
traffic lights with their relatives, the traffic signs.
    The biosonar channel is quite special, mainly used by bats and
dolphins for detection and navigation. Shape, texture, size, distance,
velocity and location of a certain object is pinpointed with good
precision by use of this channel.




Interrelations between time, place and channel

In reality, time and place influence all other parameters of a commu-
nication situation. If these concepts are combined, an arrangement
like Table 4.2 can be created and some different situations of
communication defined. From the table with its comments it is
possible to see how environmental factors and needs determine choice
of and design features of the communication channel. Note that the use
214          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Table 4.2 Definition of a communication situation according to time and place.

      Same time          Synchronous close communication
      Same place         All natural channels are used

      Same time          Synchronous remote communication
      Different places   Artificial augmentation of natural channels are used

      Different times    Asynchronous close communication
      Same place         A local memory function is used

      Different times    Asynchronous remote communication
      Different places   A distant memory function is used


of solely natural channels severely restricts the general communication
concept.
    Synchronous close communication must be considered the most
fundamental and also the least problematic. All available channels
can be used simultaneously to a more or less extent although the
acoustic and optic dominate (note the use of perfume in the chemical
channel). An example of optic close communication is the use of sign
language.
   The dominating acoustic and optic channels are normally handled
quite consciously while the others are used subconsciously. In human
communication between individuals the process is fine-tuned by use
of body language. Four components of interpersonal communication
is discerned by Tajfel and Fraser (1978) according to the following:

1. The verbal system. Expletives and phonemes, composing the speech.
2. The intonation. Systematic use of different pitches, stresses and
   junctures like 'help?' and 'help!'.
3. Paralinguistics. These are additional vocalizations, shared and used
   communicatively by members of a cultural group. Examples are
   'ah', 'urn', etc. Pauses, tone of voice, extremes of intensity, pitch,
   drawl, laughing, crying also belongs to this category.
4. Kinesics. Body and facial movement grouped as body language
   and including eyebrow position, eye contact, body shift to
   punctuate discussion, nods etc.
                   COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                 215


   A closer investigation of non-vocal communcation gives the
following means:

• songs            • tone                      • key
• rhythm           • bar                       • intonation
• loudness         • silence                   • color
• odour            • touch                     • form
• gesture          • facial expression         • carriage
• movement         • dance                     • drumming
• clicking         • whistling                 • sigh
• scream           • imitation                 • playing
   The process of human communication is often summed up in two
transformations, consisting of the following four phases:

1. The sender must make clear for himself, exactely what to
   communicate.
2. He must chose symbols which externalize the internal content
   (sound, gestures, body motions, words, intonation etc.). The first
   transformation.
3. The receiver must assimilate these symbols despite disturbances.
   That is, hear the transmission, know the used language, interpret
   non-verbal information.
4. He must thereafter integrate all received symbols and transform
   them into an internal content, the second transformation.

   Different kinds of uncertainties inherent in the use of natural
language must, however, be considered. According to Colin Cherry
(1966) they are as follows:

1. Uncertainties of acoustic pattern
   (accents, tones, loudness)
2. Uncertainties of language and syntax
   (construction of sentences, use of synonyms)
3. Uncertainties of environment
   (disturbances by noise, background interference, etc.)
4. Uncertainties of recognition
   (past experience of the receiver, familiarity with the transmitter, etc.)
216        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Synchronous remote communication are used by animals
primarily in acoustic channels. Finbacks send their messages in the
deep-sea hydro-acoustic channel, on a frequency of about 20 Hz.
Indications have been noted of a global communication network
ranging up to 15000 km some generations ago (Payne 1971).
    The communication network of the African elephant exemplifies
infrasound land communication in the mechanical-acoustic channel.
This channel is used by pawing the ground, causing propagating
vibrations below 16 kHz. A 100 mile range in the African savanna has
been estimated by some biologists (Moss 1988).
    Human synchronous remote communication is dependent on
artificial augmentation of the used natural channels, today mainly
done in electronic ways. In the acoustic channel, all imaginable methods
has been tried since the dawn of human civilization. Some mechanical
solutions using air, solid material or water interactively are the
following:

• Signal drums, signal pipes, signal trumpets, gunshots
• Alp horns, yodelling (Swiss alps), whistling (Canarian Islands)
• Voice pipes, pneumatic sirens, church bells, gongs

   Among the electronic augmentations of the channel the following
are the most important:

• The telegraph, the telephone
• The radio telegraph, the radio telephone
• The hydro-acoustic telephone (submarine)

   Examples of devices for navigation and detection in this channel
defined as passive are:

• Radio direction finder
• Sonar (passive)
• Hydro-acoustic bell (underwater bell)

   An example of an active device is the transmitting Sonar system.
   In the optic channel there are several well-known mechanical
solutions. These solutions are normally used together with a
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY             217


further augmentation of the vision by use of field glasses. Examples
are:
• Mechanical semaphore
• Flag semaphore
• Signal lamps
• Signal rockets
• Heliographs
• Signal mirrors
• Signal fires
  Electronic augmentation of the optic channel include:

• The teletype, the telefax
• The picturephone
• The television

   Single-directed use of the optic observing channel is exemplified by
RADAR while passive use includes several sophisticated electronic
devices. Examples are given according to the following:

• GPS navigational system
• DECCA, LORAN, OMEGA, NAVSTAR
• Visual radio direction-finder
• lighthouses

   In asynchronous close communication no distance has to be
bridged, at least on principle. The distance between two employees
on each side of the same wall in a company office thus can be
neglected. On the other hand, the message has to be stored in some
kind of memory for later retrieval, unintended what channel is used.
In the acoustic channel such a memory may consist of a human being
memorizing the message and releasing it on demand. A tape recorder
may also be used or a computerized voice mail-box function.
   In the optic channel the memory function may be a left behind
written message, some photographs or a video-tape recording. Even
the chemical channel is conceivable to convey a memorized message,
like a lingering scent or perfume.
218        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Asynchronous remote communication implies the most de-
manding situation as both time and space has to be integrated. The
message must had both to be stored in a memory and forwarded into
a remote channel. In the optic channel the following represents
classic 'mechanic' solutions:

• mail
• fiery cross
• message sent in a bottle
• carrier pigeon

   These alternatives illustrate a technique involving the necessary
transmission of both material (e.g. the writing paper) and information
(e.g. the written content) and represent travelling memories. In the
course of time, different kinds of travelling memories have been used.
The fiery cross and the carrier pigeon are examples where the wood
and the paper serve as memory media.
   In modern electronic solutions the content of the message has to
be conveyed over space by the transmitter and stored in a distant
memory for later retrieval by the receiver. Alternatively it has to be
stored in a local memory by the transmitter for later retrieval by the
receiver. The electronic solutions eliminate the need for transmission
of material, for instance a letter. Even the need for a material exposition
of the message has been reduced when it is presented on an electronic
screen. The telefax is such a solution which represents a stationary
memory. It can both be polled for a message and store an incoming
bulletin. In the acoustic channel a dispatch rider embodies a kind of
travelling memory while a telephone answering machine exemplifies
the stationary memory.
    Finally, an illustration of the use of the mechanical/tactile channel
in the asynchronous remote category can be given. It conveys messages
composed by the Braille system and are read by the fingertips.
Normally this channel is used in a single-directed and passive way.
    In the examples given here, a man to man communication implies
the use of natural channels with their augmentations while in a man
to machine situation it may be discussed if the channel can be termed
as natural. A machine to machine situation includes entirely artificial
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                219


channels and excludes the involvement of acoustic, optic or other
natural channels.




Shannon's classical theory

In his paper from 1948, The Mathematical Theory of Communication,
Claude Shannon presents the foundation of classical communication
theory and differentiates between three conceptual levels: the syntactic,
semantic and pragmatic. As we will see, these levels can be adapted
to all main concepts within information theory, such as noise,
redundancy, etc.
    The syntactic level, the data level, deals solely with the internal
relation and linking between signs used. This includes rules for
building up word and sentences in a formal manner. It is the study
of the logic and grammar of sign systems. Syntactics concerns the
physical form rather than the content of signs. The semantic level,
the information level, is the level of application and of general
understanding of the significance of signs used to relate to things,
actions and the outside world. It concerns the meaning of the signs
and the association between signs and behaviour. It gives the meaning
of the signs for the system's goal. The pragmatic level, the knowledge
level, is the level of the user world, of the personal and psychological
impact of communication. It concerns the role of the signs in
controlling and regulating the function of the system in decision-
making and makes practical applications from knowledge, hereby
forming wisdom. Here questions of meaning, results and value for
 both sender and receiver are actualized. The attribute of meaning to
 a message can only be considered if the receiver is taken into account.
 Pragmatics thus is the study of mutual understanding. Empirics,
 finally, tells us about the physical characteristics of the communication
 media. This can be different communication cannels e.g. sound, light
 and electronic transmission.
   A brief summary thus tells us that syntactics concerns the formalism
used to represent the message, semantics the meaning of the message,
220        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                            Signals




                             Signals

         Figure 4.1 Information processing in human communication.




pragmatics the issue of intentions and empirics the signals used to
code and transmit the message. Figure 4.1 shows the interrelation
between the three levels and the pertinent information processing.
   Meaning and probability are related concepts. Probability is always
probability to somebody. Thus, an interpretant is implied who somehow
constructs the meaning. Every meaning is therefore unique for the
human being interpreting it. The meaning cannot be forecasted by
someone else. In the definition of meaning, it is assumed that both
the source and receiver have previously coded (and stored) signals of
the same or similar referents, such that the messages may have
meaning and relate to behaviour. That is, the used symbols must
have the same signification for both sender and receiver. If not, the
receiver will create a different mental picture than intended by the
transmitter. Meaning is generated by individuals in a process of social
interaction with a more or less common environment. It is a relation
subsisting within a field of experience and appears as an emergent
property of a symbolic representation when used in culturally
accepted interaction. The relation between the symbolic representation
and its meaning is random. Of this, however, the mathematical theory
                          COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                   221


has nothing to say. If human links in the chain of communication are
missing, of course no questions of meaning will arise.
   According to Shannon, all meaning is interpreted outside the
transmission of signals and the transformation of signals into a
"message" is left outside Shannon's definition. His concept of
information relates not so much to what is said as to what could be
said (or is not said). Therefore, information must not be confused
with meaning and has no value in itself. The value of information
comes out mainly in connection with human action or as an indirect
relation. The real value of a message is the amount of work which
has been done by its creator and which the receiver is spared the
effort to repeat.
   The three conceptual levels of communication may be compared
with the three stages in handling a spoken language, implying two
intermediate translations between the outside world and the subjective
reception of information (see Figure 4.2).
   The first level consists of the acoustic pattern taken physically as
vibrations in the air. The second level consists of the various pheno-
mena in the inner ear and pertinent parts of the nervous system. The
third represents the conversion of the information pattern by the brain
into an experience of individual meaning.
   The three conceptual levels of communication by Shannon are
transformed into three related problems. The first is the technical
problem: how accurately can the symbols used in communication
be transmitted? The second is the representation problem: how

                                                              EAR
                                  Outer          Middle


                               mam
                                      m
   JW^V^.                       ML- ! mical 51
                               s Munitions !T~
                                                 Hydraulic
                                                 vibrations
                                                                     Electro-
                                                                    chemical
                                                                    vibrations

    Sound Pressure Wave




            Figure 4.2 The three stages in handling a spoken language.
222        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



accurately do the transmitted signs represent the intended message?
The third is the efficiency problem: how efficiently does the received
message influence the behaviour of the receiver.
    In his work, Shannon explicitly states that the presented theory
relates only to the syntactic level and the technical problem. The theory
thus concerns the probability of the reception of certain signs under
various conditions in the transmission system. Information is an entity
regarded as neither true nor false, significant nor insignificant, reliable
nor unreliable, accepted nor rejected. The coding of experience into a
set of communication symbols and its recall after transmission by
decoding, the very content, is irrelevant and outside the scope of the
theory.
    Although the representation and efficiency problems are irrelevant
for the technical problem, the technical problem is highly relevant
for the representation and efficiency problem. All calculations of
representation and efficiency are dependent upon the precision in
the technical. Whatever its form, the message has first to be received
properly before the content can be perceived.
    In Figure 4.3, the main concepts of Shannon's theory are presented.
The theory is completely general and the communication process is
seen as a transaction between terminals with the sole aim of genera-
tion and reproduction of symbols. It may be applied to a person
communicating to himself (writing a memo) or to an unintentional
interceptor of a message. If humans form parts of the communication
 system, the mathematical theory is relevant only in the technical part
 of the system.


             Coding                                        Decoding




            Figure 4.3 Concepts of Shannon's communication theory.
                   COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                223


   Every message intended to be communicated to someone has a
source. The message which consists of a sequence of symbols from
a certain repertoire is forwarded to the transmitter and then sent
through a channel to the receiver. The receiver is connected to the
destination. In this process the information is first coded and then
decoded. It is thereby assumed that both the source and the
destination have previously agreed on a code with the same or similar
referents, used in such a way that the messages have meaning and
relate to behaviour. In reality, the restrictions of the used codes creates
the reciprocal, intelligible message. The code may be generally known
or secret to prevent interpretation of an outsider. Note that every
message in this communication system has a sender and a recipient.
A message without recipient is inconceivable per definition. Both
transmission and coding take advantage of the spatial, temporal or
other classificatory ordering of the elements carrying the information.
   Not all information emitted by the transmitter in a communication
system is obtained by the receiver. Here, significant degrading
phenomena are damping and distortion. Also, the receiver attains
some information that was never sent by the transmitter. The very
existence of a channel with its noise transforms the message. Noise,
which is always present in the channel, interferes with the trans-
mission, degrading its quality to a greater or lesser extent. The total
influence of noise can be measured as the resulting difference between
the input and the output message.
   In contrast to Shannon's classical theory, modern information
theory makes a distinction between channels of communication and
channels of observation. This is based on the fact that communication
requires at least two persons, while observations and measurements
require only one (nature does not communicate to us with language
or signs).
    In the communication system presented in Figure 4.3, some critical
conditions must be fulfilled for optimum performance.

• According to its intentions, the information source must provide
  adequate and distinct information.
• The message must be correct and completely coded into a trans-
  missible signal.
224            GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



           Human


                       Level 4     paragraph      =    sentence + sentence...

                       Level 3     sentence       =    word + word

                       Level 2     word           =    letter + letter

                       Level 1     letter         =    pulse + pulse

                       Level 0     pulse          =    communication trigger
           Machine

      Figure 4.4 Hierarchic levels of a written message in an electronic channel.



• Taking into account different kinds of noise and the needs and aims
  of the destination, the signal has to be transmitted in a sufficiently
  rapid and correct form.
• Received signals must, in spite of disturbances, be translated into a
  message in a way that corresponds to the coding.
• The destination must be able to convert the message into the desired
  response.

   An examination of the communication itself during the transmis-
sion of a written message will show a general hierarchical structure
of the process. Imagine the short electronic message, 'remember
today's meeting' mailed from one computer to another. To analyze this
message, four levels will be used according to Figure 4.4.
   Pressing the letter R on the keyboard activates a certain binary
pattern generated by the computer, here defined as the zero level.
This pattern is assigned to a particular letter or keyboard function,
now interpreted on the screen as the letter R on the next level one.
When additional letters are formed they build the first word on level
two. Level three consists of complete sentences, eventually building
a paragraph at level four (see Figure 4.4).
   Being occupied only with the first two levels of the hierarchy,
Shannon's theory concerns the binary pattern representing the letters
(coding). Effects of intervening noise occurring in the channel and
the application of redundancy to neutralize the subsequent existing
errors are also dealt with. The hardware is totally indifferent to the
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY             225


choice of letters used. The combining of these letters to create words
is directed not by the hardware but by the rules of the language and
the linguistic customs of the human user who wishes to be understood.
Words are then arranged into sentences according to the syntax of
the language and these in turn may be further arranged in paragraphs
to emphasizing and distinguishing different topics.
    Yet one has to bear in mind that the words are poorer than our
thoughts and our understanding is poorer than the words we use.
Exchanges between different levels of knowledge are necessarily
irreversible and they have different meaning for partners of different
history. Several prelinguistic processes have, however, been completed
before the specific message is chosen and typed out. The origin of
human communication begins on levels far higher than those existing
in Figure 4.4. The move from the highest descriptive to lower levels
clearly shows how certain systematic changes occur.
    Given his background as an electrical engineer, the restriction of
Shannon's work to the technical problem is natural. He must, however,
have been aware of the extreme difficulties present in the development
of a theory for the other two levels. A complete theory of commu-
nication must deal with the structure of the message and its encoding,
communication, decoding, and understanding, of the inherent
meaning. Finally, the theory must calculate how efficiently the
message will contribute towards desired behaviour.
    As we now understand it, classical information theory tells us as
little as does the hardware used about the incorrect choice of words
or use of a vague structure in a sentence. A vague structure may
even be intended by the source and it should be possible to transfer
 every kind of message, even sheer nonsense (genuine or as used, for
 example, in cryptography). Shannon's concept of information therefore
 excludes meaning per se; what is significant is only that the actual
 message is selected from a set of possible messages. How the source
 chooses its messages is irrelevant to the theory.
    Although the concept of meaning lies outside formal information
 theory, the pragmatic aspects influencing information must not be
 forgotten. The concept of information is thus inseparable from that of
 meaning. Meaning is always the meaning for someone, defined in terms
226        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



of the person or system receiving the message. Meaning is a relation-
ship between the message and the receiver and no inherent property of
the message itself. It is thus that meaning can differ from one receiver
to another. We can only attribute a meaning to a message if the
response of the receiver is taken into account.
   Of the many attempts to define meaning in a more formal way,
D. MacKay's (1969) is one of the most useful. MacKay distinguishes
between the following aspects of the term:

— the meaning intended by the sender
— the meaning understood by the receiver
— the common meaning

   He then defines the meaning of a message as its selective function
on a specified set of responses, something valid for all the three aspects.
   Every message is accompanied by certain implicit instructions for
the receiver as to how to interpret it and relate to the sender. This
kind of metamessage is always superior to the pertinent content of the
message and is generally conveyed analogically, for instance by
intonation, facial expression or bearing.
   C. Cherry (1966) points out that the pragmatic qualities of a message
are dependent on:

— Earlier experiences by the sender and receiver
— Present circumstances
— Individual qualities

   While Shannon's theory mainly belongs to the area of communica-
tion, he presents a pragmatic view of the highly abstract concept of
information. The transitory nature of information has traditionally
made it an integrated part of the media used. Separating information
from its material carrier is nevertheless a prerequisite for the under-
standing of its nature. Information is not dependent upon any specific
technology for production, distribution and use. Only when separated
from its technology will information become an adequate measurable
entity.

                                      *
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                227



Basic concepts of information theory

Information theory is concerned with the problem of how to measure
changes in information or knowledge content. It is based on the fact
that we can represent our experience by the use of symbols like the
alphabet, pictures, etc. Generally, we only need information when
faced with some kind of choice. If you know the road to the bus
stop you do not need to consult a map for information. Information,
ignorance, choice, prediction and uncertainty are all closely related.
    Since the establishment of classical information and communication
theory in the 1940s, nobody has, however, succeeded in stating a
general definition of the concept of information. This problem is based
on the fact that information is a relation, not a concrete thing. Without
a context there is no difference between information and noise. What
is noise in one relation may be considered information in another.
Information is a kind of variation pattern, not differing from other
kind of variations. If not coded it must be considered noise. From a
philosophical point of view, matter and energy exist without the
need of observation while information only exists under observation.
The idea of information does not make sense unless there is an
information processor.
    Several conceptions of information exist, often used simultaneously
and in the same context, which is a cause of confusion. Information
is a highly abstract term, possible to interprete in hundreds of ways.
It could be radio signals travelling in the air, light pulses down a
fibre optic cable, sequences of bases of DNA, etc. The literal meaning
of the word is as a rule 'that which determines form'. As commonly
employed its significance is mostly derived from the context in
which it is used. Information is not just information in itself. It
becomes a concept with a content when it is information to somebody,
i.e. as a mental construct. Information is neither matter nor energy, it
is rather an abstract concept of the same kind as entropy, which must
be considered a conceptual relative. 'Amount of information' is a
metaphorical term and has in fact no numerical properties.
    An existential view of information is relativistic and states that
 information per se is something imperceptible. Digital letters, numbers,
228        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



sounds and images are a sequence of zeros and ones, not something
possible to perceive as information. Pure information, like pure
knowledge, signifies nothing at all; it is the context in which it is
employed that gives it existence and value. Information becomes
knowledge only when we decide to put it into use. Without this
transformation, stored information is nothing more than physical or
electronic signs.
   Defined from a societal standpoint, information may be seen
as an entity which reduces maladjustment between system and
environment. In order to survive as a thermodynamic entity, all social
systems are dependent upon an information flow. This explanation
is derived from the parallel between entropy and information where
the latter is regarded as negative entropy (negentropy). In more
common terms information is a form of processed data or facts about
objects, events or persons, which are meaningful for the receiver,
inasmuch as an increase in knowledge reduces uncertainty.
   Information scientists, however, with their more explictit need for
clarity, use some of the terms defined below to measure information
content. Selective information has to do with the number of minimum
independent choices between two equally likely possibilities. This
gives the promise of narrowing the range of prospects about which
we are ignorant. Its measure is a relation between a signal and an
ensemble. Descriptive information is seen as small entities which,
when added together, build up more knowledge about something.
A microscope with higher resolution accordingly gives more structural
information about an object than one with lower resolution. On the
other hand, when an observation gives more precision by better
instrumentation and finer readings (more decimal places), it has
gained in metrical information content. The measures of selective,
structural and metrical information content can be seen as com-
plementary. A simple analogy of their mutual relationship would be
volume, area and height as measures of size.
    Information is always dependent on some physical base, or energy
flow, where the energy component is subordinate to the structure of
variation, manifested by the flow. The structure of variations in the
media used must always remain unaffected by the carrier, however
                   COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                 229


it is chosen. If these variations in some way match the structure of
the receiving entity, a dynamic relation is possible. Information is
therefore a kind of relationship between sets of structured variety and
not a substance or concrete entity.
    Information has also been defined according to what has been
called the infological equation (Langefors 1973). It is represented by the
following formula:

                              I = i (D, S, t)

   In this formula, I stands for the information achieved by an
interpretation process, i, acting on data, D, with regard to previous
knowledge, S, during the time, t, which is available.
   Whatever the definition, information is an invisible agent — such as
electricity in a modern town, tying together all components (personnel,
machines, money, material, etc.). It is the instructions which permit
a system to perform structural or logical work. Information organizes
not only matter and energy but also itself. It has therefore to be filtered,
condensed, stored, transmitted, received, aggregated, integrated,
manipulated, and presented, that is, processed. As best, the processing
is non-destructive and leaves the information

• relevant
• complete
• uncorrupted
• actual

   Decision making and control, regulation and measurement are
affected through information. These processes are based on the fact
that information may be infinite but only possible to organize in a
finite way from a human point of view. All information can be struc-
tured according to the following:

• Category
• Time
• Location
• Alphabet
• Continuum
230        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Of course, each choice has many variations but the main
alternatives are still basically five in number. If we take as an example
a book going to be part of a library, this demonstrates that when a
structure is used, the book is easily recognized.
    Category in a library means the main topic according to the content
of the book. Such topics are fiction, history, philosophy, etc. Time in
a library sense is the printing year of the book, while location is its
physical position on one of the shelves. Alphabet is the arrangement
of the book stock in alphabetic order, both with regard to the author's
name and the title. Continuum is the current newsletter presenting
all recently acquired books in the library stock. Traditionally, libraries
have used all structures simultaneously, well aware that each way of
organizing information will permit a different understanding. The
possibility of multiple perspectives is a good approach when the aim
is to extract maximum value and significance from information.
    A special problem is information unconstrained by package in the
form of books or journals e.g. in the Internet. There it is copied and
added into a continuous process like the ongoing adaptation of stories
in the oral tradition before literacy.

                                      *

Information, exformation and entropy

Apart from the above-presented perspectives on information, two
views are predominant among researchers. The mathematical/
statistical view is primarily used in connection with telecommunica-
tions and databases to quantify and measure channel and storage
capacity for information exchange and processing. This concept has no
epistemological aims to explain the nature of information. It was used
by Shannon and Weaver in their pioneering work. Here, information
is defined as a measure of freedom of choice when selecting a message.
Their concept of information must not be confused with meaning.
Meaning can be defined as the significance of information for the
system which processes it and has to be measured by units other than
those normally used in information theory. Meaning does not relate
to the symbols used, rather to what the symbols represent.
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY             231



   The information physics view states that information is an implicit
component of virtually every equation governing the laws of physics.
Information is a property of the universe and it does not have to be
perceived, to have meaning or to be understood, in order to exist.
Several well-known researchers has mathematically stated the relation
between matter, energy and information. Einstein presented the
relation between matter and energy in his formula E = mc 2 . The
connection between energy and information was described by Szilard
(1898-1964) and between matter and information by Bremerman
(1965). Bremerman also suggested an upper bound on the rate at
which symbols can be processed by matter, "Bremermans limit". This
limit was defined to 1047 bits/gram/sec. and is founded on the fact
that the speed of light cannot be exceeded. The reasoning presupposes
that one photon is considered equivalent to one bit. The information
physicist Tom Stonier (1990) has published some theorems concerning
the interrelationship between matter, energy and information. Some
may be regarded as quite revolutionary by classical information
theorists. Freely interpreted they are as follows:

• All organized structures contain information, and — as a corollary
  — no organized structure can exist without containing some form
  of information.
• A structure that is rich in information tends to lack pattern (a
  random set of figures cannot be condensed into a simple set of
  instructions, so it has a high information content).
• The addition of information to a system manifests itself by causing
  a system to become more organized, or reorganized.
• An organized system has the capacity to release or convey
  information.
• Heat is the product of energy interacting with matter. Structure is
  the product of information interacting with matter.
• The information content of a system is directly proportional to the
  space it occupies.
• Time, like entropy, is inversely related to information. The greater
  the interval between two events, the less the information content
  of the system.
232        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Energy may be converted into information or be used to convert
  information from one form to another (information transducing).
• The more highly organized a system is, the more its information is
  separated from the energy that bears it. (Information should not be
  confused with the matter-energy markers which bear it.)
• Information cannot be stored in a system in thermal equilibrium.
  (With time, the printer's ink in the individual letters of a book will
  diffuse away until a homogenous state is reached).

   Organization may thus be expressed as the manifestation of infor-
mation interacting with matter and energy. When added to matter it
exhibits itself as structure or organization; consequently organization
may be regarded as stored information. But the stored information into
a crystal is, however, practically non-existent as it is a simple, regular
array of atoms with a periodic structure.
   Information may not only organize matter and energy, it may
also organize information itself. From that it follows that the less
organized a structure or process is, the less information is needed
to describe it completely. A totally disordered state needs only a
few bits of information to describe it. The thermodynamic steady-
state of a gas can be completely described simply by giving its
temperature and volume. As a system approaches steady-state, it
loses information irreversibly. On the other hand order is created
by reducing complexity. Furthermore, information is everywhere,
but knowledge only exists within a goal-seeking adaptive system
consisting of goal-seeking subsystems.
   A modification of the information content of a system always
results in a corresponding change of its pertinent entropy and a loss
of organization is always associated with an increase in entropy.
Such a change may be brought about through the alteration of its
organization or its heat content. The function of additional heat may be
to stabilize the organization and minimize externally induced entropy.
But if all existing heat was withdrawn from a system, its temperature
would be zero degrees Kelvin and also its entropy would be zero. A
phenomenon such as this may be interpreted according to the third
law of thermodynamics (see p. 20).
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY              233


   The expansion of a system in physical space as a result of the
application of energy will not produce change in information, unless
accompanied by change in organization. The information content
of a system normally tends to vary directly with the space occupied
and inversely with the time occupied. Concerning the impact of time,
physical information is time-dependent and does not withstand the
forces of entropy. A system which is more resistant to erosion over
time has to contain more information. The configuration of a physical
system blurs with time and consequently an observation of it becomes
increasingly obsolete.
   Several inventions within the area of human communication enact
information patterns on various forms of energy. Radio transmitters
and printing presses, for example, multiply the information content
several million times.
   Accepting this view of information, physics gives some inevitable
general consequences for the relation between information,
probability and entropy. Information, order and improbability create
the opposite to lack of information, disorder and probability, which
represents entropy. Information is therefore to be considered as an
inverse exponential function of entropy and is sometimes referred to
as negative entropy (or negentropy) by some researchers. As entropy
increases information decreases. As entropy approaches infinity,
information approaches zero.
   These facts explain why the famous Maxwell's demon (see p. 20)
does not disobey the second law of thermodynamics when it sorts
molecules through a trap-door in a closed system. By his decisions
about energy levels, the demon generates negentropy, the local
increase of which is necessarily matched by more entropy elsewhere.
   A paradox revealed by information physics is that as the universe
evolves, its information content increases and it may end up in a state
where all matter and energy have been converted into pure informa-
tion. The main laws of thermodynamics state that the total entropy
in the universe has to increase. Evidently there exist simultaneously
two universal contradictory forces: one entropic, destroying and
levelling out, and one organizing and building up.
234        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



     Another paradox is that meaning and information have very little to
do with each other, just as no directly visible correlation exists between
order and information. The more disorganized and unpredictable a
system is, the more information it is possible to obtain by watching
it. One can never know if a hidden order exists; it may well-exist even
if it is not possible to reveal for the moment. Organization, information
and predictability are thus quite paradoxically interrelated.
    A closer look at the concept of information will reveal some strange
qualities. One is that it is impossible to wear out information. You
may duplicate information in as many copies as you want without
deterioration of the source and moreover mostly without cost. To get
rid of information will on the other hand always involve some cost.
     Unlike the basic entities of matter and energy, information is a
function of the observer as the same message may have different
meanings for different people. Bateson defined information in one of
his books as "a difference that makes a difference" (Bateson 1972).
This difference is dependent on a matter or energy carrier (or marker,
see p. 124), like a written letter or speech with sound waves in which
a pattern appears. It can be observed at the atomic level, in molecules,
in cells, in organs, in groups as norms and in society as culture.
     Information may be measured on the basis of the amount of
surprise, unpredictability or 'news value' that it conveys to the
receiver. Paradoxically, disorder possesses a greater surprise potential
than order. A completely unstructured sequence of letters like
EVSYEDTOQPF is very difficult to describe; there is no simpler
description than the sequence itself. It must therefore be assigned a
maximum of information. A structure imposed on the letter source
will reduce the average amount of information per letter from that
source. Whereas an ordered row of letters, say ABCDEFGHIJKLMN,
holds less information, the combination EINSTEIN can provide a
great deal of information. The latter row has been the subject of more
information processing in the ordering of the letters in relation to a
meaningful context. Its information history is composed of the
knowledge of both the humanity and the whole Western-scientific
culture. Information is extremely context dependent and very often
the real content of a message is read between the words.
                     COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                       235



                          Uncertainty




                                    45'




                                   1
                                               I X
                              |    ,           1\         •
                                            Information

Figure 4.5 Relation between information and uncertainty in a communication channel.



    The reception of information will normally result in a decrease of
uncertainty for the receiver. This process is shown in Figure 4.5. The
slope of the channel conveying the information shows a linear relation
by the 45° angle.
    The amount of uncertainty reduction is dependent upon the
amount of information already held by the receiver. According to
this preexisting information the slope in the figure may have a quite
different angle.
    The communication system with transmitter, channel, receiver,
etc. and its given set of message categories constitutes a closed system.
Information expressed in categories other than those normally used
therefore has a tendency to be interpreted as an error arising from
distortions or mistakes. Information, however, is normally ordered
simultaneously on many levels. The regular effect of communicated
information is surprise followed by uncertainty reduction. Information
which initially increases uncertainty evokes a higher order of surprise
related to a discontinuity in the information accumulation.
    Imagine the optical information system of traffic lights. Each driver
knows what to do when the light shifts to green via amber, but what
if the light suddenly turns blue instead of green? With a shift from one
level of categories or channels to another the reduction of uncertainty
ceases. When the passenger tells you that blue light is a request to
pull over and stop the car in order to let the fire brigade pass (exclusive
236          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                            Channel shift
                                                   Information

Figure 4.6 Discontinuity in uncertainty reduction and transition to a more diverse
channel.



for this town), you say 'Aha!'. A fresh set of categories accommodating
both the old and new is established and the uncertainty reduction
can be resumed. Figure 4.6 depicts graphically the discontinuity in
uncertainty reduction and the transition to a more diverse channel,
all related to the example given above.
    A discontinuity is also possible in a reverse way. Imagine the car
at the red light when it suddenly turns green without showing amber
first. This transition to a less diverse channel poses no problem as the
information received still fits into the basic content of the existing
category and need not be reinterpreted into new categories. Both red
and green retain their meaning (see Figure 4.7).
    The shift between channels of varying complexity is an important
part of the communication process. The involved parties have to
ensure that the channels used are neither too simple nor too complex
for the kinds of message used and they must adjust them as required.
    A message may hold information which, although not present in
the message per se, is comprehended by the receiver through reference
to previously known facts. This is the basis for the concept of exf orma-
tion, derived from external information (Norretranders 1993). It
is information which exists in the head of the sender, is omitted in
the composition of the message and is presumed to be deduced by
                     COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                     237




                           Channel shift
                                                    Information

Figure 4.7 Discontinuity in uncertainty reduction and transition to a less diverse
channel.



the receiver. The intention with a message is primarily to induce the
receiver to form an idea corresponding to that of the sender. This use
of exformation is possible because human beings share experiences
which are possible to interpret through a common language giving the
same associations. The words refer to something not intrinsic to the
words themselves but conceivable in the mind of their user.
    Information is something measurable, expressed by letters or bits
used in the concrete message, while exformation is all that was omitted
or extracted. More information is not necessarily more exformation.
It is therefore not possible to measure the amount of exformation; this
is dependent upon each context. In certain circumstances the omission
or non-existence of a special signal may stand for a complete message.
A phrase like 'silence speaks volumes' tells us that a general silence
may convey a very comprehensive message. The same goes for an
absent daughter, who has promised to phone home over the weekend
if she does not feel well. She has sent a message without a single
signal if she does not telephone. Thus the information content of a
message clearly depends on someone's prior expectations about the
message. With this perspective we are not able to speak of how much
information a person has, only how much a message has.
238        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Empty spaces within the organized structure of a message may
also be highly significant pieces of information. The most frequent
symbol in written English is the space between words which conveys
information until the words are removed and the page becomes blank.
It is the organization and structure of the surrounding system which
defines the information content of existing empty spaces. Spaces as
discontinuity define boundaries of structural entities, but the absence
of structure within a structure can sometimes constitute information
as significant as the structure itself. Therefore, a message not sent is
also informative. The value of information may here be defined as
the amount of work which is performed by the sender and which the
receiver need not repeat.




How to measure information

If information is to be treated scientifically rather than philosophically
it has to be expressed numerically and quantitatively and not be
interpreted as synonymous with meaning. Much confusion is caused
by attempts to identify meaning with the change generated in the
receiver. What is actually sent is not a measure of the amount of
information transmitted. This depends merely on what could have
been sent related to the prejudiced view of the expected message.
    The information content of a message is nevertheless related to
the complexity of its structure. An extensive initial lack of knowledge
by the receiver gives a high complexity of the message. Structural
complexity of the message thus may be used to define the quantity
of information contained in the message.
    As defined by information theory, the concept of information is
merely a measure of the freedom of choice when selecting a message from
the available set of possible messages formed by sequences of symbols
from a specific repertoire. Information thus refers to certain statistical
properties associated with messages that are forwarded in formal
communication systems. In reasonably advanced communication
systems, this set of possible messages may be formed using aggregates
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY              239


of words, e.g. in the English vocabulary. Furthermore, the system must
be designed to convey every possible selection, not only that one
selected at the moment of transmission.
   The information content can be determined functionally using the
difference between the initial uncertainty before receiving a message
and the final uncertainty after receiving it. In this way we get a
working definition of information as being the amount of uncertainty
which has been removed when we get a message. The information
content when receiving a message in one phase is:

    Initial uncertainty - final uncertainty = Total information
   If received in two stages, the information content is defined as the
difference between the initial uncertainty and the intermediate
uncertainty.
Initial uncertainty - intermediate uncertainty = Initial information
   When further information is added, the final information is
defined as the difference between the intermediate uncertainty,
plus the difference between the intermediate uncertainty and final
uncertainty.
Intermediate uncertainty - final uncertainty = Final information
   Quantitative relationships in such stages may easily be added
together. In the above simple equations the terms intermediate
uncertainty cancel each other. Total information again equals the
difference between the initial and the final uncertainty. In this way
the information quantity assigns a value to the content which describes
the complexity of the message and which may easily be added. In
reality, the quantity of information has no semantic meaning. It is
only an index of the degree of unexpectedness of a message carried
by a signal.
   Information may be measured in terms of decisions and its presence
can be demonstrated in reply to a question. The question is posed
because of lack of data when choosing between certain possibilities;
the greater the number of alternatives, the greater the uncertainty.
The game of Twenty Questions illustrates how an object is supposed
240          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




  Figure 4.8 Strategy of uncertainty-reduction in the game of Twenty Questions.



to be identified through answers to questions concerning the object
('yes' or 'no' questions). The strategy of uncertainty-reduction in the
game is easy to recognize in Figure 4.8.
   Let us start with a situation where we can pose a single question: is
the newborn baby a boy? Here it is equally possible that the reply
will be yes as no and when the reply is given no uncertainty remains.
The structural complexity and the information content are thereafter
the smallest possible. The quantity of information contained in the
answer may be defined as one unit of information. In information
theory this is more precisely called one 'bit' of information. The
quantity is derived from the repertoire of the digits 0 and 1 in binary
notation, both assigned equal probability and carrying a content of
one bit. Each question must divide the field of possibilities equally if
one bit of information is to be gained for each reply.
   With two questions, one out of four possibilities may be decided;
with three questions one out of eight and so on. It is obvious from the
examples that the base 2 logarithm of the possible number of answers
can be used as a measure of information. Eight possibilities gives log
2 for 8 which is 3. Thus we have here three bits of information. With
only one possibility there is evidently no uncertainty at all; the amount
of information is zero, as the logarithm of 1 is zero. Using binary bits
as a basic unit of measure, the degree of informational uncertainty
thus can be empirically defined as a function of the number of bits
required for its elimination.
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY               241


    The base 2 is a very natural choice because it comprises the
minimum number of alternative messages in the repertoire of even the
most primitive communication system. An example of such a system
is the old time acoustic fire alarm given by a special tolling of church
bells: ordinary tolling = no fire, special tolling = fire. It is however
unrealistic to expect equal probabilities regarding the messages
contained in the system's repertoire: the no fire situation is more
probable than the fire. The lack of parity between different messages in
a possible repertoire therefore corresponds to the probability of their
selection. The proposed measure of information (log22) must therefore
be revised to include preferences for a certain kind of choice.
    To communicate a message is to transmit a pattern distributed in
time, seen mathematically as a time series. A measurement of infor-
mation is principally related to the regularity or irregularity of that
pattern, but the irregular is always more common than the regular.
A random sequence of symbols shows no pattern and conveys no
information. A fundamental principle of information theory is
therefore that information is characterized by symbols with associated
probabilities of occurrence. Written language, for example, is a
source where the symbols used appear with unequal probabilities
and are statistically linked. Its elements are therefore mainly discrete,
separate and mutually exclusive.
    Between the limits of complete knowledge and complete ignorance,
it makes sense to speak of degrees of uncertainty. The larger the set
of alternatives possible to choose, the more information we require in
order to make the decision. But we must consider not only the range
of choices available but also the probabilities associated with each.
    The amount of information carried inside a message is determined
by its probability in the set of all possible messages. The more probable
the type of pattern, the less order it contains, because order has less
probability and essentially lacks randomness. It is therefore obvious
 that the less probable a message is, the more meaning it carries,
 something intuitively felt. We apprehend the surrounding world not
 on an equal scale of probability, but on a scale which is heavily biased
 towards the new and interesting. As we will see, it is the usualness
 or rareness of the used signs (or frequency) which determines how
242        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



much information they comprise. Generally, the less probability, the
more information. In this context, information is nearly the same as
improbability. Thus: the information content of a signal is the measure of
the improbability with which this signal appears in a certain communication
system.
    Probabilities are by default always less than or equal to 1, because
1 is the probability of absolute certainty and no probability can be
greater than absolute certainty. From that it follows that the amount
of information is determined to be greater than zero when the
probability of the matching event is less than one. If the selecting
probability in a set of messages is 1.0, the message is always chosen;
no freedom of choice exists and no information is communicated. To
conclude: when probability approaches zero, information approaches
infinity; when probability approaches 1, information approaches zero.
    While information combines additively, probabilities taken
independently combine multiplicatively. Thus, the relation between
the amount of information existing in a message and the probability
of that message will be similar to the relation between a set of
numbers that multiplies and a set that adds. Mathematically, the
first set is defined as the logarithm of the second set, taken to an
appropriate base. The handling of logarithms however demands a
suitable scale, determined by a factor, positive or negative, by which
it can be multiplied. A mathematical property of information conveyed
by an event occurring with a certain probability, is that its probability
logarithm has a negative value. The ordinary logarithm of a quantity
less than one is always negative, while information is naturally taken
to be positive. By adding a constant quantity it can be made artificially
positive — a result also given if starting from a value other than zero.
    The measure of freedom of choice, i.e. the information content, in
 a repertoire of two messages with different probability may be
 exemplified by the already mentioned tolling of the bell. If every tenth
 tolling of the bell on average is a fire alarm, it must be assigned a
 probability value of 0.1. All other tolling sequences thus comprise the
 probability of 0.9. Then the information content of a tolling may be
 calculated as:

                -(0.9 log20.9 + 0.1 log20.1) = 0.476 bits
                   COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                 243


    When a particular message becomes more probable than any other,
the freedom of choice is restrained and the conforming information
measure naturally has to decrease. The information content of the
message repertoire does not depend on how we divide the repertoire.
The content of each individual message can be computed individually
and then added to form the total message.
    In applications of information theory it is practical to consider the
letters of the alphabet as the repertoire of available messages (each
letter being a kind of elementary message). The 26 letters of the English
alphabet and the space needed to distinguish between words give a
total of 27 symbols. Equal probability of all the symbols in this
communication system would assign them the same individual
information content of log227 = 4.76, i.e. 5 bits. (Note that every
bit represents a choice between two alternatives and that it is
inconceivable with fractions of choices here.) In reality, however,
they occur with very different probabilities so the average information
content of an English letter is about 4 bits.
    When utilized in a real message the information content of a letter
is still lower, as the English language inherently restricts the freedom
of choice. Constraints induced by grouping and patterning of letters,
words and compulsory redundancy cause the real information content
to be a little less than 2 bits per letter. The probabilities of occurrence
of certain pairs, triplets, etc. of letters are astonishingly constant, just
as are the frequencies of various words. The individual probability of
words and letters seems to have a correlation to their costs in time
and effort when used; the total average cost in a message is generally
minimized. The probability of occurrence for individual letters in the
English alphabet is presented in Table 4.3.
    A deduction regarding the English language is that no word in fact
has to be composed of more than three letters. The number of possible
trigrams are several tens of thousands which is more than enough for
 the words of the language.
    What about ordinary decimal numbers and their information
 content? The decimal notation with its repertoire of ten equally
 probable digits has an information content of log210 = 3.32, i.e. 3 bits
 (rounded, bits are always integers by definition). Therefore, in a
244          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Table 4.3 Individual probability of occurrence of letters in the English alphabet.

                  Letter   Probability    Letter    Probability
                    E        0.13105        M         0.02536
                    T        0.10468        U         0.02459
                    A        0.08151        G         0.01994
                    O        0.07995        Y         0.01982
                    N        0.07098        P         0.01982
                    R        0.06882        W         0.01539
                    I        0.06345        B         0.01440
                    S        0.06101        V         0.00919
                    H        0.05259        K          0.00420
                    D        0.03788        X          0.00166
                    L        0.03389        Q          0.00121
                    F        0.02924         z         0.00077
                    C        0.02758




message any sequence of digits may occur while sequences of English
words occur according to certain rules.
   Both ordinary letters and digits have a shorter notation and a more
comprehensive information content than the binary system. The binary
notation with its equally probable digits of 0 and 1 carries an
information content of log22 = 1 bit and may of course be considered
3 times more excessive than the decimal notation and 5 times more
than the alphabetic notation. But we may easily express every sign
simply by the use of the binary digits 0 and 1 (the working principle
of the computer!). Four digit binary combinations give 16 different
words (24 = 16), six digit binary combinations give 64, and so on.
Every time we add one binary digit to the word the possible
combinations of new words are doubled.
   How about information content and transmission time when letters
and digits are expressed in the old Morse Code? At first sight it is
easy to believe that this code is binary, consisting of dots (the
equivalent of 0) and dashes (the equivalent of 1). But this is an
erroneous thought due to the three spaces included in the code. A
short space (one time unit, tu) exists between the various dots and
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY              245


dashes building each symbol. Between symbols a medium space exists
(three time units) and between words a long space (six time units) is
to be found. The dot itself is one time unit while the dash consists of
three time units. The time units have got their length in order to
optimize the operation of the human ear as a detection and hearing
device.
   Now consider the word TEA which is — •               and gives the
following transmission length:

           T = 3 tu + 3 tu + E = 1 tu + 3 tu + A = 5 tu = 15 tu

   If this value is compared with the length of the same message sent
in a binary code, we will find the same result. A binary code regarding
the 26 letters of the alphabet had to use five bits to define each
symbol. The total time to transmit the word will also be 15 tu. No need
exists for spaces between the letters because the 0 and the 1 are of
same duration and there is no need to indicate when one symbol ends
and the other starts. After every byte (of 5 bits) there is always a new
symbol also consisting of 5 bits.
   Obviously, the Morse Code seems to be as efficient as the binary
code. This is, however, not true as the chosen word is extremely
favourable for the Morse Code. If another three letter word is selected,
say WHY, the same calculation as for TEA shows 28 tu, approximately.
A comparison between the binary code and the Morse Code shows
that the latter, on average, is faster by about 50 per cent. With the
introduction of the extremely fast modern computer, the binary nota-
tion of the alphabet and decimal system has in a short time outdone
communication systems such as Morse telegraphy and teletype.
    It is now possible to take a closer look at the system of traffic
lights presented on page 235. This reveals that with three different
colours, each signal should have an information content of 1,59 bit
(2log 3). This is, however, a little too high. In the used sequences of
consecutive colours, red never comes directly after green or green
directly after red. The repertoire is limited and no random use of the
three colours a m possible. By use of the intermediate symbols of
green-yellow and yellow-red, the information content is limited. After
green, yellow is always presented and after red always yellow, in
246        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



reality red-yellow. But after yellow, either green or red may be
presented. This part in the sequence of signals must be ascribed the
information content of 1 bit.
   To create the highest possible safety and reduce doubtfulness,
redundancy is built into the system by the fixed position order of the
coloured lamps. Red is always on top, yellow in the middle and
green at the bottom.




Entropy and redundancy

The natural increasing of entropy in a closed system has its counterpart
in the decreasing of information. The fact that information may be
dissipated but not gained, is the information theory interpretation
of the second law of thermodynamics where entropy becomes the
opposite of information. A message may spontaneously lose order
during the communication, as occurs in bad telephone lines where a
different kind of noise is present. Words in the conversation are lost
and have to be reconstructed from the significant information of the
context. From this point of view, information decrease is synonymous
with entropy increase.
    The fact that information may be lost by entropy but never gained
is also seen in the act of translation between two languages. The
translation never gains exactly the same meaning as the original. The
translator always has to compromise between phrases that are more
or less appropriate — in either case, some of the author's meaning
is lost. Other sources of entropy are information input overload (see
p. 128) and the importation of noise as banalities (e.g. nonsense
entertainment and background sound effects). All this together will
impair the organization and structure of a given message and thus
culminate in a loss of meaning.
   Earlier, entropy has been mentioned as the degree of disorder in
physical systems. Transferred to information theory, the concept is
used to inform us of the relation between a phenomenon and our
information regarding it. More information is necessary to describe
                   COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                  247


it when entropy increases. Consequently, what is arranged and
structured needs less information to relate and comprises less entropy.
A situation with many alternatives gives high entropy, while a
decrease in the number of alternatives gives a lower entropy. Lower
entropy is also the result when adding information to a system,
something which was mentioned in the section on information
physics. The quantitative measure of entropy, interpreted statistically,
therefore corresponds to the quantitative measure of uncertainty as
defined in information theory.
    Information entropy has its own special interpretation and is
defined as the degree of unexpectedness in a message. The more
unexpected words or phrases, the higher the entropy. It may be
calculated with the regular binary logarithm on the number of existing
alternatives in a given repertoire. A repertoire of 16 alternatives
therefore gives a maximum entropy of 4 bits. Maximum entropy
presupposes that all probabilities are equal and independent of each
other. Minimum entropy exists when only one possibility is expected
to be chosen. When uncertainty, variety or entropy decreases it is thus
reasonable to speak of a corresponding increase in information.
    It is possible to calculate empirically the relative entropy of a certain
language. An attempt to do this with the English language would need
to begin with a study of its construction. Existing combinations of
letters with their probabilities can be evaluated by using a dictionary
 as a starting point. If the word INFORMATION is used we may state
 that it has been chosen from a repertoire of 26 letters in 11 successive
choices. With equiprobable letters, every choice represents an entropy
 of 5 bits and the whole word yields 11 x 5 = 55 bits of entropy. The
real entropy is however lower and is calculated according to the
 successive choices presented in Figure 4.9.
    The choice of the first letter is completely free and gives an entropy
 of 5 bits. The second choice is less free and must be made from among
 the 18 letters in column two; the English language does not permit any
 other combinations. This gives an approximate entropy of 4 bits as
 does the third choice. In the fourth choice the possibilities rapidly
 decrease and the freedom of choice of the information source is now
 practically reduced. The last seven letters are calculated in a similar
           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                   I         N   F   O   R   M   A   T   I   O

             A A A
             B /       B
             C /       C
             D         D
             E/        F
             F/        G
             G/        H
             H         J,
            3          K
             J         LJ
             K         1M
            L          (N)
            M           0
            N           P
            O           R
            P           S
            Q           T
            R           V
            S




            Y
            Z


        Figure 4.9 Calculation of entropy in the word INFORMATION.



manner but add very little to the information content. Therefore the
acronym INFO is very often used instead of the full word.
    The final calculation gives an actual entropy of 22 bits. A quotient
between actual and maximum entropy gives 0.4 which is the value
for the relative entropy in this case. Such a value may be interpreted as
if the choice of the information source obeys 40 per cent free-will and
60 per cent compulsion according to the structure of the system. This
component of an average message is what could be guessed owing
to accepted statistical regularities inherent in our use of the alphabet
and is called syntactic redundancy. It reflects the lack of randomness
in our choice of signs or messages and denotes what initially seems to
be superfluous, as we already know the structure of the system (the
language). Redundancy is a richer presentation structure as the
message is conveyed in several parallell ways. A consequence is that
the mass of text increases but also that short messages are more prone
to interpretation errors.
    Redundancy, the opposite of information entropy, is however both
necessary and desirable in human language and is one of its most
                   COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                249


typical qualities. Empirical investigations have shown that a colloquial
language has a redundancy of 50 per cent while a more technical
language has less. The BBC newscast may transmit the following: "The
President of United States, Bill Clinton, has today announced...'. For the
majority of listeners the message is just as intelligible if the first part
is omitted. There is however a substantial technical risk of interference;
a hooting car may disturb the listener. The redundant phrase The
President of United States is therefore wholly functional in the given
situation. Redundancy is therefore potential information, available for
us if necessary.
    Normally we have no problem to interpret AB-ND-NCE -F IN-ORMA-
I-N as abundance of information despite more than 25 per cent of the
letters being missing. Our language may therefore be regarded as
inefficient at first sight; an inefficiency which turns out to be highly
necessary if it is to provide an inherent reliability. A language is
always a compromise between basically inconsistent demands:
precision and security in contrast to flexibility and efficiency. Our
vocabulary is adapted to our everyday needs and we cannot have
words for every special object or event. When everyday need demands
important distinctions, they do, however, exist; the Laplanders have
eight different words for snow in their language while the British only
have snow and sleet. In comparison with the decimal system, it is
obvious that the alphabet contains a large amount of superfluous
information.
    Semantic redundancy is most easily described by the use of
synonyms and paraphrases in natural language. The more extra names
for the same thing, the greater the probability of making everything
clear and avoiding misunderstanding.
    Pragmatic redundancy is defined as the percentage of letters,
words, etc. that can be removed from the receiver's message without
 changing his response. In this case, compare 2027 and the word
 Onethousand-twentyseven. Remove one entity from each group and do
 the conclusion. Total pragmatic redundancy in a message exists if a
 response intended by the sender has already occurred and is not
 repeated by the receiver.
250        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The performance of a certain communication system must of course
be designed according to the existing entropy of the information
source. We must therefore realize the differences between human
communication and machine communication. In communication
between machines it is possible to reduce the redundancy in order to
enhance the speed and efficiency. Technically, a complete reduction of
redundancy in machine communication is only possible in a noiseless
channel. Otherwise every individual error in a certain message would
change the message into another one.

                                      *

Channels, noise and coding

A communication channel is defined as any physical medium whereby
we may transmit or receive information. It may be wire, cable, radio
waves or a beam of light. The destination a n d / o r source may be a
person or a memory device like a tape or a computer disk. As a matter
of physics, the capacity of a channel is defined by Hartley's law as
C = B x T . Ralph Hartley was a precursor to Shannon and his law from
1927 states that in order to transmit a specific message, a certain fixed
product is required. The product (the channel capacity C) is defined
by the bandwidth B multiplied by the time T. For the same message
to be transmitted in half the time thus requires a double bandwidth.
   Two main kinds of channels can be discerned: the discrete or digital
channel applicable to discrete messages such as English text, and the
continuous or analogue channel, long used to convey speech and music
(telephone and LP records).
   To apply information theory on continuous channels is possible
by use of the sampling theorem. This theorem states that a continuous
signal can be completely represented and reconstructed by sampling
and quantifying made at regularly intervals. Sufficiently microscopic
fragmentation of the waveform into a number of discrete equal parts
bring about a smooth change from the continuous to the more easily
calculated discrete channel. See Figure 4.10.
                    COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                    251




                     " o




                     1 o.Ml              l.,,llll, -
                                      Time     ••


     Figure 4.10 Measurement of amplitude samples in a continuous signal.



    A message arriving at its destination may differ both structurally
and functionally from the original because of noise. Thus, information
is always lost to some extent, which means that the amount of informa-
tion can never increase during the course of the transference of a
certain message, only decrease. The existing noise in the channel is a
kind of negative information. It is preempting the selective power of
the channel leaving a residue for the desired signal.
    Structural differences between a message sent and the message re-
ceived are defined as syntactic noise. Examples are when a telephone
call is distorted or when raindrops dissolve the ink script of a letter.
Misinterpretation by ambiguity in the denotation of a message is called
semantic noise. Bad spelling or choice of inappropriate phrases are
typical examples. Pragmatic noise is not produced by the sender but
is everything that appears in connection with the message and
decreases its readability. A bad radio receiver may produce pragmatic
noise.
    However syntactically noisy a message is, it may not create
pragmatic noise and can therefore at least theoretically be received
correctly. A syntactically noiseless message may, on the other hand,
fail its intention through environmental noise disturbing the receiver.
Syntactic and semantic noise may generate pragmatic noise but need
not necessarily do so.
    Messages transmitted in electronic channels are always, to a
greater or lesser extent, affected by certain harmful electrical influences
or transmission noise. Of these types of noise, white noise is the most
252        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



common. It is assumed to be random and non-Gaussian, making the
message and the noise statistically independent. As its elements are
independent of the communication channel it can be relatively easily
filtered out by various technical means. System-dependent, or black
noise, has certain dependencies between its elements. It is non-
Gaussian, often highly non-linear, and cannot be dealt with as
separated from the system and the message. Up to now, the complex
nature of black noise has prevented the development of reliable
methods for its calculation and neutralization.
    One method of solving problems caused by noise is to ensure a
suitable amount of redundancy in the language used. General redun-
dancy can also be achieved by different means such as repetition of
the message, change of channel and form and the use of feedback in
the communication process. Another method is efficient coding, which
will decrease the negative effects of noise.
    The acquisition of information is a flow from noise to order — a
process converting entropy to redundancy. During this process, the
amount of information decreases but is compensated by constant re-
coding. In the recoding the amount of information per unit increases
by means of a new symbol which represents the total amount of the
old. The maturing thus implies information condensation. Simul-
taneously, the redundance decreases, which render the information
more difficult to interpret. Compare with the use of stenography
which considerable reduces the letter content in the translation from
speech to text.
    Information must always be transmitted in some physical form,
which seldom has the same shape in which it is actually created.
Transmissions therefore has to be coded because it is only in a coded
form that the channel will permit the message to propagate. (A
message conveyed without coding would be the equivalent of
telepathy.) The code determines how a succession of symbols
 (numerals, letters, signs, etc.) can be replaced by another, not necessary
equal long succession.
    Choice of an appropriate code for the channel will actually improve
the operating efficiency of the communication system. Optimum
utilization of the channel capacity is therefore a problem of matching
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY                253


a code to the channel in such a way as to maximize the transmission
rate. A further, different reason for the use of codes is secrecy.
    A code determines how a succession of symbols (numerals, letters,
signs, etc.) can be replaced by another, not necessarily equal, long
succession. The symbols used by the code may not be of the same
kind as the original symbols used and all information, even the most
complex, can be coded. Well-known codes are the Morse code used in
telegraphy, the Baudot code used in teletype and the ASCII code used
in the binary representation of computer languages. The transfor-
mation of a message by use of a code, coding, can however only be
carried out for a meaningful message. Transformation of characters
in a message apart from the meaning can only be effected by use of
cryptography. The transformation of a message in order to regain its
original content is called decoding.
    To study how a message can be most efficiently encoded (normally
in an electronic channel) is one of the chief aims of information theory.
Its subarea of coding is however both vast and complicated and only
some of its main principles may be outlined here. Let us however
begin with coding of decimal numerals. Calculations earlier in this
chapter showed that combinations of three binary digits were
inadequate to express the existing numerals. Four binary combinations
give 16 possibilities, a surplus of 6 (see below).

  Binary number Decimal digit Binary number Decimal di
       0000          0             1000          8
       0001
                            i—i




                                   1001          9
       0010          2             1010        unused
       0011          3             1011        unused
       0100          4             1100        unused
       0101          5             1101        unused
       0110          6             1110        unused
       0111          7             1111        unused

    Five binary combinations give 32 possibilities, enough for the basic
letters of the alphabet, but not for all the characters of a normal
keyboard which requires about 50 keys. Here, the use of 6 binary digits
254         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



gives 64 possibilities, a surplus of 14 for a keyboard with no upper
case. To express all the characters of a normal keyboard including
upper case thus requires at least 7 binary digits, which gives 128
combinations.
    If we want to express a three-digit number, there are two different
possibilities. One way is to let the information source select three
times in the basic repertoire of ten digits which gives 3 x 3.32 = 9.96,
i.e. 10 bits. The other way is a choice in the repertoire of existing
three-digit numbers between 100 and 999 which gives log2 900 = 9.4,
i.e. 9 bits. Obviously, the second method is a little more efficient than
the first which in turn is more comfortable for human mental capacity.
Our decimal system is derived from calculations with hands, feet
and a limited short-term memory.
    It is now possible to understand that block coding will reduce the
number of digits used in the binary code when coding both numerals
and letters. In a message, any sequence of decimal digits may occur,
while letters in English words occur according to certain rules. To
encode whole words by a sequence of binary digits is therefore more
efficient compared to coding the letters individually. Here, inherent
statistical laws of the English language give an average of 4.5 letters
per word requiring 14 binary digits or 2.5 binary digits per character.




Review questions and problems
1. Try to give at least five different definitions of the concept of information.
2. What is the difference between a signal and a sign?
3. Linguistics distinguishes between three conceptual levels. Shannon's
   communication theory is relevant for only one of them. Which one?
4. What is the least possible number of questions to be posed to get the
   correct answer in the Game of Twenty Questions?
5. What will happen with a written message without redundancy if one of
   the letters becomes illegible?
                  COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION THEORY              255


6. Give an example how the concept of relative entropy can be used when
   analyzing the English language.
7. Show why block coding of a message is more efficient than individual
   coding of numerals and letters in the same message.
                                 5

                Some Theories of
                 Brain and Mind
• The need for consciousness
• A hierarchy of memory
• Brain models
• A model perspective

'The brain is not an organ of thinking but an organ of survival like
claws and fangs.' (Szent-Gyorgi)



I  n comparison with other animals, human beings are relatively slow
   and ineffective. Our physical strength and general performance
fall far below that of animals of our own size. The human life-span
is also short when compared with such different animals as the
elephant or the Galapagos tortoise which limits the amount of human
accumulated experience. We cannot remain in water for a long time,
or fly; our body can only survive within a very limited internal and
external temperature range and we must have oxygen to breathe.
    We tire rather fast and spend half of our life time resting or
sleeping. During the other half we are mostly hungry and engaged
in eating or digesting food. The range and sensitivity of our sense
organs are also limited; especially in comparison with birds and insects
we are not able to see as far or to detect rapid movements. Our
hearing and smell are inferior in comparison with that of our own
dogs. All our senses are easily saturated by information — not too
much per unit of time and of right kind, please!

                                  256
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                  257


    Psychologically, we are very subjective beings, always looking for
a meaning to our existence. We often compile fragmented data from
our senses to construct an artificial whole, sometimes initiating very
strange decisions and actions. We are excellent at adapting reality to
our personal maps, remembering selectively and putting new facts
into old moulds. Facts are generally interpreted to our own advantage.
What is unknown frightens us and we attempt to neutralize it by
creating myths, rituals and traditions.
    The above description ranks human beings low on the scale of
existing animals but, looking around, we find ourselves to be in
some ways extremely successful. In spite of our shortcomings we
somehow solve difficult problems and make reasonable decisions
in critical situations. Man is apparently something more than a
featherless biped (in the words of Plato) — thanks to his brain with
its outstanding information processing capability. This brain with its
error tolerances is specialized in the weighing of uncertainty and
making creative associations between different objects. It is also special
because thoughts cannot be reduced to algorithms and because it is
not programmed by an outsider. "The brain is merely Nature's latest
means of self-preservation" (Rosh Ashby).
    According to Miller's theory the brain is the equivalent of the
decider and associator at the individual level. In Beer's Brain of the
Firm the decider and associator at higher levels are treated as a
metaphorical brain. In Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis we find humanity
in the role of the huge, global brain of mother earth. Thus we uncover
the idea of the brain function as a concept distributed among
individuals in the higher levels of systems hierarchies. Genetically
specialized individuals fulfilling the role of 'organizational brain' are
not known in nature, although other essential functions such as the
'organizational reproducer' (queen bee) have been developed.
    Apparently, the organizational brain is too important to be located
in one single place as it manages functions directly involving the
continuous existence of the organization. To minimize its vulnerability,
a distribution strategy has been favoured by the development. Thus,
in a sense Lovelock's 'global brain' exists everywhere and nowhere,
something which also may be said of the individual mind. Therefore,
258        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



it is not possible to identify mind in a single part or centre of the
brain. It is the specific mode of interaction between parts of the brain
that give rise to the phenomenon of mind.
    The mind-brain relationship can be exemplified by written
language. No pre-established correlation between a sequence of
characters and its meaning exists but at a given time and in a
given context, a reliable correlation occur. A self-organizing and self-
specifying process is at work.
    When treating the human brain and its information processing,
the traditional body/mind problem is brought to the fore. How can
billions of interconnected nerve cells in a brain give rise to feelings,
thought, purpose, and awareness?
    Regarding the mind, some researchers maintain the eliminativist
position. This tells us that the body-mind problem is no problem at
all. It will simply disappear when brain functions are fully understood.
Others see the mind as an epiphenomenon, a byproduct of physiological
causes where the thoughts relates to the brain as the gall to the liver
or the urine to the kidney. The mind is possible to explain by a
suitable reduction to antecedent physical conditions. This has been
the source of the witticism from generations of lecturers: 'What
is mind? No matter. What is matter? Never mind'. While some
reseachers maintain the eliminativist position (the body-mind problem
is not really a problem at all and will disappear when brain functions
are fully understood), other adhere that it has two aspects, one active
and one passive.
    Usually the active aspect is known as the question of how the
conscious mind by its will can influence the motion of material objects.
How can the mind, if it has no physical existence, initiate physical
changes in the brain? The passive aspect questions how a material
object such as the brain can evoke consciousness. How can brain-cell
activity give rise to subjective experience of an T looking out at the
world?
    The b o d y / mind problem thus concerns free-will, intuition,
creativity and the subjective unity of experience. The body/mind
problem is today often interpreted in terms of quantum physics. The
duality of body and mind reflects the basic duality between wave
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                259


and particle — the origin of our physical existence according to
quantum theory.




The need for consciousness

An important tendency of life on earth is that it resides in individuals
separated from each other. Therefore, in the hierarchy of nature,
consciousness is found at the level of organisms where highly
centralized nervous systems with a brain exist. It is not possible,
however, to imagine consciousness without an existing memory.
Awareness of every kind had to relate certain of its constituents to
earlier, not too short, reminiscences. Experience stored in memory
gives the possibility to evaluate new information without demanding
it to be complete. In very simple terms, consciousness could be defined
as the capacity of a system to respond to stimuli. To respond to
stimuli is to adapt and adaption is a kind of learning which is the
storing of knowledge. The evolution of higher levels of consciousness
with expression of will and decision-making appears to rest heavily
on the pertinent accumulation of knowledge. Consiousness is not
possible to image without the concept of time. Without experience of
time we cannot perform a mental synthesis; without that synthesis
we cannot handle the flow of information.
    The benefit of a conscious mind has sometimes been questioned
from a biological point of view and its existence has been interpreted
as a secondary product of its own work with no special function
per se. A different, but well-known point of view is the classic
philosophical panpsychism which states that consciousness is like
the force of gravity and the phenomenon of electricity, an inherent
attribute of all matter, an omnipresent quality gradually manifesting
itself when matter becomes alive. Consequently, human consciousness
does not differ in nature from consciousness of elementary life forms
 or matter, only in degree and complexity.
     Several quite reasonable perspectives nevertheless state that
consciousness has a strong survival value. To define why it has that
value is however very difficult if you compare human beings with
260        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



early and primitive species such as ants and flies, which have survived
for billions of years apparently without consciousness at all. Thus
consciousness is not always necessary for survival. It has its costs
and in many environments this is too high. In certain milieus where
geographical placing and other environment-variables are important,
the possibility of information processing within the individual life-
span brings about many advantages. There, a brain with consciousness
has its justification. During other circumstances, slower information
processing during many generations is more suited to its purpose.
   It seems, however, reasonable that consciousness has its most
important role in handling entirely new situations where no prior
references exist and difficult judgements have to be made. Con-
sciousness allows for greater flexibility of behaviour than is achieved
by preprogramming for even a wide range of possibilities. The need
for guesses, extrapolations and forcasts justificates the existence of a
conscious mind. The precalculation of possible actions implies no
risks compared with real trial-and-error and increases chances for
survival tremendously. To let bad ideas die instead of ourselves seems
to be the very point of consciousness. An important function of the
consciousness mind is that reflecting on your own behaviour allows
you to predict the behaviour of others. Such predictions in not easy
because human behaviour has built into it certain random variations
of temperament and pattern of reaction which can trigger a fit of rage
over petty incivility. These sudden changes of temperament make us
less predictable and more difficult to exploit. They create a healthy
respect and sensitiveness of hearing in the environment. No doubt,
the most dangerous and fraudulent creature in human environment
has been other specimen of her own race.
   The recognition of other thoughts to measure our own against,
is a focal point of self-awareness. When starting to project into the
minds of others we discover our own mental life.
    Maybe one can emphasize the special biological necessity of
consciousness in connection with an all-embracing global catastrophe.
Human beings may attempt to save their species below the water
surface or orbiting in space until better circumstances return, thanks
to a superior conscious intelligence and prognostic capability.
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                  261


    One of the most popular philosophical arguments for the need of
a consciousness is the antropic principle, presented by John Barrow
and Frank Tipler in 1986. This says that the laws of nature seem
surprisingly well suited to the existence of life. The very nature of
the universe seems to be creative and to include the existence of
conscious beings, fulfilling the basic need for the universe to be aware
of itself. It is in the end through human eyes that nature has attained
the possibility to examine itself. Mind is therefore a necessary social
artefact in both the history of the species and the individual. The
interpretation of the antropic principle that life should arise inevitably
given Earthlike conditions is known as biological determinism. A
consequence of this concept is that there is structure in the world and
this structure is recognized by the brain. The researcher Steven
Weinberg has expressed it in the following way: 'The world is the
way it is, at least in part, because otherwise there would be no one
to ask why it is the way it is.' Furthermore, without the existence of
h u m a n beings, reality would have neither form nor function.
Consequently, the natural laws are designed to allow for the existence
of conscious beings and reality exists as it does in order to create the
proper conditions for human evolution. Our existence thus tells us
something about the properties of the universe but also that the entire
evolution of the universe is reflected in the human brain. As such the
brain has got a built-in moral system to ensure its survival.
    Regarding the antropic principle some followers prefer to interpret
it in a more absolute way, thus coining the idea of a strong antropic
principle. They proclaim that the existing state of the universe is
inevitable and not a result of an accidental occurrence. It is impossible
for us to consider another kind of universe as we could neither exist
in it nor observe it (note the relationship with the interpretation of
superdeterminism in Chapter 1). A corollary of the strong antropic
principle is what has been called Tipler's 'beautiful postulate', namely
that life, having once come into being, will continue for ever.
    It is possible to impose a hierarchy of consciousness among
living organisms from unconsciousness via consciousness to self-
consciousness and omniconsciousness. In a broader context, these
concepts are to be found in the higher existential levels which have
been formulated by Ernst Schumacher (1978).
262        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• The kingdom of minerals
• The kingdom of plants which compared with minerals have life
• The kingdom of animals which in addition have consciousness
• The kingdom of man which, in addition to minerals, life and
  consciousness, also possesses self-consciousness.

   Another ingenious aspect of live and consciousness has been given
by the philosopher of science, Karl Popper (1959). He states that the
existence per se consists of three worlds; the physical world, the
spiritual world with consciousness, and the world of ideas (the content
of the consciousness).
   Apparently, consciousness has to do with the physical complexity
of the brain. A threshhold may exist above which consciousness sets
in. That means that a species with one hundredth of the size and
complexity of the human brain has not one per cent of our counscious-
ness. Consciousness is arguably an all or nothing phenomenon
emerging on a certain level of complexity (regarding critical mass in
the brain, see p. 143). Some biologists state that brain size is related
to the need for animal vision. A correlation exists between brain size
and social group size. The demand for an extremely good visual
system related to social needs initiated the growing of the brain. The
vision plays a main role in social interaction. Recognition of faces
and interpretation of expressions was many times a matter of life and
death. As a group member, the animal had to process an enormous
stream of information in order to be sucessful.
    The possession of consciousness is positively correlated to an
organism's intelligence. This concept can be defined as the capability
to change a pattern of instinctive behaviour through the use of
experience. To do this, an aptitude to discern common elements of
different situations is necessary, together with the ability to store this
capacity for future use. Any intelligent organism processes information
and has the capability to learn. The faster it learns, the smarter it is.
An organism not able to learn cannot be considered intelligent.
Learning itself is the enduring change in knowledge or behaviour
resulting from experience.
    Intelligence is close connected to an organism's ability to perceive
and analyze its environment. The capability to interpret what happens
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                 263


in the environment presupposes that the organism has an internal
model of the world. Such mental representation is possible to change
corresponding to external changes and furnish the capacity to predict
the effects of alternative actions in the future. This reduces the need
for costly trial and error, and enables man to undertake activities that
pay off in the future like planting crops and breeding animals. To
test alternative behaviours mentally is the basis of human ability to
plan ahead, choose between alternatives, invent technology, and
modify the external environment. If this works we have a definition
of higher intelligence. As a matter of fact, the very sophistication and
nature of an organism's intelligence is determined by its environment.
Therefore, it can be measured as a ratio of the organism's ability
to control its environment, versus its ability to be controlled by the
environment. Consequently, it can also be measured as the amount
of success with which the organism is able to create its own positive
environment. Intelligence can only be measured in terms of intelligent
behaviour and is an irrelevance for an organism in a static state.
Characteristics associated with intelligence is thus connected with
mobile organisms while immobile ones lack them.
    Intelligence exists then among both animals and men. A real
difference between animal and man is, however, very difficult to
establish in spite of Schumacher's definition. One concrete difference
between human species and other organisms is, that humans are
able to develop a useful collective memory. This has been done
by development of an oral and written cultural tradition passing
information from one generation to the next. Storing and retrieving
of information has been possible across both space and time. Therefore
cultural evolution with its creation of art, religion, and science become
more important than biological evolution.
    According to the biologist Richard Dawkins (1989) the main
concept behind the cultural evolution is the meme. This is the
intellectual correspondence to the gene which lays behind all physical
evolution. Memes are habits, skills, ideas, inventions or artistic
expressions which are passed from person to person by imitation.
They are the creators of our minds and also the cause of our big
brains (serving to spread the memes). Human brain is the meme's
264        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



copying device and it evolved not to spread genes, but to spread
memes. Like biological replicators as genes, memes follow the laws
of heredity, variation and selection. Worth to note is that the idea of the
meme itself has become a meme.
   Memes are inherited when we copy the actions of others or when
we pass on an idea. Some ideas are true and useful, others are copied
despite being false. Variation (and also mutation) in memes takes
place when we retell a story and small details get changed or
something is forgotten. Selection exists when only certain parts of
received information is passed on to anyone else. Memes which are
clever to copy themselves, for whatever reason, would tend to spread.
Memes which are copied stay with us — the rest die out. The size
of memes can vary within very wide boundaries from some letters
written on a paper to a whole book.
   H u m a n language must be considered a vast system for the
transmission of memes by speech communication. Used as a broad-
casting phenomenon, sound can transfer memes to many people at
once. By the invention of writing and use of the modern alphabet
about 700 B.C., big scale storing of memes was possible. This invention
cannot be overrated and constitutes the foundation for all progress of
the human civilization. It

• preserves the casual speech in an external lasting memory
• separates the speech from the speaker
• renders a formation of lasting concepts possible
• promotes deductions and sequential thinking
• facilitates order and objectivity
• accepts delayed answers

   Both animals and man are strongly influenced by their mental
world of emotions and feelings — the ultimate protective invention
of nature to guard the organism. What the brain decides with its
intelligence is thus motivated by feelings such as disgust or fear. The
charge of the feelings is to manage all the important processes of
thought. A feeling is the mind's way to summarize an extensive,
unconscious mental process. Feelings sum up big all-embracing mental
phenomena which reason and consciousness cannot access. In the
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                265


necessary choice between different alternatives, feelings constitute
the overarching framework which makes such a choice meaningful
instead of irrational. Strong feelings are the prerequisite for value-
based, emotional decisions. Different kind of emotions like joy,
shame, astonishment thus has to be regarded as various aspects of
the internal information processing. The feeling paves the way for
the interpretation of sensations. If not, we would all, have been bitten
by a hissing snake long ago. Emotional states are an integral part of
higher biological intelligence and thus also of social intelligence.
    Some people state that the real difference between man and animal
is embedded in human morality, a purely human capability to
differentiate between good and evil. This argument is not very strong
if one considers what people do to each other in everyday life;
dolphins therefore seem to be absolutely superior in morality (Karl
Marx states that the real difference between animal and man is
indicated by the manner of which man organizes his production). It
is also possible to assert that man separates from animal by producings
his own provisions. To discuss the true location of morality may,
however, be outside the scope of this book. Its origin and function
may only be commented on as one of the significant qualities of the
self-conscious mind.
     A new variation of our ancestors, called homo habilis, the skilled
man, emerged 2 million years ago. At that time the global climate
suffered a dramatic deterioration with a series of ice ages. A main
strategy for survival in an ever harder environment was social
organization. This demanded a better awareness to cope with a quite
new kind of complexity.
     There is a strong relation between the size of the cerebral cortex
and the group size within the species. A big cortex is necessary to
handle complex intrigues and conflicts within a large group. Human
beings are innate mind readers. The skill at imagining other people's
 mental states is a basic capability to avoid dangerous situations
 and remain in life. The language is not in the first hand used in
 communication, but to strengthen the social bond within the group.
 Its main function is to express feelings which are associated to social
 relations. Important is not what is told but how and to whom. The
266        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



informative function belongs to a later part of the development. Time
available for grooming is not sufficient for the big group whereas
one can speak to more than one person at the same occasion.
    An emerging morality became an intelligent adaptation to demands
for an improved sensitivity: to know what was right or wrong in a
new complex situation of agreements, co-ordination and mediation
of knowledge. Ethical behaviour, therefore, is not a luxury but a
necessity in social systems of high density and complexity.
    Morality is founded on a capability for empathy, the com-
prehension of the inner world and feelings of other beings, the very
prerequisite of civilizing (that is, sympathy is to feel for somebody,
while empathy is to feel as somebody). The consequences of individual
actions and their impact on other creatures may thereby be predicted
reasonably well. What is good or destructive for others is thus related
to what should be good or bad for oneself. Symbolic thinking and an
explicit understanding of concepts such as me and you are, here, the
prerequisites. The continuous training in handling this complicated
world of symbols is believed to lie behind the development of the
brain as well as all kinds of moral actions.
    No doubt, the emergence of human language was the most
important reason for this development. By use of a language the
internal, symbolic world could be conveyed to and understood by
other individuals. The language which differ man from the animal
has no limitations. It can describe things which is not here and now
or that which does not exist. It can express the past as well as the
future and communicate thoughts. Spoken language is an entirely
new quality which is above body language. Contrary to body language
it can express a negation, a denial of a kind that it is not raining. Sign
language can express the concept of not but only as a recoding of
spoken language. Animal which communicate by calls can only handle
things which exist in the immediate environment. The capacity to
imagine that which does not exist in the present is a main factor that
 differentiates man from animal.
    A spoken language is governed by the will (Broca's area). But
 disregarding this, it is impossible for man not to communicate. We
communicate both with what we are doing and not doing. Silence is
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                  267


also communication. The calls and cries of animals are, however,
unintentional and controlled by an evolutionary older part of the
brain (below cortex). 'Language may not be the source of the self, but
it certainly is the source of the " I " ' — to quote the British reseacher
Damasio.
    The quality of empathy has, however, an unavoidable complication
in the possibility to exert intentional cruelty in order to reach one's
goals. Moral awareness based on deep emotions gives man the
sophisticated power of both destruction and healing in relation to
his fellow beings. Without these emotions, no values working as
guidelines for action, should exist.
    Returning now to consciousness, it is here defined as the ability
to create an inner mental world, an abstract model of the reality
by use of memory — inseparably connected to perception. This
predictive model is used on the external environment and is constantly
redefined and disregard tuned to the same with growing experience.
Consciousness relates to basic feelings, e.g. pain, contentment, joy
and sorrow. Vertebrates are in general conscious beings, albeit to
varying degrees.
    Self-consciousness is then the creation of active models of a reality
wherein the individual self is included; these models serve for both
explanation and prediction. A self-conscious mind produces alter-
native models, even of a non-existing future. Thus both interpretation
and anticipation of a future built upon various activities is possible.
Self-consciousness gives a freedom of choice and a capability to
manifest one's own will. Such an aptitude which offers the possibility
to determine one's own fate contributes to a tremendously increased
pace of development. While the human brain is the most significant
location of self-consciousness, this is also recognized among the
more developed animals, e.g. chimpanzees and dolphins. Emergent
properties of self-consciousness are the use of languages and artefacts
and time- and death-awareness among human beings.
    Although dwelling in a world surrounded by physical things
created by themselves, human beings mainly exist in the world of
 symbols. A breakdown in this world of symbols can lead to mental
 disorder, serious mental diseases, and is often in the background
268        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



when suicide is committed. Thus mental diseases and suicide are
unknown among other animals.
   The highest mode of awareness, omniconsciousness, is based on
a superior understanding of reality and exemplifies a new stage of
development. It is characterized by some authors and philosophers
as all-embracing and genuinely ethical and representing the ultimate
degree of consciousness achieved by few human beings. Famous
religious personages, e.g. Buddha, are said to have achieved this kind
of consciousness. While this level is difficult to describe adequately
using a lower level language, it can be said to include unity with the
environment without the loss of individuality.
   The personal ego is understood to be part of an eternal, universal
consciousness temporarily residing in the actual body. Persons
approaching this level of consciousness see no reason to assert their
ego. They are not dependent on the surroundings or its fluctuations
and see their own misfortune, losses and criticism of self as real, but
not crippling. To be in this state is to witness one's own actions as
if watching someone else. (The presented stages of consciousness is
sometimes known as ego-centric, socio-centric and world-centric.)
   Apparently, the expansion of consciousness leads to an expansion
into space. The possible merging of individual consciousness into
one single mind stretching from person to person all over the world
has always fascinated both philosophy and science. The resulting
global reservoir of information produced by all mankind is often
called the Universal Mind. That simple forms of consciousness merge
to produce higher forms is part of the evolutionary paradigm (see
R. Fivaz 1989). This idea is also integrated in both the Gaia hypothesis
and the noosphere of Teilhard de Char din (see Chapter 3). The
merging process itself has been the subject for several authors, among
them the cyberpunk Rudy Rucker in his book Software from 1982.
    When discussing concepts of consciousness, the subconscious and
the collective subconsciousness have to be mentioned. These terms
were introduced by the early psychoanalysts such as Carl Gustav
Jung and Alfred Adler and imply that only certain parts of the mind
can be embraced consciously. We can recognize our consciousness
as part of a wholeness. Most often our consciousness is partial, a
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                 269


phenomenon we can appreciate after the interruption of a deep sleep
with significant dreams. Collective subconsciousness is the realm of
the archetypes, the inherited patterns for emotional and mental
behaviour, shared by all human beings.
    Jung and Adler were students of Siegmund Freud (1856-1939)
and based their proposals of the collective subconscious on his
psychoanalytical theories. Scientists have always called in question
the content of Freud's ideas although they must be considered one of
the most famous existing models of human mind.
    Freud's model and the brain where it abides can be presented
metaphorically like a three-floor, two-family building. It has its
entrance in the middle and on both sides there are two apartments
which are mirror images of each other (the two brain halves).
    In the basement, in the brain-stem, we find the fundamental
regulation and control mechanisms which sustain our physical
existence and are inaccessible for the consciousness. There the Id
exists and secure that we breathe, eat and are aware of physical pain.
The blind, preprogrammed functions of the organism, exist here.
    In the first floor, in the limbic part of the brain, we find the I or
the Ego with all its feelings which constantly play off against each
other. Here memory is stored, with its hierarchy of feelings. The Ego
is dominated by the Libido, or the urge for sexual satisfaction. When
the Libido is restrained to realize its urge, a surplus of energy is
generated and canalized by cultural activities, art and sciences in the
process of sublimation. All kinds of talents which are useful for society
are often produced by sublimation.
    In the upper floors, the Superego is lodged in the neocortex. The
very thinking and the all-embracing and controlling reason with
rational decisions exist here. The superego is specially governing the
left half of the brain. The right half is more dominated by the I and
its feelings. The Superego is influenced by two instincts comple-
menting each other. That is Eros, the urge to live, and Thanatos,
the death drive. Here, different incentives together with Eros and
Thanatos constantly struggle for power in the human existence.
The lost alternatives are subconsciously crowded down into lower
270        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



levels where they establish different complexes. They get their
symbolic expression in dreams which can be understood by dream
interpretation. (Freud 1961).
   Dreaming is common to all mammals and fine-tunes "hardwired"
drives and pattern of behaviour with the circumstances of their local
experiences. This takes place in a kind of off-line mode during REM
(rapid eye movement) sleep, which may be considered a virtual
reality simulation by the brain. When this take place, all motor
movements are paralyzed in order to block physical action as fantasy
must be separated from reality. Somnambulism therefore is a kind of
malfunction and sometimes dangerous for the individual.
   The sometimes surrealistic nature of dreams is necessary when
hypothetical situations are to be simulated and kept separated from
factual knowledge (real experiences and prototypical examples). The
brain express itself most often by metaphors. Therefore, persons,
objects, and images do not represent themselves. They are just
metaphors, sometimes with the aim to disguise certain circumstances
for the censor, the superego. Dream symbolism shows remarkable
similarity with other kind of symbolism existing in art, mythology
and religion.
   It is evident that the Freudian model has certain similarities with
MacLean's "Truine Concept of the Brain" presented on page 283.
Interesting is also that Freud's concepts of the "unconscious" show
that no single executive is in charge of the mind.
   A very interesting and somewhat controversial theory regarding
the origin of human self-consciousness has been introduced by the
American psychologist, Julean Jaynes (1976). According to his
bicameral mind theory, the birth of self-consciousness dates back
3000 years. Prior to that, humanity had no concept of an ego or a
personal space of mind within the individual. Of course there were
social structures, a culture, languages and diverse experiences. But in
terms of this discussion man was schizophrenic, instructed in every
movement by insistent voices which were named as gods. Human
action was ordered by the gods, not by free-will; feelings and decisions
were the result of divine intervention.
                    SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                271


   From a psychological point of view, man was bicameral, with
brain chambers corresponding to the left and right hemisphere. Non-
linguistic activities emerging from the right chamber were transferred
to the left by way of voices speaking within the head. Thus no
individual decisions were taken and the responsibility belonged to
the gods. According to Jaynes, the self-consciousness with its ego is
a relatively new human quality, a product of histofic evolution and
therefore changing as time passes. Self-consciousness was not an
essential for human survival; even today we perform the majority of
our actions without being aware of them, e.g. driving the car or
entering the subway automatically. In fact we are very often without
consciousness of our ego without being aware of it. We cannot be
aware of that which we are not aware.
    Of course these ancient 'absent-minded' people were as we are,
apart from the lack of a continuous stream of thoughts, regarding
something else, which characterizes modern man. When something
extraordinary happens modern man becomes attentive; historic man
listened for the internal voice and instructions from the gods. These
gods were no figment of the imagination, they were the evolutionary
side-effect of a language capacity and the real will of the ancient
man.
    Cultural and political revolution, together with the rising
importance of written language, gradually paved the way for human
self-consciousness, which appeared in the form of a metaphor T as
a side-effect of a personal narrative, similar to that presented in the
famous tales of the Iliad and the Odyssey. Noticeable experiences of
the "I" are as follows:

1. Intentionality
2. Self-awareness
3. Reflectivity
4. Ego-experience
5. Attention
6. Choice and free will
7. Experiences related to the unconscious
272        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   New and dramatic insights into the nature of consciousness have
been presented by the American neurophysiologist Benjamin Libet
(1985). His starting point was the summation of the total information
flow passing through our senses. The amount was imposing: the
eyes alone transmit more than 10 million bits per second to the brain
and all senses taken together more than 11 million bits. Experiments
carried out by Libet demonstrated that a maximum of 40 bits per
second was possible to perceive for a conscious mind and that the
normal capacity was about 15 bits. In terms of communication, this
channel capacity, or bandwidth is filtered down to 15 bits per second.
   Such a tremendous reduction of the information flow entering the
brain is analogous to that of switching from a floodlight to a spotlight
in a theatre. You begin by seeing one or two faces on the stage, the
spotlight roams about and something in the background becomes
visible as you become aware. The conscious mind is extremely flexible
but in each distinct moment it is limited to a rather specific area.
We perceive much more than we are immediately aware of, but
we are able to focus attention on whatever we want. Furthermore,
this awareness concerns one sense at a time — compare the reflex to
close our eyes when we want to hear better. This mechanism allows
us to be aware of surrounding impulses without becoming confused
by them — a kind of survival strategy.
   Periodically, the consciousness is shut off. Exactly when we do
not know for you cannot be aware of your own unconsciousness and
remember it afterwards. The consiousness is only something which
is necessary to use when we meet a new situation demanding
advanced thinking and planning. Alternatively it must be actualized
to prevent our subconsious mind to lead us to destruction. Most of
our actions are in fact unconscious. Without a behaviour which
generally is below the threshhold of consciousness, we should not
survive. A constant, conscious reflecting mind is too slow in struggle
for life.
    Libet's main findings reveal the readiness potential of the brain.
He has shown that the conscious will to carry out something appears
half a second after its initiation by the brain. The awareness of the
action is delayed and projected backwards in time, making us believe
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                  273


that our will preceded it. The consciousness is delayed and conceals
this fact for itself by preserving an illusion of instantaneous awareness.
This self-delusion is very practical when it is highly important to
act instantly or instinctively. To react more slowly has to be done
consciously. In both cases we maintain the impression of being in
command of ourselves. The conclusion is the iron rule of thinking
before acting.
   How then will the free-will relate to these findings? Hitherto it
has been considered that the higher an organism climbs along the
scale of evolution, the higher the degree of free-will and hence the
ability to control and influence its own environment. According to
Libet's experiments, awareness arises after the activity in the brain
has started. But it will take 0.2 seconds from the conscious experience
of the decision to its actual execution. Nonetheless, a conscious mind
can stop the action before its execution, i.e. the consciousness cannot
start the action but it may decide that it should not be executed. This
veto function of the consciousness works through selection or choice
as well as control of outcome of the will, rejecting suggestions
presented by the non-consciousness.
   The experienced feeling of self-command is the result of a
sophisticated feedback of sensory data in time. We only cope with a
small part of what we perceive — that part which gives meaning to
the context. The delayed awareness enables us to present an adapted
and coherent view of the world, an adjusted simulation which makes
sense and which we are ready to perceive. Libet's work leaves little
doubt that we are all at the mercy of influences of which we are very
often unaware and over which we have virtually no conscious control.

                                    *


A hierarchy of memory

A crucial step in the development of the human race was the
possibility of using a language. It liberated the individual from the
compulsion to merely learn from his own experience. We became a
new and advanced kind of information processor. Use of natural
274        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



language presupposes an extensive memory, something which in
itself has been a basis for human survival and success. This was also
a big step forward in the ability to construct mental models as thinking
is organized by our language. With language and associated forms
of communication, model building could be shared with other
fellows. All members of a society now could benefit from knowledge
discovered by any individual. It liberated the individual from the
compulsion to merely learn from his own experience. Knowledge
could be accumulated across generations.
    Before the age of general abilities to read and write, the only place
for memory storing and retrieval was in the brain. Memory was
conserved through transfer from father to son and certain techniques
to facilitate this process evolved. The storyteller, who had an important
function as a living memory, used tricks like rhythm and rhyme to
support the process of remembrance. Here we may see the beginning
of poetry and literature.
    Special memory techniques, mnemonics, were invented in
prehistoric times and especially well-known among the ancient
Greeks, who had formal courses in the 'art of remembering'. Central
to every method was the organization of the material to be learned
so that it could be retrieved when needed. Mnemonic systems are
designed especially to impose meaning upon otherwise unrelated
items. The range of techniques used includes the method of places,
where some geographical location is used as a cue for retrieving
items; the method of associations, where simple associations are
sought between each of the items, connecting them into a meaningful
story; and the method of keywords, where otherwise unrelated items
are linked to numbers.
    People with a special talent for remembering, who are said to
have an eidetic memory, have always existed. They are noticed in
the literature because of the problematic consequences of remembering
literally everything that they come in contact with. Since 1991, persons
with extraordinary good memory has met in the World Memory
Championship in London. The competition has ten different areas.
One is to remember the face and name of 99 unknown persons.
Another is to remember the sequence of 4500 binary numbers. A
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                275


third is to remember the sequence of 52 playingcards shown in five
minutes. In "random words" the participants have fifteen minutes to
remember as many words as possible from a list and render the
succession correct.
   Paradoxically, memory researches have found that winners of the
contest in most cases do not have a special intelligence or talent.
Instead, their capacity depends on motivation and purposeful training.
Their memory also seems to be limited to a certain area of knowledge.
   With the invention of memory supporting artefacts and the art of
writing, it became possible to store information and knowledge
outside of the human brain. Human memory and intellect could be
released from the task of remembering and be used in the creation
and development of knowledge. In a sense, the invention of written
language indicates the birth of science.
   A more precise analysis of the many aspects of information will
establish the nature of what really should be remembered and stored
in the various kinds of memories. The following terms are used quite
differently, depending on context and intention:

— capta
— data
— information
— knowledge
— wisdom

   The arrangement can be seen as a continuum, whose parts lead
from one to the next, each representing a step upward in human
cognitive functioning.
   If a basic event in the surrounding world is registered as a change
in the state of a sensor (for instance a neuron) it makes sense to speak
of capta. This change may be preserved for a certain period, being
experienced for example as a lingering sense of heat. When some
rules, comprehensible for the observer, are applied to organize such
basic representations of events, data is generated (singular datum).
Numerals and the alphabet are such representations and the heat can
be expressed on a Celsius scale. Naturally, data can be recorded and
presented quite mechanically, without the perception of living beings.
276         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Data reaching our senses and making us aware that something
has changed or is going on is said to give us information. By infor-
mation is thus meant human interpretation or processing of data.
This implies that it had been fitted into categories and classification
schemes or other patterns. Then we have cognitive or physical
representation of data about which we are aware. In other words,
we have been informed. After the interpretation, information is
emergent in relation to data. This is why information cannot
be quantified, in contrast to data.... Assigning meaning and
understanding to information by use of higher mental processes and
further systematization and structuring makes it possible to speak of
knowledge. This in turn may be transformed to wisdom when values
are included in making judgements.
   Poets and philosophers have always been aware of the delicate
intrinsic nature of the continuum and the borders of its parts. T. S.
Eliot says:

              Where is the life we have lost in living?
        Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge?
      Where is the knowledge we have lost in the information?
                                                        (T. S. Eliot)

   A hierarchy of memory, capable of storing relevant parts of the
continuum or intelligence spectrum presented above, will have the
following shape:

• Genetic memory, existing in the genes.
• Immunity memory, existing in antivirus cells.
• Accumulated experience and knowledge, stored in the brain.
• Written information, stored on various materials.
• Magnetic and optical information, stored in databases.
• Encyclopedias, books, paintings etc. stored in libraries.
• Metainformation, stored in universities, museums, gene banks,
  nature reserves, etc.

   From this hierarchy it can be seen how different levels of living
systems expand their memory capacity. While the cell stores its
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                 277


information in the genes and the organism in the brain, the group
uses certain common instructions, calendars and almanacs. On the
organizational level we find information stored in archives and
accounts, whereas the national and supranational levels store their
metainformation in valid laws and conventions. The main memory
of the phenomenon of science must be considered to be the university.
Culture must also be considered a memory wherein humankind has
stored its increasing knowledge.
    The memory expansion depicted in the hierarchy is only possible
if a parallel development among memory artefacts take place. In
reality it has always been an interaction between memory and its
artefacts. Advanced artefacts make possible advanced information
processing and vice versa. This interaction, made possible primarily
through a capacity for language and writing, and the extension of
images far beyond personal experience and lifetime, is a main driving
force behind the exponential increase in the speed of h u m a n
development.
    The memory artefacts began with Sumerian cuneiform-inscribed
clay and evolved towards pigment on papyrus, parchment and paper.
Also, stone and ropes were used to store information in the cultures
of the Scandinavians and Incas. During the Middle Ages, paper was
the main storage medium, first as paper rolls and later as books. In
 the 19th century, photographs and phonographs became available
 and in our own century film, shellac and vinyl records and a great
 variety of different magnetic and optical media have become available.
    The main storage medium is nevertheless still paper. Our paper-
 bound cultural heritage has always faced sudden serious threats and
 we are now facing the risk of a collective memory loss through the
 decomposition of the paper. Before 1850, paper was a high-quality
 product and the raw material was taken from rags. After 1850, the
 wooden-fibre content increased — a raw material which now has
 begun to fall apart in an accelerating self-destructive process.
    This problem may be compared to the destruction of Venice, which
 implies another collective memory loss. The buildings there now tend
 to slowly fall apart due to the diminishing ground-water level and
 the beautiful faces decompose due to acid rainfall. There are no natural
278        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



counter-measures to these problems and the consequences are very
difficult to forecast.
    A third example of collective memory loss occurred in Alexandria.
It is said that more than 1 million papyrus manuscripts in its large
library were destroyed in AD 48 by the Roman Emperor Caesar. This
is considered to have delayed European development by at least one
hundred years.
    Human evolution that was earlier governed by genes is today
governed by ideas due to the accessibility of a huge collective
memory, but also due to the extension of human sensing capabilities
by artefacts. Examples of such artefacts are the telescope, the
microscope, the telephone and so on. The principles behind knowledge
accumulation and augmentation of mental capability presented here
may be called noogenetics (from the Greek noos, meaning mind)
to distinguish them from the ordinary biogenetic development.
The noogenetic equivalent to biogenetic mutations are new ideas,
inventions and works of art.

                                      *

Brain models

The human brain uses about 20 per cent of the body's energy but is
just two per cent of its weight. In proportion to the body mass, the
brain is three times as large as that of our nearest relatives. It has
more than ten thousand million neurons, interconnected by means of
a thousand times this number of synapses. Due to the speed
with which biological membranes function this gives around 1016
interconnections per second. This is around one billion times faster
than today's most powerful network computers. The most complex
interconnective communication system in the world is the global
telephone system — carrying only 1011 calls per year.
   For some reason or other the human race emerged with this brain,
oversized in performance compared to the needs of the bodily
functions. This extra capacity was the basis for the extremely
complicated nerve functions necessary for verbal communication. The
                    SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                279


richness of internal interconnections enables the owner of the brain
to use symbols and therefore permits the development of a language.
   The human brain has between 10 and 100 billions neurons and
each of them are interconnected with 1000 to 20000 other neurons.
The number of possible interconnections between them thus exceeds
the number of existing atoms in the Universe. As a survival instrument
adapted to the world surrounding us, the brain therefore probably is
the most complex system which exists in the universe (with the
exception of the universe itself?) because it can form a representation
of the enormous complexity of the surrounding world.
   Today, a common belief among brain researchers is that the more
the brain is used the better it will work. Intense use will cause the
branches, called dendrites, in the neuron to grow. Dendrites are
rootlike projections connecting the neurons. A typical neuron receives
input signals from tens of thousands of other neurons. The more
dendrites, the more interconnections promoting information transfer
between different parts of the brain. Although divided into areas,
each with a specific function, the brain processes information mainly
in the same way in all of these areas.
   Studies of the brain have shown that the length of dendrites may
vary by as much as 40 per cent between different individuals. A most
intriguing finding is that those who pursue intellectually demanding
jobs have longer dendrites than those who do not. Two possible
explanations for this phenomenon are: intellectually challenging life-
styles cause dendrites to grow longer or having long dendrites leads
people to live intellectually challenging lives. The first alternative,
considered to be the most plausible, has received support through
experiments with animals: rats raised in 'enriched' environments have
been reported to show changes in brain structure.
    A widespread attitude among researchers is that the brain is so
complex that it will be impossible ever to embrace its whole function
and capacity. A classic paradox formulated by the biologist Lyall
 Watson is: 'If the human brain was so simple that it was possible to
 understand its function, human beings would be so simple that they
 could not understand it.' It is a common view that the brain is a
 system which cannot be worn out; the brain grows with activity and
280        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



will only be better by increased use. It is also assumed that we
normally use only approximately one per cent of its total capacity.
   The brain's storage capacity is literally astronomical and researchers
believe that it can store every impression during a normal life-span —
with plenty of room left over. This statement that the brain can store
every impression it has come in contact with applies to either of the
two halves of the brain (or one of the two co-operating brains); like
other essential mammalian organs, such as kidneys and lungs, it is
duplicated. But unlike other doubled organs where each half of the
pair works on equal terms, the brain pair is individually specialized
with an established internal hierarchy.
   The left brain seems to be specialized in serial information
processing, while the right works primarily in parallel. Verbal
processing and writing via letters, words, sentences, sections and
pages is typically assigned to the sequential and analytical left side.
Associative work seems to be assigned mainly to the synthesizing
right side. Typically, this side processes more than seven elements in
a very short time. It also recognizes musical patterns and chords and
discriminates pitch as well. It discerns the form of the whole from its
parts and recognizes complex visual forms (pattern recognition).
Accordingly, two different kinds of information input may be treated
simultaneously, compared and co-ordinated by both halves, thus
creating a substantial and all-embracing impression. Functional
differences between the left and right side can be listed as follows:

Left                Right
— Verbal            — Preverbal
— Analytic          — Synthetic
— Abstract          — Concrete
— Rational          — Emotional
— Temporal          — Spatial
— Digital           — Analogue
— Objective         — Subjective
— Active            — Passive
— Tense             — Relaxed
— Euphoric          — Depressed
— Male              — Female
                    SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                281


    There is also strong evidence that women have a better integration
of the halves than men.
    When the two halves of the brain become separated by accident
or brain surgery (split-brain), the result is the emergence of two
personalities, both with their own information sources and individual
self-consciousness. Experiments with such persons involving screened-
off vision show that an object held in one hand cannot be compared
with a similar object in the other hand. There are simply no
connections between the two eyes. When the artificial shield between
the eyes is removed the two personalites are joined again to a single
personality. The separated hemispheres have simply so many
secondary interconnections via the brain-stem that their activities
once again can be co-ordinated.
    Within our Western-culture an old tradition of analytical and
rational thinking is coupled with a need for adequate expressions in
speech and writing. The capacity for artistic work, intuitive thinking
and creative fantasy is often seen as something less essential for both
personal and societal development. From that point of view the left
side dominates, sometimes creating the typical modern rational
personality (sometimes with a touch of neurosis). For a harmonious
development of the personality, society and its educational system
must assign equal significance to the capacity of both left and right
brain halves.
    When discussing the over-arching organization of the brain, a rare
quality existing in certain people must be mentioned. Known for
more than 300 years, it is called synaesthesia and can be described as
a multisensory integration in the experience of the surrounding world.
Persons with this quality have a sensory crossover which makes them
able to experience words, sounds, smells, sensations, etc. as coloured.
The experience is involuntary and cannot be suppressed. Those
with this faculty find their experience quite natural and can rarely
understand that this mixing of senses does not occur in others.
    Apparently, synaesthesia is a normal brain function in mankind
but, for some reason or other, its working reaches conscious awareness
only in a handful of people. It suggests that the brain has some kind
 of co-ordination centre where recall is reconstructed from numerous
282        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



fragments of memories, stored separately, but accessed in an
integrated way.
   One of the best known concepts of the mind, called the parallel
distributed processing (PDP) brain-model, is embraced by several
neuroscientists (see D. Rumelhart 1986). According to this model,
intelligence emanates from the interaction of a great number of
interconnected elementary units, the neurons. This slow and noisy
apparatus performs real time processing the only way possible: by
working massively in parallel. Such a working mode means that a
sequence, requiring millions of cycles if it were to be processed in a
serial way, is done in a few cycles in a network of a hundred thousand
highly interconnected processors.
   In this model, the brain work is regarded as a statistical process;
no specially important areas are commanding the decision-making
procedure. Decisions are made through co-operation between
independent units, the neurons, creating reliability in turn through a
huge statistical sample. Under these circumstances brain control is
distributed, working in consensus but with no specific precalculated
solutions. This kind of system is adaptive and flexible, constantly
configuring itself to match the actual input. Although this process
has neither classification nor generalization rules, it acts as though
such rules were present. Learning itself results in a modified but
more durable coupling density and a reconfiguration of the neural
network, called brain plasticity, a kind of self-organization. The
interaction of the brain with its environment, together with the existing
genetic information leads to the formation of new information. It is
thus possible to say that the brain reprograms itself, creating thereby
the very foundation for memory, learning and creative thinking.
Supporters of the PDP model often say: 'There is no hardware and
no software, there are only connections.'
   Generally, human information processing is dynamic, interactive
and self-organizing as well as superior in optimization and adaptation,
a non-serial task. Also, it is robust and not too sensitive to inaccurate
data; it handles incompleteness, ambiguity and false information very
well. More specifically, in PDP-model terms the basis for these good
qualities is that knowledge is globally stored in the existing network
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                 283


or structure and is continuously available. Essential information exists
as frames or schemata, which are stored in flexible configurations
offering the automatic supply of missing components, in a process of
continual adaptation to meet the situation at hand.
    Another key concept of the PDP-model is gentle degradation.
PDP does not know a critical amount of neurons when the network
stops working. All parts may be seen as redundant and a damaged
brain has a diminishing capacity corresponding only to the area of
injury.
    A special theory concerning selective mechanisms in the brain has
been presented by Gerald Edelman (1987). It is called neuronal group
selection (NSG) and is founded on the notion that many brain
processes operate by natural selection, a kind of neural Darwinism.
Also, processes governing brain formation and growth are of the
NSG type. In the developing brain, specialization of cell function is
determined by the characteristics of the other surrounding cells in
which it finds itself. Cells of a developing nervous system tend to
migrate to brain areas favourable for their further specialization. The
selection unit is a number of neurons called the neural group, more or
less specialized to respond to a certain pattern of input. Different
groups may have the same input pattern but their reaction will differ
a little according to internal structure and relation to other groups.
Some groups are strongly specialized to react in a defined way to a
certain input and are said to have repertoires. Primary repertoires become
established shortly after birth and do not change. Secondary repertoires
are established by change of connection strength between and among
primary repertoires due to the situation at hand and are therefore in
 a constant flux.
    Stable repertoires emerge by reorganization of old neural groups
 from other, less stable repertoires, and result in something new and
more appropriate. In this reorganization a constant competition takes
 place between the groups resulting in a growing repertoire and
 stronger intergroup connections.
    Besides the PDP-brain model, several others are well-known.
 Especially relevant here is the triune concept of the brain presented
 by Paul MacLean in 1972. According to this theory, the brain is
284        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                 Figure 5.1 The triune concept of the brain.




organized in three main hierarchical layers, arranged with the oldest
in the centre surrounded by the others, like the skins of an onion.
The human brain is a complicated web of these layers superimposed
on to each other according to the different evolutionary stages. It is
reminiscent of a thousand-year-old town where old and new buildings
exist side by side. Each of us thus carries the history of the whole
biological evolution in our nervous system. The three main stages are
presented in Figure 5.1.
   The oldest layer, the instinct layer, is also called the reptilian
brain and provides basic reflexes and instinctive responses. It can
be characterized by aggression, rituality, territoriality and social
                     SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                 285


hierarchy. The next layer, the emotional layer or the limbic brain, is
the location of feelings and the important drive for altruistic behaviour
such as the care of offspring. The third layer, the thinking layer or
the neocortex brain, is capable of manipulating abstract symbols; it
can analyze, associate, imagine and plan. Here is to be found the
location of the essential human quality of intuition.
   If the reptilian layer has a certain degree of consciousness, the
limbic may be considered to be conscious and the neocortex wholly
self-conscious. Unconsciousness and consciousness, old information
and new thus exist side by side in a development similar to that of
the city. The general function of these layers may be summarized
thus: reptilian as biological, limbic as emotional, neocortex as
intellectual. The co-ordination of all three layers defines what can be
described as the human mentality.
   A simplified anatomical drawing showing the three layers is shown
in Figure 5.2.
    "The reptilian brain stands for the figures and roles which underlie
all literatures. The limbic system brings emotional preferences,
selection and development of the scenarios into play. And the
neocortex, finally, produces on this substrate as many different poems,
tales, novels and plays as there are authors" (Jantsch 1980).




                    Figure 5.2 Layers of the human brain.
286        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Earlier we have stated that a prerequisite for consciousness is
the existence of a memory. Apparently a memory residing in a
conscious brain has no storage limitations. During a lifetime each
individual gathers a tremendous amount of knowledge and experience
for their own benefit. With the development of basic aural and
visual communication, this knowledge could be transferred to
other individuals to a certain extent. With the advent of a language
among higher animals, communication was suddenly raised to a
superior level and both knowledge and skill began an exponential
accumulation. The nature of language implies an overwhelming
communication desire as a guiding motive for human life. For humans,
an existence without communication with kinfolk is something
unthinkable.
   However, when self-conscious beings became aware of their own
mortality they realized the problem of memory loss. The possessor of
the memory sooner or later dies; its content is thereby lost. Another
problem was the h a n d l i n g of the memory content: retrieval
mechanisms were by no means on a par with the unlimited storage
capability. An example of how knowledge could be conserved and
transferred to following generations is the traditional storyteller who
is both a memory bank and a conveyor of its content. To preserve
knowledge and to transfer it between different generations, the ancient
storyteller acted both as a memory bank and a conveyor of its content.
   The above-presented brain models are mainly of a structural nature.
One of the interesting functional models, the brain resource model
introduced by Matti Bergstrom (1991) is based on a theory concerning
the attitude of humans towards their the own brain. It is not possible
to apply the same view on the brain as we do upon other human
organs, such as the stomach, the liver, etc. The brain is the only part
of the human organism which studies itself and this implies inevitable
consequences for inherent values. These values cannot be excluded
when studying the brain; without their application in human morality
and ethics there are no qualities which may be called human.
Furthermore, our values, coupled with feelings and fantasies, are
necessary for the development of a healthy personality. The brain
                    SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                287



resource model does not discriminate between values and knowledge,
between subject and object.
   The growth of the brain is considered to be dependent upon an
adaptation to an ever-more complex and demanding environment. A
homogenous environment with no sudden changes permits survival
with a small brain and an uncomplicated nervous system. The
transformation of the planet, with shrinking oceans, formation of
new land, severe weather changes, natural disasters, etc. demanded
something more. Survival during these circumstances had to be built
upon an improved capacity to receive, store and handle information,
mirroring a more complex environmental structure. With this
perspective, the brain is simply seen as an interface between the
environment and the internal world of the organism. Its purpose
vis-a-vis the organism is similar to that of the skin: to adapt to and
protect from the environment.
    The brain-resource theory takes a very pragmatic view of the old
mind/body problem. The mind embraces not only the abstract world
belonging to areas like psychology, sociology or philosophy, but
concrete physiological nerve processes as well. The 'wholeness' of
the system is the mind and the different physical parts of the body.
This view is exemplified by thermodynamic concepts: pressure,
volume and temperature — macroscopic entities describing the
wholeness of a system, but which are not possible to locate anywhere
in a gas. The same goes for the mind, which it is not possible to
pinpoint at a certain place in the brain.
    In so far as the thermodynamic view has made possible both a
demystification and a reasonable explanation of the complex concept
of mind, it has been adopted into neurodynamics. Complex nerve
systems with astronomical quantities of simultaneously propagating
signals are not possible to analyze in terms of single pulses; the
only way to understand such a mechanism is through a statistical
approach.
    One of the most significant qualities of the brain is its value
function. This may be defined as the capability to choose and arrange
knowledge according to an internal scale. Information and knowledge
288        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



have no value of their own but are assigned a value as they become
ordered and sorted. To assign values is to control and process
information and to create negentropy, the opposite of entropy.
Information overload, a serious problem in our current society, can
never be handled with more information; a value should be designated
to that which exists. To choose, evaluate and see a wholeness is the
very core function of the human mind. A value-free science, for
example in the nuclear area, is something of a paradox, when
generating sophisticated knowledge to be used in an arms race and
to promote chaos and potential destruction of the whole world.
    A defective value function is always more critical than the quality
of the adopted values. Children often reject a school culture
overloaded with value-free knowledge which is so apparently without
meaning for themselves; they turn instead to the hard gang morality
and simple reward system of the street.
    Another significant resource of the brain is its creativity function.
The origin of creativity is found in the chaotic signal pattern of the
brain stem, which acts as a random generator for new ideas if not
restrained by social constraints. Some of these ideas may reach and
influence the ordered levels of the brain, the neocortex, where a
sudden change of mind occurs and is experienced. This mechanism
may be functionally illustrated by catastrophe theory as a sudden
and abrupt change when new ideas are born.
    Our contemporary Western society does not support creativity.
General social standardization, passivism and information pressure
all too often restrain activity, spontaneity and the important work of
the brain's random generator. The striving for a successful planning
of our future also delimits creativity. To accept creativity is to lose
the possibility of planning even the not-too-distant future. While
creativity implies new and unpredictable knowledge which can lead
to an unpredictable world, it also offers a strong survival value for
adaptation to the future. Finally, creativity demonstrates how disorder
and chaos are prerequisites of order and harmony.
    A further consequence of the brain-stem as a chaos generator is the
general human fear of the unknown. The unknown internal ego and
the unknown external unbounded world have slowly been mastered
                           SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                      289



                                 The unknown internal




                                        ART
          Behaviour                     l"Me"[    Human strategy against fear
                                    KNOWLEDGE
        (art, knowledge)




                                 The unknown internal

Figure 5.3 Art and knowledge counteracting human fear (from Bergstrom 1991).



by the strategy of art and knowledge. Figure 5.3 shows how these
concepts counteract the fear of the unknown in the human milieu.
   Another key concept included in the theory is the potentiality of
the brain. This term indicates that if one of the existing possibilities
is realized by action, the others disintegrate. The responsibility
inherent in each action is therefore tremendous; other worlds which
are possible are destroyed when a choice is made. This dilemma has
traditionally been solved in the Eastern countries introspectively, by
decreasing external actions and increasing the internal potentiality of
the brain. Could fewer actions instead of more be a more effective
way to tackle this dilemma in the Western world as well?
   The two competing states, the random and chaotic associated with
the brain-stem, and the fixed and ordered linked to the cortex, are
the two bipolar extremes of the brain. The simultaneous existence of
chaos and order in complex, dynamic systems, however, tends to
organize the content in a middle way in some kind of dissipative
structure. It seems reasonable that such structures are generated in a
self-organizing process of the brain, creating a new and relatively
stable order. A large amount of dispersed information is suddenly
joined to an integrated whole — a new idea, paradigm or method is
born.
   The brain hologram metaphor has been suggested by a number
of scientists, including Carl Pribram (1969). A hologram (from the
290        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




              Figure 5.4 Interference pattern in a pond of water.




      Figure 5.5 Pattern reconstruction using a fragment from Figure 5.4.




Greek holos, whole) is a kind of photographic image, created by
illumination of a laser beam and has the following properties.

• The image is three-dimensional; it may be viewed from many
  aspects.
• A part of the hologram may be used to reproduce the whole image.
  The resolution of the whole image decreases as the area of the part
  decreases.
• Images can be superimposed and also individually recovered.

   The holographic effect is the result of an interference pattern. To
explain this phenomenon, let us take the analogy of three stones
dropped in a pond of water. The resulting three circular wave systems
produce an interference pattern as shown in Figure 5.4.
   The pattern holds all information concerning the position of the
dropped stones. A fragment of the pattern is sufficient to reconstruct
the whole wave system (see Figure 5.5).
   A holographic photograph is created by use of a laser light split
into two beams. One beam shines directly on the film while the other
is reflected from the object to be photographed. Unlike ordinary
                    SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND               291




                   Figure 5.6 Holographic photography.




photographs, the result is a blur covering the whole negative. This
blur is a kind of interference pattern and when a laser beam is
projected through the negative, the object reappears at a certain
distance away from it. Different parts of the object are brought into
focus by changing the viewing position (see Figure 5.6).
    If images from a number of objects are stored, reflections from
each item act as references for the others. Thus, one object may be
used to recall another — a kind of associative memory.
    An examination of the area of the human brain concerned with
vision shows that it possesses holographic qualities. When a piece is
cut away, nothing specific is lost from the field of vision. What
happens is that the wholeness is seen less distinctly. The ability to
see whole scenes without decomposing them into features, or to
filter out special items from a homogeneous background are also
holographic attributes. To discern a particular face in a crowd of
people or to recognize a certain voice among all other vociferous
voices in a cocktail party are typical examples.
    A neural hologram may be imagined as a propagation of waves
of dynamic neural activity. It should be obtained as a result of
interference of neurons between two patterns. One sent directly acting
on the near end of dendrites and one slightly delayed acting on the
far end of dendrites. The input information is thus both distributed
and redundant by the property of mutual convergence and divergence
in neural pathways.
292        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Of course, there is no sign of a complete correspondence between
the real hologram and its neural equivalent. As an explanatory theory,
though, it may shed light on certain processes of the working brain.

                                      *

A model perspective

In the past many models of the mind have been constructed in an
attempt to explain the phenomena of emotion, learning, perception
and behaviour. None of them can however disregard the basic
connection between the development of the hand and the brain.
Freeing the hands by two-footedness made the brain able to grow.
Without the use of hands there would have been no invention and
manipulation of tools, no evolution of writing and consequently no
information storage and tradition. It is important to realize that the
brain belongs to the body. Without a body, it is unrealistic to state
the existence of a mind.
   During the 19th century, brain-models were dominated by
analogies of mechanical, thermodynamic and even hydraulic
processes. Most were dualistic, founded on the old Western thought
that the body was a machine controlled by the brain, while the mind
was separated from the body (and the brain). Between the world
wars, electric brain metaphors like the telephone exchange were
predominant.
   Since the 1950s, most models have been associated with the
sequential computer with its central processing unit. The brain-mind
distinction got its metaphor in the hardware-software distinction.
Theories concerning the mind become materialistic by stating that
physical and chemical properties of the brain, together with pertinent
processes were enough to explain the mechanisms of mind. Thus a
material phenomenon, the brain, created the immaterial mind.
   In the 1990s, the perspective has changed again and the parallel
computer, programmed as a neural network is the most current
metaphor for the working brain. This metaphor is often discussed in
cybernetic terms as the brain uses both positive and negative feedback
in managing, for example, sensorimotor control. Such duality is
                      SOME THEORIES OF BRAIN AND MIND                    293



uncommon in most ordinary control systems, due to the risk of
instabilities, but is combined highly successfully in the brain. Positive
feedback is used in a feedforward control course to predict what
happens next, while negative feedback makes small corrections within
the movement.
   Today, most biologists seems to take a materialistic, reductionist
view of the phenomenon of the mind. Its existence is the emergent
properties of chemical and physical processes from a sufficiently
complex control system in a living organism. The material base
consists of neurons, interacting with other neurons to a certain extent
randomly. This interaction creates information patterns existing in a
context beyond ordinary time and space. Therefore, most researchers
agree upon a distributed mind, occupying the total area of the brain
where all elements are of equal importance.
   The view of a distributed mind can be extended further, to the
whole of the organism. The brain is part of a nerve system existing
everywhere in the body. Thus consciousness exists ubiquitously,
although on many different levels, throughout the whole organism,
suggesting an extension of the distributed-mind perspective.




Review questions and problems
1. Discuss whether the traditional body/mind problem still can be considered
   relevant.
2. Can consciousness always be considered to have a strong survival value?
3. What is the relationship between superdeterminism and the strong antropic
   principle?
4. How does the problem of free-will relate to Benjamin Libet's findings?
5. Why can the invention of written language indicate the birth of science?
6. What is the difference between functional and structural brain models?
7. Use of the hands is considered to be a main factor in the development of
   the brain. Try to explain why.

                                     #
                                 6
                Self-Organization
                 and Evolution
• Evolution as self-organization
• Basic principles of self-organization
• Some rules of the game
• The city
• Climate and weather
• The economy

'Order is not pressure which is imposed on society from without,
but an equilibrium which is set up from within.' (Ortega y Gasset)



A     n important quality of what we call dead matter is that it
      organizes itself. It transforms itself into states of higher order
and escapes chaos under its own power if the flow of energy is
strong enough. The universe has demonstrated its predisposition
to create structures in all scales and kinds from snowflakes to
galaxies, stars and planets. Overall, it is possible to see a trend
toward increasing sophistication, complexification and functionality.
From its very beginning, the universe has gone through a process
that in the general sense is similar to that of the origin of life. A
sequence of evolutionary events is structuring the universe where
each emergence is the starting point for the next one in the next level.
Order arise naturally from the laws of physics and chemistry. It
emerges spontaneously from the molecular chaos and is identified
by system growth. This phenomena is not to be found in a certain

                                  294
                     SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                  295



individual piece but in the overall dynamics of its collective behaviour.
"Organization generates organization".
    Atoms strive for a minimum energy state by the establishment of
chemical bonds with each other, thereby organizing themselves into
patterns knows as molecules. Photons sometimes spontaneously group
themselves into a single powerful beam where every photon is moving
in lockstep. When water vapor condenses and form droplets or when
water freeze, a basically formless state is transformed by a phase-
transition, creating structure and complexity. A hurricane organizes
itself, driving the wind and drawing rainwater from the oceans by
the steady influx of energy from the sun.
    Nature thus prepares the condition for the complex self-
organization known as life. This phase transition take place if
one get beyond a certain threshold of complexity like genes in a
developing embryo which organize themselves in a certain way to
make brain cells or muscle cells. The process of creation is no longer
to be seen as an isolated incident but rather like a continuing and
still unfinished phenomenon. If the chance to create life was a truly
random event, one would have to wait far longer than the lifetime
of the universe to see even a single useful protein molecule. The
same goes for the creation of a planet, suitable for the existence of
life. Life is part of nature's compulsion for self-organization.
    Life has passed through distinct stages of biological evolution
(prokaryotick and euaukaryotic life, asexual and sexual reproduction
as well as prebiotic stages). Certain physical principles interconnect
these events and it is possible to see how organizational complexity
increase with time. The driving force behind the evolutionary changes
is that the biosphere constantly become forced away from a normal
state of dynamic equilibrium by internal or external transformations.
    In the living world, all evolution is irreversible when everything
goes from less ordered to more ordered states. As time pass, amoebas
has evolved into animals but animals never turn back to the stadium
of amoebas. The proceeding towards increasing differentiation,
increasing structural organization, increasing complexity and
increasing integration never stops. Evolution goes from dependence
to relative independence of the environment and to greater and
296        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



greater autonomy of individuals. Finally, a greater and greater
consciousness is established. The highest states of order known at
present are living systems and their collective superstructures, the
ecosystems. Thus spontaneous self-organization generate much of
the order also in large, complex, and apparently random systems.
   Self-organization can be ascribed to all kinds of natural systems,
from physical, chemical, biological, psychological to cultural. Self-
organization is everywhere and is possible to see by looking from a
proper perspective. Complex adaptive systems in the natural world
can be seen as elements acting in parallel. In a brain the element are
nerve cells and in a cell they are organelles like the nucleus and
the mitochondria. In an embryo, the elements are cells, and so
on. The coherent behaviour in the system arise from competition
and cooperation among the elements. No one plays the role of an
organizing master. As they gain experience, all these complex adaptive
systems constantly re-arrange and revise their building blocks. The
human brain (like all more advanced brains) organize and re-organize
its neural connections when learning from experience (See p. 282
regarding brain placticity) Marketplaces respond to changing
technological development, changing lifestyles and preferences,
immigration and the price of raw materials. Organizations promote
individuals who work well and often change their structure for
greater efficiency. National states build new alliances and species try
to survive better in a changing environment just as industries and
corporations try to do.
    Self-organization also exists in many different phenomena like
immune systems, stock markets, traffic flow, urban developments,
social behaviour of termites, weather conditions, etc. Regulation in
these systems arise through the interaction of positive and negative
feedbacks.
    With this background, it is evident that self-organization can be
used as a term for a category of related although not identical concepts
like autopoiesis (see p. 60), synergetics, self-reference and deterministic
chaos. It may be regarded as a theory about the way chaotic systems
organize themselves and attain order. As such, it can be considered
a general theory and explanation framework for the sciences and an
 unifying paradigm.
                     SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                297


   To study the fields of self-organization and evolution allow us to
understand how systems emerge from unstructured aggregates of
components and how variation and selection take place at different
levels and between different, co-evolving systems. Also how these
system are regulated by rules that are generated by themselves,
thereby showing autonomy. Self-organization enfolds general
principles that extend beyond the boundaries of classic areas like
biology, physics and chemistry. Hereby, it may enhance our means
for a better relation with both the natural and social world. The
strategies found in nature how to build complex self-organizing and
self-reproducing systems might provide guidance on how to design
better social organization and for other purposes that we consider
important. Finally, to study self-organization make us not assume
central causes where none exist. As designers, we can then omit to
impose centralized control where none is needed, letting the system
govern itself as much as possible.
   Once upon a time, the German philosopher Schelling lamented
"Why is there something rather than nothing?" It seems reasonable
to state that self-organization is part of the answer.




Evolution as self-organization

The most fundamental evolutionary mechanism is natural selection
working together with genetic variation, a kind of decentralized
biological trial-and-error method. By definition, selection is the very
opposite of randomness. It implies that some qualities are preferred
(those enhancing survival) while others are avoided. It reduces the
number of possibilities and therefore variation is held in check by
selection. Genetic variation works with sexual reproduction, making
offsprings similar to their parents but different and often better.
   Reproduction may vary genetically from parents due to different
combination of genes or sudden mutations. If the new variant is
better adapted and more successful, it is more likely to have more
offspring who eventually takes over the population. In the interaction
298        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



between evolving systems, this simple mechanism generates extremely
sophisticated processes of diffentiation and integration like them in
societies and big organizations. Also, the dynamics of information
transmission and storage may be considered one of the drivers of
evolution. Life is dependent on the ability to process information and
to make complex transfomations of it to produce action.
    All kinds of evolution is a kind of adaptation to prevailing
circumstances. An organism that is too rigid in its responses will
quickly be overrided and wiped out. One that overreacts will spend
too much time in coping with constantly occurring crises rather than
getting on with living. A good trade-off between the two extremes
keeps the organism alive and healthy.
    A significant human way of adaptation to new circumstances is
mental modelling. It relies on pre-processed analyses which have
been stored for future reference. When needed, these are used as
pattern-recognition tools to recognize a situation compatible to one
which previously had been solved. We test possible adaptations
mentally and then try them out in practice, choosing the best for us.
If apparently successful, it will be adopted by others and reproduced
throughout the population by memes until replaced by something
better. Adaptive problems not wholly understood by individuals,
may sometimes be solved by human inventions like markets and
governments. Left to itself, a market will distribute consumer goods
and satisfy human need without conscious intervention from a central
control unit.
    The Darwin theory of evolution based on natural selection may be
considered a theory of self-organization but also learning. Learning
occurs wherever evolution is, even if artificially. Evolutionary theory
which tells how replicative systems propagate in space and time and
how properties and strategies are passed on to a successor organism,
includes self-organization. This process can only take place above a
certain complexity threshold and requires that the system is fed by
high-value energy and exports entrophy.
    Normally, evolutionary progress creates different kind of
interaction between systems. Living creatures do not only optimize
themselves against the environment which often change slowly, but
                     SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                299


also against other creatures. Competition and cooperation always
exist. As time passes, new ways to interact and cooperate are
generated and tested. Both number and size of cooperative phenomena
increase. Living creatures increasingly coordinate their actions on
behalf of the group rather than entirely act in their own individual
interest. But genuine cooperation can only emerge where evolution
has found out how to build organizations out of self-interested
components. Only individuals who pursue their own interests will
act in the interest of society. This phenomenon is well-known e.g. in
economics as "the invincible hand".
   An inevitable effect of interactive evolution are deceivers which
undermine cooperation by taking the benefits provided by the
cooperators, without cooperating in return. Such deceivers will always
be a part of all kinds of cooperation. Only the appearance of adequate
control systems can keep selfish abuses in check. Such kind of control
can be a manager that takes control of a group for purely selfish
purpose, but in the end promotes cooperation that is to everybody's
benefit.
   Natural selection alone will, however, only be able to enhance
cooperation between living entities which are limited in space and
time. Cooperation between complex organizations of the largest scale,
e.g. between different empires, apparently does not work, which can
be learnt from history.
   Evolution has coordinated molecular processes into cells, cells
into organisms and organisms into societies. Life itself originates from
the formation of cooperative hierarchical organizations. As living
creatures, humanity cannot keep from going forward. Our visions
cannot be withstood although we cannot foresee the consequences.
Even evolution itself has evolved and improved the ability of
evolutionary mechanisms to discover more effective adaptations.
Living processes get smarter at evolving. Self-interested human
individuals benefit from building cooperative organizations of greater
scale and evolvability.
   Some researchers, for example, John Steward (2003), state that
cooperation extends over increasingly large spans of space and time.
The potential for beneficial cooperation will not be finally exhausted
300        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



until all living processes are organized into a single entity, that is, of
the largest possible scale. It will end only when all matter, energy
and information in living processes of the universe are totally
interconnected into a cosmic super-organism.
    A main point among Steward's arguments is that needs and
wants implanted in us by our evolutionary past no longer will produce
the behaviour that is optimal for the future. When old hardwired
motivations and emotional responses clash with a new reality in a
global, nuclear world, they threaten our future. It is not easy for us
to modify our motivations and dislikes. Instead of changing ourselves
we continue to chase positive reinforcement for our internal reward
system, making the evolutionary adaptability of humanity seriously
limited. Humanity now must free itself from its biological and cultural
past. These limitations had to be overrided by new spiritual software,
enabling us to become self-evolving organisms with a superior level
of cooperation.
    From an evolutionary point of view, there is no contradiction
between the material world inclined to run down according to the
Second Law of Thermodynamics, and the organic world seeming to
wind up in evolution. It is possible for the Universe to increase both
its organization and its entropy at the same time. Here the separate
arrows of time have joined forces and are pointing in the same
direction forward. The direction of the evolutionary time's arrow is
forward, never backwards. The second law is transcended by the
existence of life, living upon the free flowing energy between the sun
and low-value infrared radiation reflected by the earth into deep
space (exporting waste as entropy back to the environment).
    It is, however, worth to note that self-organization is only one
possible route of evolution. Systems may produce order out of
seemingly randomness but also degenerate into chaos with
degradation and errors as well. Errors have their own value in
preventing too tightly bindings in coevolutionary relationships
when runaway death spirals occur.

                                      *
                      SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                 301


Basic principles of self-organization

Self-organization may be defined as a spontaneous process of development
of an organized structure in open systems far from equilibrium. A slightly
different definition is: "The evolution of a system from random
initial conditions into an organized form in the absence of external
pressures". It may be taken as the opposite of construction.
   Systems which are self-organizing acquire their new structure
without specific interference from the outside. Starting from a random
or homogenous state, large-scale patterns are spontaneously formed.
There is no external influence or separate control unit that effects
a change which may be of a spatial, temporal or functional nature.
The process is irreversible, reflecting its chaotic and non-linear
origin. It is organization without an organizer, coordinated without
a coordinator. Things happen spontaneously without apparent cause,
something which is called non-causality. Self-organizing system are
said to be creative as new structures and models of behaviour are
"invented". All complex, self-organizing systems are adaptive as they
try to turn what happens to their own advantage.
    What all these complex self-organizing adaptive systems have
in common is that they show a kind of dynamism that make them
qualitatively different from "dead" systems which are only
complicated. They are always in transition, unfolding with building
block at one level combining to new building blocks at a higher
level. Typical features characterizing self-organisation are:

• No external control
• Complexity
• Instability
• Fluctuations
• Hierarchy building
• Phase changes
• Adaptation
• Redundancy
• Self-maintenance

   Basically, it is a kind of evolution triggered by the system's own
inner dynamics. For self-organization to occur, the system must be
302           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



neither too sparely connected with most units independent, nor too
much connected so that every unit affects every other. In the system,
the parts and components are interconnected in a nonlinear fashion
by a complex network of feedback loops. From a mathematical point
of view, this can be described by a set of nonlinear equations.
   Complexity and order can arise, on its own, by self-organization
from simple parts governed by rudimentary laws. Complexity and
emergent properties occur when many of these components interact
simultaneously. The complexity lies in the organization of the
components. The evolution of self-organization normally exhibits a
distinct and routinized path in a kind of repetitive, cyclical process.
   First comes a long period of stability followed by a short period
of strong fluctuations or chaos. From there the systems re-emerges to
a new level of structural stability and order in a sudden jump called
bifurcation. With this move, the previous and alternate steady states
cease to exist. It has been followed by reorganization with more
complexity and less redundancy.
   In Figure 6.1, the chaotic stage, bifurcation, phase transition and
the new steady state phases are shown.
    A condition for self-organization is that the system is fed by high-
value energy and exports entropy. Adding energy to a system, often
in the form of heat, tends to drive it to a critical state, "on the edge
of chaos" (Waldrop, 1992). It is the delicate balance between forces of
order and forces of disorder. In "the edge of chaos", one finds the
complexity that makes life and mind possible. At this point, a small
change can either push the system into chaotic behaviour or lock it
into a fixed operation. When conditions are right, small chance events


          Socio-spatial
          configuration
                           instability   instability
                             chaos         chaos

          -    ^   ^   A    /   ^    ^

                                                              — — • Time

                   Figure 6.1 Distinct phases of self-organization.
                      SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                  303


are magnified and building up gradually amplified by positive
feedback. The energy contribution tunes the development of the
system and gives something to react to. Once in a critical state, tiny
perturbations may have enormous consequences and change the
system in a moment under the influence of multiple positive feedback
(see the butterfly effect, page 74).
   The result is often a phase transition to a new state with further
hierarchical levels and increased complexity. Sudden sweeping
changes are a key characteristic of systems at the critical point. At
that point structure and interactions matter more than the properties
of the elements in the system. An interesting fact is that critical systems
seem to have a disproportionate number of large events, while less
dramatic ones follow normal distributions.
    In living systems, an ensemble of functions organize the enslaving
of what will be a subsystem. It is released by internal variation
processes or fluctuations starting at certain critical values of a system's
control parameters in which its components organize themself into a
new pattern. It is a complex dynamic process emerging from one
unorganized state to an organized one with time. The outcome is
characterized by new, emergent properties transcending the properties
of the constitutive parts at each new level of complexity.
    Obviously the concepts of order and organization is associated with
self-organization. A distinction between order and organization is
that order is a pattern whereas organization is a process. Organization
is also thought of as being for something. Order has to do with the
quantity of information in a system, while organization defines the
quality of that information. An ordered state increases the rate of
entropy production and thus stress reduction. The greater the energy
flows in a system, the greater the order. Generally, more ordered
systems have better resilient to damage than less ordered ones.
    Fluctuations can be demonstrated by a visual stimulus pattern
according to Figure 6.2. During fixation, rosettes are created at various
locations which in the next moment are decomposed.
    Another quality of self-organization is autocatalytic or self-
amplifying processes. They may be understood as simple feedback
loops where the same operation is iterated or carried out repeatedly.
304        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



             •*%••% » « " » ^ I * , r • » * ; » » • " • * • » # " ^ « - • » • » * : » » • » * »••




             * \ - I • * * , - V « » } - . * %• I * • < • » ' * * , - \ » I */«V



       Figure 6.2 Continuous perceptual fluctuations in a visual pattern.



   The formation of a self-organizing structure can be considered the
opposite of a normal design process which basically proceeds from
top down to bottom. Self-organized structures originates from bottom,
leading to a hierarchy where higher levels show new qualities of the
system. Although complex, the process may result from interactions
among simple elements. Thus, macroscopic levels depend on
microscopic interaction.
   All self-organizing systems are open systems, by a continous influx
of matter/energy and information. This implies that such systems
are built against a surrounding disorder of much higher probability.
Their emergence may be understood in a three level model according
to the figures below, where the first visible stage of self-organization
is a kind of spontaneous pattern formation, denoting rudimentary
information processing. Consequently, systems which are unable to
organize themselves exhibit no sign of information processes. Systems
in balance or equilibrium, by definition, do not self-organize. Neither
do chaotic systems which have no memory of the past. The system
has to be in a critical state, just at the edge of chaos. Above this
threshold, tiny changes can have very long-lasting effects.
   When the critical point is attained, the properties of the individual
elements cease to matter and the interaction take over. Once started,
the process generates order, making use of energy for performing
work, depreciates it and removes the resulting entropy. See Figure 6.3.
                            SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION             305




                                                                •   o
                                                                    <




                                     low-entropic energy

        self-organization

                              H H I l high-entropic energy

        Figure 6.3 Emergence of order with energy/information flows.



   In Figure 6.4, sensors and effectors has been created and self-
reproduction occurs. Regulation by the use of feedback mechanisms
exist.
   The third level of the model is shown in Figure 6.5. Here advanced
information processing takes place and a capacity for self-recreating
exists. The system is regulated by sophisticated negative and positive
feedback. Its stability is generated by reproducible relations among
the component. This permits a withstanding of internal and external
instabilities or disturbances.
   Self-organization mainly take place episodically, in spurts, with
intermittent bursts of activity, something defined as punctuated
equilibrium. This process is possible only if the system has evolved to
a complex critical state far from stability and take place over a long
transient period without external influence. Sudden evolution, not
gradual change, are typical for the emergent phenomena of self-
organization.
   How million of years with slow development was interrupted
by intermittent burst of activity can be seen in the "Cambrian
306         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                                r                                           >
                                            Generation of order
                                             Self-reproducing


                    r               >




                                                                                                        RESPONSE
                                                                    r                ^




                                                                                              SIGNALS
                        using

           IE       LxX\\\X.\XXXX\>^.




                                                                    •
        H | c o l       sensors                                         using
        CO I g l
                    L               J
                                                                        effectors
                                K                                            )
                                                                    V                    )



            u
       self-organization
                                    1   H    low-entropic energy



                                            high-entropic energy

        Figure 6.4 Emergence of order, self-reproduction and regulation.




                                        Generation of order
                                        Self-reproducing
                                        Self-recreating


                                               gaining     I - co
                                                                    / getting        \       CO         Z
                                                                    v\WX\\\\\\\\ W                      o
                                                                                             IGNA




                                                                                                        1-
                                                  W         ,|
                                                                     wisdom                  CO
                                               knowledge     °3                                         o
                                                                    V                ;                  CO




                                            low-entropic energy

       self-organization
                                            high-entropic energy



Figure 6.5 Emergence of order, self-reproduction, self-recreating and advanced
regulation.
                    SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                307


Explosion". At that time, about 500 million years ago, a sudden
proliferation of new species and families took place.
   Systems approaching a complex critical state can, however, evolve
into severe instability or catastrophe instead of a new organized
structure. A general study of evolution shows that catastrophes are
inevitable in biology, history, and economics. Even if we can explain
with utmost precision what has happened earlier, we are not able to
predict what will happen in the future. The same dynamics which
produce small everyday events also give birth to large catastrophic
happenings. Quite contrary to what is usually believed, large and
dramatic events do not need a specific reason for their explanation.
They take place without any outside intervention like extraterrestrial
impacts. A meteor hitting the earth and causing one of the regularly
occurring mass extinctions, merely represents a triggering event. The
stage was already set in the previous history which had transformed
the ecology into a critical state. A certain rate of mass extinction
seems to be essential for evolution. "Without death there is no
progress".

                                  *

Some rules of the game

Many systems have specific purposes which only can be fulfilled by
a high degree of complexity characterized of many parts which interact
in a well-regulated fashion. A good example is how a mind could
emerge from a collection of mindless parts in the human brain. What
we need to understand is not the behaviour of individuals parts but
rather their orchestration. We also must realize that complicated
behaviour can be realized on quite different substrates and that the
more complex a system is the more it will show traits of what we
experience as intelligent behaviour.
   A look at high-way traffic, market economies, immune systems,
bird flocks, fish shoals, antelope herds and ant colonies show no
central authority or coordinator. They show how large scale, orderly
patterns emerge by local random interaction among decentralized
components and how local rules make global dynamics. Many
308        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



similarities exist in the behaviours of minds, animals, societies and
machines. In the computer area, neural networks are self-organizing
in the sense that they learn to make the right computations to
accomplish a given assignment. Self-organization and selection can
also be studies in Genetic Algorithms and Artificial Life. In each
case, the behaviour of the whole is far more sophisticated than the
behaviours of the constituting parts. Collective structures behave very
differently from the parts which compose them.
   Flocking behaviour among birds has been investigated by several
biologists. If a flock is going to form, its does so from the bottom up,
creating an emergent phenomenon following three main rules.

• Maintain a minimum distance from objects in the environment,
  including other birds.
• Try to match velocities with birds in the neighbourhood.
• Move toward the perceived centre of a mass of birds in its
  neighbourhood.

   These rules may be compared with the rules influencing intelligent
robotic behaviour presented on p. 325.
   Ant colonies are particularly illustrative as prototypical example
of how complex group behaviour arise from simple individual
behaviour. How randomness is replaced with purpose can be seen in
an ant colony. Once the number of ants passes a certain number,
there is a significant leap in their ability to learn, survive and prosper.
Any larger would cause too much confusion. Any smaller and a
message would not be passed on at all.
   Some general principles, derivered from ant research but relevant
for most complex behaviour, has been formulated by Steven Johnsson
(2001).

• More is different. The statistical nature of interaction demands a
  certain lowest critical mass in numbers for complex behaviour to
  take place.
• Ignorance is useful. A densely interconnected system with simple
  elements where sophisticated behaviour trickle up is more robust
  than sparse connections with smart elements.
                      SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                  309


• Random encounters are useful. Random interactions without
  predefined orders between simple elements allow them to gauge
  and alter the macrostate of the system by their mere numbers.
• Pay attention to neighbors. Local information leads to global
  wisdom. Neighboring elements stumbling across one another and
  interchanging data generates overall knowledge.
• Note patterns in the signs. Simple pattern detection allows meta-
  information, or signs about signs, to circulate and generate a global
  behaviour of the system.




The city

The largest known human artifact during history is the city which
belongs to the most complex space-time structures existing in the
world. Being with us for 6000 years, it represents the rise of civilization
and have survived all socio-cultural changes. In the city, new surprises
are always waiting around the corner and possibilities exist to open
new relations and change one's life today.
    The existence in town mostly works surprisingly well. Although
itself tremendously complex, the city is a kind of complexity problem
solver and complexity manager. Despite this, the science and
technology which lay behind its creation still cannot handle sewage
disposal problems, traffic jams, exhaust pollution or poverty ghettos
in Western metropoles. As a self-organizing system, the ever-changing,
pluralistic city seems uncontrollable, unpredictable and unplannable.
Marxists has always stated that the urban system under capitalism is
chronically unstable and seems to jump from one steady state to
another. Today, this is emphasized by the crisis of the welfare state
and the global trend towards privatization.
    Irrespective of its temporary state, the city has always been the
object of intense planning efforts. This infringement in values of liberal
freedom and market economies is motivated by shortcomings of the
"invincible hand of the market" which have to be counteracted.
Preparedness is also necessary to achieve moral goals that are not
310        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



necessarily capitalist or liberal. Predictability, control and effective
social engineering is the core intention of the planning effort. The
problem is that the control functions themselves are self-organizing
systems and as such uncontrollable and give rise to bureaucracy.
   The growing bureaucracy in modern societies is a special problem
area of its own. Today, when official laws and regulations of all
kinds rapidly increase through deals between special interest groups,
the way is paved for bureaucracy. Overwhelmed administrators
require assistants, the more the better, which gives status in the
hierarchy. The base of the growing bureaucracy pyramid is in constant
growth and the more administrative jobs there are, the more new
jobs are being created. The administration becomes and end itself
and the paperwork becomes rituals, not questioned by anybody.
   Urban development is characterised by today's accelerated social
transformation with disorder, instability and diversity. Most big
modern cities show social and cultural pluralism in a spatial mosaic
of coexisting ethnic groups. Even if inhabitant only care about their
immediate neighbours, large segregated districts emerge, as short-
range, local interactions create new large-scale structures. Many layers
of the city are elements which overlap or enfold each other and
create complex, dynamic systems. New structures are created by self-
organization which changes the system and develop it further into
new changes. This happens by itself, with no central planning to
regulate the process or public authority to be the second player. It
works with neighbour interaction, pattern recognition and all kinds
of feedback.
   The formation of buildings, trail systems, transport and supply
networks and other parts of the community, show significant analogies
to phase transitions known from physics, like cluster formation
and aggregation. It essentially occurs in a state between stable
behaviour and chaotic regime with a fine balance between order and
chaos. Often, a reason for the phase transition is increased energy
consumption leading to a disintegration of the stable or frozen
structure by increasing the connectivity of the system. Another reason
for phase transition is the sheer increase in size. In cities, the result
is a development into neighbourhoods and satellites.
                     SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                 311


   Although the city as a whole show stability, local areas may exhibit
unstable or chaotic behaviour. The interplay between order and chaos
might show up in the movements of cars on the roads, of pedestrians
on pavements and other urban phenomena.
   The animals in a herd, the ants in an anthill and the bird in a
swarm can all be treated as if they were atoms, with no personality,
subjectivity or individuality. That the inhabitants of a city act and
behave collectively can, however, not be taken for granted. They can
act in concert, but also like free agents with personality and subjective
individuality. As such they can plan, take decisions and act
accordingly. In social systems like the city, self-organization involves
the mental reflections and purposeful actions of their elements,
which creates their own reality. Social systems are unique as they
consist of subsystems that can set goals for themselves. The example
par excellence here is man. A complication is that systems involving
humans to some extent, do not follow the laws of physical science.
Human participants can alter the path of evolution so that past
patterns no longer continue into the future. But interaction on the
local and individual level will, sooner or later, determine the behaviour
and structure of the global city level. Freedom only matters on the
level of the individual human life.
   It is obvious how the city tries to keeps its unstable elements
under control by the use of jails, madhouses and other institutions in
order to allow a smooth process of development.




Climate and weather

Without a doubt, the most common topic of conversation among
inhabitants of the world is the weather. In a broader sense, this is
quite reasonable. Collapses of many ancient societies can be attributed
to rapid shifts in climate. The blame on social, economic and political
forces must often be considered secondary causes. Sudden dramatic
climate changes have always struck human societies and they will
struck again. They are an inevitable part of human condition.
312        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    The climate is a typical self-organizing system and as such
extremely sensitive for subtle triggering conditions not possible to
define and influence. A microscopically, often random adjustment of
an initial value can trigger violent changes of a final value in a whole
weather system (see "The butterfly effect" on p. 74). To predict when
abrupt climate changes will occur and what form it will take is
seldom possible. Major climate changes that suddenly occur often
persists for a long time, even thousands of years. A typical example
is Sahara, which was converted about 5000 years ago from a green
landscape with lakes, to the burning, sandy desert it is today. The
visible course of events is a gradual change in temperature or other
physical conditions which push the situation towards an invisible
threshold. When this is crossed, the climate suddenly changes to a
new state and usually stays there for a long time.
     Today, human induced increases in atmospheric concentration of
greenhouse gases is a likely cause for a general global warming. The
predicted average rise in global temperature is estimated to reach
4 - 5 degrees C in the next 100 years. This warming will most likely
push the earth's climate faster towards a point of no return where
sudden shifts into new, radically different conditions occur. Climate
researchers suggest that greenhouse-induced warming will increase
rainfalls overall in connection with more severe storms and flooding.
These phenomena are, however, not expected to offset the drought
on other places. Also, already cold places will paradoxically suffer
from more cold.
     Actual climate models suggest greater summertime drying with a
rising global temperature. Mild drought will worsen and persist for
the coming decades. The big grain belts will suffer and some plant
areas will die, putting less water back into the air by evaporation.
Thereby more plants die with further diminishing rainfall and a
wicked circle is established.
     The greenhouse effect is also strengthed by other human measures.
Cropland has replaced forests, thereby changing how much sunlight
the land reflects. Too much water has been pumped out of the ground,
changing the amount of water carried by rivers into the oceans. Trace
                     SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                313



gases and particulates in the atmosphere has increased, modifying
the characteristics of clouds, rainfall, etc.
   Much knowledge about long time changes in climate has been
generated by ice cores extracted from Greenland's inland ice in a big
research project about 15 years ago (Alley & Bender 1998). Specimen
extracted from ice rods up to three kilometres long has given climate
records from the past 110000 years. They are still investigated but
clearly reveals wild fluctuations in climate like 10 degrees C in a
mere decade. The records show more than 20 such sudden warming
episodes.
   Trapped dust and methane in old air bubbles residing in the ice
cores give details of climate changes. With additional cues from high
mountain glaciers, the thickness of tree rings, and the types of pollen
and shells preserved in ancient mud at the bottom of lakes, it is
possible to draw secure conclusions.
   The existing system of ocean currents that strongly influence
climate in the world and bring warmth to Europe, is called the
North Atlantic conveyor belt. If global warming continues, many
climatologists fear that large quantities of fresh water from frozen
northern landmasses and Greenland will obstruct the conveyor.
Normally, the sinking water drives the conveyor belt which
warms the north and cools the south. A slowdown of the currents
should cool the North Atlantic region even if global temperature
continue to rise. Then winter becomes harsher in both Europe
and North America and agriculture suffers. Central Asia gets drier
and most of the regions of the Southern hemisphere become much
warmer.
   As one of the main regulatory phenomena which makes life
possible on earth, climate is dependent on thousands of feedback
and response mechanisms. Their existence and cooperation are still
only partially understood. Further aspects on climate as a self-
organizing system has already been mentioned in this book. See
page 140 about the Gaia hypothesis.

                                   *
314        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



The economy

If an economical system manages to diversify and increase its
complexity above a certain critical level, it undergoes an explosive
increase in growth and creativity. This is called economic take off and
is a kind of spontaneous self-organization. In market economies, this
self-organization creates equilibrium between supply, demand, and
prices. Diminishing returns ensure that no company or product can
grow big enough to totally dominate the market. The reason is that
the more you do of anything, the less useful, less profitable or less
enjoyable the last quantity becomes. This happens with nobody in
charge or some kind of conscious planning.
    People satisfies their needs by unconsciously organizing themselves
into an economy through buying and selling. They will respond
to every situation by optimizing their economical utility, just as a
physical particle will respond to any given set of forces. Although
each individual is striving only for his own profit the market works
as if the participants were collectively acting to maximize the sum of
consumer and producer surplus. Theoretically, man is a being whose
reasoning always is considered to include and promote his predictable
self-interest. By this behaviour, man in a market economy often is
called "The Economic Man".
    Large interacting ensembles of people exhibit collective behaviour
quite different from what is expected from simply scaling up
the behaviour of private individual. But the micromotives of the
individuals sometimes leads to macropatterns that are not desired by
any of the individuals.
    Social and environmental side effects of the competition in a free
market are inequality. Losers pay a high price and winners achieve
huge privileges. The alternative, centrally planned production and
distribution, has, however, proven to be completely disastrous with
its lack of feedback and unhealthy bureaucracy.
    Attempts to handle side effects of a free market are achieved
by implementing legislative regulation, tax redistribution, subsidies
 and public service. But all this also take on a life of their own and
undergoes self-organization. High taxes inhibit economic growth,
                          SELF-ORGANIZATION AND EVOLUTION                            315


generates u n e m p l o y m e n t , lower tax r e v e n u e s a n d create h u g h costs
for welfare. All industrialized economies t o d a y seems to r u n deficit.
Meanwhile, a majority of voters d e m a n d for lower taxes a n d m o r e
welfare.

                                           *

R e v i e w questions and problems

1. Does a crowd of people in movement follow the same simple rules as
   flocking birds?
2. What is the relation between the Economic Man and The Invincible Hand?
3. What is the main reason that major climate changes cannot be predicted?
4. Why are ants particularly illustrative as prototypical example when self-
   organization is discussed?
5. Is it possible to imagine self-organization to occur in a closed system?
6. Try to explain why the city is a kind of complexity problem solver and
   a complexity manager.
7. Does it make sense to state that systems involving humans, to to some
   extent, do not follow the laws of physical science?

                                           *
          Part 2
The Applications and How
                                  7

  Artificial Intelligence and Life

• The Turing test
• Parallel processing and neural networks
• Expert systems
• Some other applications
• Artificial life
• Computer viruses
• A gloomy future

'AI enthusiasts confuse information with knowledge, knowledge
with wisdom and thinking with calculating.' (Joseph Weizenbaum)



P     rogressive scientific optimists in Western societies are often heard
      to promote two main projects: that of nuclear fusion and of
artificial intelligence. While billions of dollars have been invested in
both of these areas and very little has happened, proponents are still
claiming that a breakthrough is very near. To understand why the
difficulties seem to be insurmountable just before reaching the goal,
it is necessary to investigate some of the main thoughts and attitudes
of the artificial intelligence, or the AI, area. However, as we shall see,
this investigation will be less about computers than about the nature
of consciousness and mind.
, AI has a very straightforward goal: to augment and improve
human mental capability by replacing human mental activity with
the activity of a computer. In order to do this, the construction of an
intelligence amplifier is a consequence of the development in the


                                   319
320        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



modern technological society with its existing power potential and
overall complexity. While our physical strength has been multiplied
several hundred times by the use of conventional machines, no such
comparable growth of human mental capacity has taken place. We
may somehow amplify our inborn intelligence sufficiently to give the
overall comprehension that we so obviously lack in handling our
dangerous strength. To do this, AI researchers state that it is necessary
to find ways to formalize human cognitive processes in order to
make them programmable.
   Albeit a subarea in the discipline of computer science, AI has
emerged as something more than an ordinary specialism. AFs success,
if any, would have profound philosophical, ethical and practical
implications for the entire human society. Also, deep feelings are
disturbed when the superiority of the human race is challenged.
Today, we do accept to be beaten in mental arithmetic and eventually
in chess by our 'dumb' apparatus, but our intelligence, beliefs and
feelings, constituting our total human preeminence, these we generally
want to reserve for ourselves.
   A closer look at the area of AI indicates that we can find some
strong and influential supporters, the functionalists, who believe
that within a few years computers will be capable of doing everything
a human mind can do. For them, thinking is simply a matter of
information processing and there is no significant distinction between
the way human beings think and the way machines think (except that
computers do it faster). When the program algorithms managing the
computer's behaviour reach a certain critical point of complexity and
function, intrinsic qualities such as free-will and consciousness will
appear. Even human attributes, such as feeling pain, contentment
and a sense of humour will emerge. Consequently, the statement that
only brains within living individuals can become conscious is called
'carbon chauvinism' by the functionalists. A question which must
be handled by functionalists is quite obvious: What will happen if
machine intelligence does jump-start itself? How do we turn it off if
we don't like the result?
   Another question is if the consciousness of AI could be engineered
to be moral. Proponents of the area state that because such a
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE              321


consciousness does not have to fight for a biological existence, it will
automatically be benevolent.
    This school is also supported by several logicians and linguists
who recognize that their specific area is in principle limited and
therefore likely to be computable in the near future. In their view the
mind is a machine operated on the basis of the known laws of physics
and the human brain with all of its activities can be fully understood
(by the human brain). Intelligence can be broken down into discrete
modules with defined functions like perception, planning actions
and executing actions. Electronic artefacts can then presumably
be constructed to perform all these activities satisfactorily using
programmed internal models.
    Regarding the internal representation of the world, functionalists
state that a richly articulated computer model poses no fundamental
problems. The world is largely stable and can be sampled again and
again by sensors. Relevant changes can be detected and added to the
input when necessary.
    A related faction includes the even stronger believers, the
behaviourists who maintain that if a computer could be instructed to
behave exactly like a conscious human being, then it would auto-
matically assume the feelings of this creature. While we are still long
way from this goal, the behaviourists claim that such mental qualities
exist in today's computers. That is, every computer, even the simplest
mechanical one, which performs a fundamental logic sequence of
operations, has a low-level mental quality. The difference between
low or advanced mentality and the existence or not of a mind is only
a question of complexity, or of the number of states and functions
involved. Thus behaviourists put an equals sign between doing and
being when they state that to behave seemingly consciously is also
to be conscious. But behaviourists seem to forget that sophisticated
programming alone is not enough to make a computer show human
consciousness. Curiously, predictable behaviour is computer-like,
randomness is human.
    A conclusion which can be drawn from both the functionalist and
 the behaviourist views is that hardware is relatively unimportant.
The software with its specific structure and algorithms is considered
322        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



the critical part of the computer when they want to liberate infor-
mation from the ballast of materiality. A consequence of this mentality
is the disembodied self-hood and the imagination of achieving
immortality by uploading ourselves into huge computer programs
resting in cyberspace.
    In the discussion regarding AI, the concepts of weak and strong
artificial intelligence sometimes are used. Here weak AI is the argument
that a computer can simulate the behaviour of human cognition, but
lacks the possibility to actually experience mental states itself. Strong
AI argues, to the contrary, that computers will be capable of cognitive
mental states, that is, they are self-aware.
    In contrast to these reductionist views of AI we have the non-
believers who state that AI only exposes what genuine intelligence
is not ("If it works, it's not artificial intelligence!"). They oppose the
notion that the mind can be reduced to a machine operated on the
basis of the well-known laws of physics. The creation of a self-
conscious artificial intelligence is yet impossible as the biological brain
functions are not algorithmic and our present technique is algorithmic.
Existing knowledge is not enough to explain the mechanism of the
mind and its emergent intelligence. Some of the non-believers claim
that a true understanding of the brain is impossible because any
explanatory device must possess a structure of higher degree of
complexity than is possessed by the object to be explained. "The
brain has no brain inside itself to explain its own function". In other
words, humans can never completely understand their own brains.
In the eyes of many non-believers AI proponents show a mediaeval
mentality in their attempt at an almost alchemical translation of dead
machinery into a thinking being.
    A well-known counter argument founded on the proposition that
simulated or artificial intelligence should really be of the same kind
as natural, has been propounded by the Berkeley philosopher John
Searle. It is a thought experiment called 'the Chinese Room' and
supposes that a person sits in a closed room. This person cannot talk
or write Chinese, nor does he understand anything of the language.
His task is to receive Chinese sentences written on a paper through
a slot in the wall. He then has to translate the text into English with
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE             323


the aid of an excellent dictionary containing exhaustive tables of
Chinese ideographs. The translation is delivered though another slot
in the wall to a receiving person outside of the room.
    Although the translation is fairly good, the translator does not
understand the meaning of the Chinese ideographs used, he only
manipulates symbols according to a set of rules. As the action inside
the room duplicates the function of a computer doing the same
task, it is obvious that no real understanding, mental awareness or
'thinking' is present. The receiver has no idea of how the translation
is arranged; so far as he is concerned, the whole process is a black
box with a certain input and its corresponding output. In spite of
this, the room arrangement shows every sign of having a very
sophisticated, translating intelligence. It is therefore proper to say
that the computer with its program serves as a model for human
thought, not just a simulation.
    Many non-believers hold AI enthusiasts responsible for clinging
to the now outdated scientific belief in reductive analysis and
mechanistic modelling and also for the belief that all the secrets of
nature will one day be fully understood. They also state that AI
researchers have forgotten their own starting point; to model
intelligent behaviour, not to create intelligence.
    Another argument against AI is that intelligence is defined in
terms of living systems and is thus not applicable to non-living
computers. Intelligence and knowledge are the results of biological
functions of living systems with bodies, defined by autopoiesis, a
quality not existing in computers. Living systems are capable of both
self-replication, growth and repair. In the higher manifestations they
have advanced nervous systems, part of which is the brain itself,
managing individual physical existence. In a sense the whole of
human body is an information system, where all the molecules and
cells contribute either to building up a communication system, or to
transmitting the signals which circulate through this system.
    Furthermore, living intelligent beings are biochemical creatures,
 guided by the very important capacity of their feelings. In a sense,
 the basis of intelligence is emotions. All emotions are inextricably
tied up with a body and its states; electromagnetic machines controlled
324         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



by a given number of lines of code do not have bodies. Memory
retrieval in living creatures is also associated not with logical
processes, but with emotional experience. Also, our bodily experiences
and intentions cannot be separated from our language. The physical
origin of language and its connection to the physical world with its
social relations makes the speaking computer a hopeless contradiction.
The bodily activity with its elementary actions constitutes the root of
intelligence and consciousness. Mental phenomena can only be fully
understood in the context of an organism interacting with its
environment. Mind cannot be understood without some sort of
embodiment as we think with the whole body (the hand as an extension
of the brain). The false idea of the disembodied mind has been the
source for the metaphor of mind as a software program.
   Therefore, attempts to get the computer to imitate the human
cognitive system — to think for us — are in principle just as remark-
able as to expect that the tools of a craftsman should do the job, not
the craftsman himself. All this together makes AI programs end u p in
the same category as aircraft when compared with birds — imitations
of a function but not of a process — not manipulating concepts but
their physical correlations.
   The definition of intelligence includes very essential social
components; that a disembodied computer with no childhood, no
cultural practice and no feelings should be defined as intelligent is
both nonsense and a self-contradiction. The term artificial intelligence
relates to a machine and has no relevance at all when making a
comparison with human qualities. 'Are machines intelligent?' is
therefore a completely irrelevant question of the same kind as 'Are
machines resistant to AIDS?'
    Regarding the human brain, it is the most advanced information
processing system hitherto known; adapted as it is to the unlimited
variety of life, it is far too complex to be treated as, or to be replaced by,
any kind of human artefacts. The range of problems it has to handle
includes the infinity of life and the infinity of human reflections.
A computer can only equal or replace the human mind in limited
applications which involve procedural thinking and data processing.
                     ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE              325


   What really differentiates men from machines is the human ability
to handle language — to comprehend any one of an infinite number
of possible expressions is something that cannot be expressed in
mechanical terms. Another significant difference is that human beings
have the ability to diagnose and correct their own limitations in a
way that has no parallel in machines. This power of self-transcendence
implies the move to another level — to see the shortcomings of the
system. The machine can only work within the system itself, according
to rules which cannot be changed on its own accord. Therefore, being
unable to break the rules set by software, computers cannot be
considered creative, implying a further important difference in
comparison with the human brain. Creativity involves discontinuity
and abrupt breaks from past patterns of thinking — something
impossible for the computer which operates with continuity.
   To be honest, a more realistic attitude seems now to be emerging
among the new generation of AI researchers using the new breed of
parallel computers. Intelligence is now to a lesser extent seen as a
centralized, disembodied function, but rather as an epiphenomenon
of the process to-be-in-the-world. "There is no mind without a body in
the hard world". Intelligence should thus be built through perceptual
experience and learning, rather than by the implementation of an
internal main model of the world. It is not a problem that could be
encoded in rules, and hence software.
    Consequently, robotics has become an important area of interest
where the hope is to trace intelligence through the experience of
touch, sight, sound and smell. Using artificial sense organs robots
should be able to build their own internal model of the world. The
problem is that both childhood and evolutionary history must be
repeated and implemented if something called intelligence is to be
replicated. Bodies and brains must evolve together like those of
a living organism. Robotic scientists can show how primitive
intelligent behaviour could emerge from cooperation between a
number of simple, independent systems in a distributed control
system. The principles are the following:

1. Do simple things first
2. Learn to do them perfectly
326        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



3. Add new layers of activity over the simple tasks
4. Do not change the simple things
5. Learn to do the new layers as perfectly as the simple

   An actual question within the field is what will happen if it is
possible to start from early childhood with a complete storehouse of
knowledge from the predecessors. Here the human brain may compete
with an electronic memory which can be accessed a million times
faster than human synapses, and can be downloaded to others with
negligible time and costs.
   No matter what is the preferred perspective on AI, a dramatic
point will be attained when transistor density in the central processing
unit of a computer reaches the human-brain equivalent. This in quantity
terms equals a number of about one hundred billion, that is, the
amount of neurons in the human brain. Today, a common processor
chip (for example, the Intel 486) comprises 1.2 million transistors.
With present trends in chip manufacture it is not unrealistic to
envisage a transistor density of one hundred million on a single chip
within ten years. A comparable development within parallel computer
processing should make possible the use of a thousand processors,
thus realizing the brain equivalent with a possible clock speed of
several hundred GHz. Which AI prophesies will then be realized, we
can only wait and see as the only predictable aspect of the future is
its unpredictability.

                                      #

The Turing test

Let us now return to the behaviouristic attitude and comment on the
Turing test. This test was introduced in 1950 by the computer scientist
Alan Turing (1912-1954). Its purpose was to find out if a computer
really could have the capability to think. The idea was as simple as
it was brilliant. A person poses questions to an invisible respondent,
either a computer or a human being. The impossibility of recognizing
whether the answers come from a computer or a human being is said
to be proof that the computer actually can think.
                     ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE              327


   To ensure that the test is reasonably realistic, the communication
must be exchanged in a technically neutral way, let us say with the
help of a keyboard and a screen. All information about the situation
is conveyed solely by way of the keyboard during the session. Also
the human respondent must always tell the truth and the computer
must lie if necessary to give the impression that it is a human. This
point is especially important when the computer answers smart
questions concerning, for example, number-crunching where it is
known that the computer far exceeds the human being. (What is the
square of 30497.034 times 2004.3 divided by 0.39794?)
   The Turing test has inspired many efforts, among them the famous
$100000 Loebner Prize in Artificial Intelligence. The requirement for
entrance into this contest is to submit a conversation computer
program smart enough to mislead a jury of eight interrogators, to
convince them that the conversation is taking place with a human
instead of a computer. Hitherto, only a single-topic program has
succeeded. Whimsical Conversation, written in 1991 by Joseph
Weintraub, was able to outwit four persons in the jury. In 1992 he
won the bronze medal and US $2000 with the program Men vs Women.
But according to the famous linguist Marvin Minsky, the Turing Test
is nothing but 'a test to see how easily a person can be fooled'.
    While many natural reasons for the lack of success can be found,
the main cause is what is called 'the common sense knowledge
problem'. The problem is how to store in a computer and then access
the total number of identified facts that human beings use in their
everyday life. On closer examination, this task very soon takes on
astronomical dimensions. To cope with a new environment, human
beings base their actions on a recognition of certain similarities
between the present situation and well-established past experience.
Appropriate responses are gradually developed through trial-and-
error, through training and imitation. Mentally, human beings advance
from the past into the future, with the memory of the past going
before them organizing the way new events are interpreted.
    To store in a computer the myriad experiences of a lifetime —
with small details such as how to give correct tip or to compliment
a beautiful woman — is not technically possible. The fact that Eskimos
328        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



have 40 different words for snow, Japanese have fifteen ways to say
no and Arabs use 60 separate words for camel must be a nightmare
for the AI programmer. To create a program that uses such details
with flexibility, judgement and intuition then seems even more
hopeless.
    The use of language in the Turing test may put the computer at
an unfair disadvantage. A special test, the Chess test, was therefore
designed by the psychologist, William Hartston, and a group of
chess masters, to examine if it is possible to differentiate between
(the intelligence of) man and computer in a game of chess. A set of
chess positions is presented and an examiner compares the computer
and its human adversary. The positions used were designed to show
both the computer's and the human's playing strengths. Computers
are very capable of playing complicated positions, instantly calculating
the immediate consequences of possible moves. Human beings have
their strength in recognizing the long-term strategic implications of a
chess position.
    In the test, one minute was given to each player, human and
computer, to find the best move from eight presented positions. The
results were measured according to a system which gave a negative
score for responses belonging to the typical computer and a positive
score for responses typical of a human player. The examiner had no
problem in differentiating between man and computer because the
latter always strove for a material gain and often captured pieces if
possible. Even Deep Blue the world's most capable contemporary chess
computer, had difficulties to resist the material gain. The sacrificing
of short-term interest for future benefit seems to be exceedingly
difficult to implement in a chess-playing computer program.
    In the spring of 1997, the world chess champion Garri Kasparov
was defeated in a chess contest with a staff of programmers using
Deep Blue. This attracted great attention but must be considered
quite natural taken in consideration the continuously growing brute
calculation force implemented in the computer. The computational
complexity of the different branches of the chess game is estimated
to exceed the number of atoms in the universe. The number of
alternatives to choose increases exponentially with the depth of moves
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE              329


one looks ahead. Therefore, grandmasters seem to rely on positional,
pattern-recognition-like heuristics rather than extensive chains of
forward move analysis (the very strength of Deep Blue). On the other
hand one can easily imagine what would happen if a slight change
was introduced in the rules of the game in the middle of a contest.
The human side would quickly adapt to the new circumstances,
whereas the computer opponent would be left helpless.
   In spite of several decades of hard work devoted to the develop-
ment of AI, no evidence of what we normally define as mental
qualities can be traced in computers in operation today. No computer
algorithm, however complicated, has demonstrated some kind of
genuine understanding and no computer has yet passed a serious
Turing test. And of course no computer has shown the slightest hint
of what is considered to define the human mind: emotion, free-will,
creativity and ethical awareness. Nevertheless, from several other
points of view, the work done by AI researchers must be considered
to be fruitful.




Parallel processing and neural networks

Today a significant part of the development of artificial intelligence
is carried out within the area of neural nets and parallel processing.
Researchers and medical neuroscientists within this area are often
referred to as connectionists. They hold that mental functions such
as cognition and learning depend upon the way in which neurons
interconnect and communicate in the brain. For a long time it has
been known that the parallel processing in the brain is self-organizing.
Several subprocesses which together deal with a major task are
executed simultaneously in different parts of the brain's neural net-
work. The main advantage here is the processing speed — completely
superior to that of serial functioning.
    The aim of constructing parallel computer networks consisting of
artificial neurons is to approach something which functions in a
manner similar to the real brain. These networks exist mostly as
330        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



computer simulations, seldom as pieces of hardware. Experiments
with neuron-like elements embodied in computers have been carried
out for several years; this is now an established area on its own.
The main advantage with computer neural nets is their capability to
imitate (to a certain extent) brain plasticity. Thanks to this feature,
interconnections between neurons in the brain are able to change all
the time to meet the task at hand. In short, the brain constantly
reconfigures and adapts itself.
    The main component of an artificial neural network, the neuron,
is linked to its neighbours through adjustable connections. Like real
nervous systems, which learn by adjusting the strength of their
synaptic connections, the artificial neural network learns by adjusting
the weighting on its connections. The strength of a signal transmitted
through a certain connection depends on the weight of that
connection. Most neurons or units of a neural network consist of
three main categories: input, hidden and output. Signals are sent
from a layer of input units to a layer of output units. On their way,
the signals pass through the hidden units, the function of which is to
improve the computational power of the network. When any part of
the input unit is activated, a pattern of activation is spread throughout
the network. If the activation exceeds a certain threshold, each
output unit sums up the arriving signals and switches itself on. See
Figure 7.1.
    The network learns by comparing a certain programmed input
pattern of activity with the resulting output pattern of activity, a
process called mapping. More advanced modes of mapping occur in
recurrent networks, where activation patterns emerging in the hidden
units are recirculated through the network. For certain input patterns
the hidden pattern generated is sent back to the input units with a
small delay, coinciding with the next input. In this way the network
remembers previous input patterns and learns of relationships
between different input patterns. See Figure 7.2.
    Neural networks work best when the input data may be fuzzy,
since they do not depend on clear-cut yes/no decisions. Their
decisions are made according to a complex averaging out of all the
input they receive. Some proponents of neural networks see them
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE                  331




                                                         Output unit




                                                         Hidden units




                                                         Input units




           Figure 7.1 Components of an artificial neural network.




                Figure 7.2 Principle of a recurrent network.



as learning machines in an evolutionary approach to artificial
intelligence. The assumption is that the underlying system is of a
relatively simple structure and that its complexity emanates from
large numbers of learned interconnections. With better computers
the pace of natural evolution could be surpassed thousands of times
in the evolution of intelligence.
332        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    Biologists do not subscribe to this idea when they state that
intelligent behaviour is the result of a basic built-in structure and not
of learning. A small insect with a few hundred neurons in its brain
is extremely structured and its seemingly intelligent behaviour is not
the result of learning. Regarding evolution at machine speed, this
must be considered impossible. The evolutionary cycle must evolve
at the same speed as the real changes occur and not the speed at
which internal changes work. The artificial computer network cannot
evolve faster than any other system that has to adapt to changes in
the environment.
    It must also be considered very doubtful if detailed knowledge
of neurological mechanisms will ever reveal the true nature of
intelligence. Similarly, exact and detailed facts about a computer chip
will never reveal secrets of its associated software.

                                      *

Expert systems

One of the beneficiaries of the spin-off effects of the AI area are
expert systems, programs for problem solving in some scientific or
technical domain. An expert system can be defined as a computer
based system comprising the total sum of knowledge and rules of
thumb which represent the highest level of expertise in a given and
carefully limited field. Such fields may be medical diagnosis, mineral
prospecting, deep-sea diving or operations of a similar kind which
sometimes seek the solution of ill-structured, incomplete and
probabilistic tasks.
    Expert systems are sometimes very useful, but all too often we
forget that they are fed with simplified and formalized average
knowledge by ordinary human specialists. The fundamental character-
istics of such systems are a lack of common sense and of a perspective
of their own knowledge. That is, they do not have the capability
to analyze their own experience. In order to exercise judgements,
an expert system employs certain intellectual rules of thumb, a
phenomenon known as heuristics, sometimes described as the art of
                                ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE                              333


           Knowledge database            Inference engine         Global database
           (Domain knowledge,            (General problem         (Input data,
           facts, rules, etc.)           solving knowledge)       history, recording, etc.)



            "~              '        •   •+       •   M

                                •4       •+       •           •




           User interface
           Input
           Output
           (Explanations)




                      Figure 7.3 Expert s y s t e m s architecture.




good guessing. Users of the system are thereby enabled to recognize
promising problem-solving approaches and to make educated guesses.
   An expert system consists of the following main parts (see
Figure 7.3).

• A knowledge database containing domain facts, the heuristics
  associated with the problem and the understanding and solving of
  the same.
• An inference procedure, or control structure, for the choice of
  relevant knowledge when using the knowledge database in the
  solution of the problem.
• A working memory or global database, keeping track of the problem
  status, the input data for the actual problem and a history of what
  has been done.
• An interface, managing the interaction between man and machine
  and working in a natural and user-friendly way, preferably with
334        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



  natural speech and images. The interface must permit new data
  and rules to be implemented without change of the internal structure
  of the system.

   In medicine, diagnostic databases have been constructed which
are claimed to be able to challenge the professional skill of an
experienced medical specialist. Other well-known expert systems exist
within the area of chess-playing, where the capacity of the computer
is now said to equal the capacity of a grand master.
   A hierarchic model of skill acquisition has been proposed by,
among others, Hubert and Stuart Dreyfus (1986). This model, which
can be used to explain the deficiencies in the expert-system concept
can be illustrated as follows:

1. Novice
2. Advanced beginner
3. Competent person
4. Proficient person
5. Expert

   The skill of the novice is normally judged on the basis of how well
he follows learned rules inasmuch as he lacks a coherent sense of the
overall task. The rules employed allow for the accumulation of
experience but soon have to be abandoned to make way for a further
development. Problem-solving here is entirely of an analytical nature
and no special perspective is used.
   The advanced beginner has gained a certain amount of experience
and can perceive what is similar in previous examples. Actions
and judgement may now refer to both new situational and context-
free circumstances.
   The competent person often registers an overwhelming amount of
situational elements, all of which are to be taken into account. To
manage the problem and find a solution, a hierarchical procedure of
decision-making is used. First a plan is established with which to
organize the situation. Then a simplifying procedure is used to focus
only on those factors important for the chosen plan. The remaining
constellation of facts may generally be referred back to an earlier
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE               335


experience and reasonable conclusions can be drawn, decisions made
or expectations investigated.
   The proficient person, except for making decisions only in an
analytical way, has the qualifications of an expert. Only when we
reach the level of the genuine expert are real intuitive decisions
possible.
   The expert does not follow a general set of rules; instead it is a
question of knowing when and how to break the rules and knowing
what is relevant or not. If this intuitive, involved methodology has
a distinctive feature, it is the very absence of a specific strategy. The
expert now has a standard reference case but knows of numerous
special cases.
   Experts often make their decisions in a condition of flow. This
term was coined by the Hungarian Csikszentmihalyi in a book from
1990. Persons doing things with great skill and creativity often enter
a mental state without restrictions, where time stops and their
concentration is perfect. The need to compulse and supervise oneself
disappears due to good preparation and years of exercises. This is a
very pleasant state and exceptionally productive.
   A closer look at expert systems can give a more realistic
understanding of their capacity and usefulness. None of the existing
systems will be able to reach the level of a human expert; it is doubtful
whether they will qualify as proficient. It is even less probable that
the human ability to recognize, synthesize, judge and make use of
intuition can be mimicked by a computer program. None of the semi-
conscious processes in human thinking that emerge in those superior
fuzzy concepts so typical of reality are to be found in expert systems.
Human expertise is far too sophisticated to be formalized into a set
of rules.
   Expert systems can only present what has been stored into them.
Often a craftsman makes things absolutely correctly without being
able to explain why. Much of the existing experience and learning is
what is called 'tacit knowledge', something which the hands, the
judgement and the intuition bring about. Notwithstanding that such
 knowledge is systematically organized, it will have structures that
336        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



cannot be expressed verbally. Of course, this is extremely difficult to
formalize into a computer program.
   It must also be kept in mind that even the highest ranked experts
within a specific field have sometimes among themselves totally
contrary opinions. When critical decisions have to be made, this
problem is usually met by requiring the selected expert group
to reach a consensus. The human capacity to merge individual
irregularities into a collective agreement, a human qualified solution,
is scarcely possible to implement in a computer. In other words,
when a task is so narrowly defined that it can be performed with
much less than the full human capacity of knowledge and judgement,
then it is appropriate for an expert system.
   In spite of the criticism presented here and, given that their
limitations are understood, expert systems of course have their place
as advanced intellectual tools. As it belongs to the lower levels of the
skill-acquisition hierarchy, an expert system never needs thirty years
of experience. It learns the main rules correctly the first time; it never
needs practice and it never forgets. The precision and speed
compensate for its blindness to situational elements. A good expert
system performs about as well as competent human beings.




Some other applications

The potential application of both neural networks and parallel
processing is most obvious in the areas of natural language under-
standing and speech recognition. To break the language barrier to
knowledge, computer translation of scientific correspondence, papers
and books would be a tremendous achievement. With the exponential
proliferation of publications of all kinds, something which may be
called the bulk barrier has to be overcome in all kinds of scientific
work. The internal communication within the scientific community
could be speeded up manyfold and the reinvention of the wheel
occur less often.
   Imagine the task of a scientific library which has the responsibility
of translating, summarizing and storing a steady stream of papers
                          ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE                                                     337


in many foreign languages. To scan a paper, translate it into English,
create an abstract, define keywords and store it in a database
constitutes a well-defined undertaking for the area of artificial
intelligence. A short step from this capability is the quality scanning
of texts. The identification of grammatical and syntactical errors,
stylistic shortcomings and a weak logical structure would utilize the
whole power of AI. Another related task would be natural language
interaction with databases. Today's communication demands some
kind of formally rigid, abbreviated query language in the retrieval
phase.
   Speech recognition is an area which ultimately poses the hardest
challenge for AI. One aim is voice recognition and translation of a
telephone conversation into a second language, and there are already
some applications for the input of unconstrained continuous speech
using a diversified vocabulary, although with several weaknesses.
The real task is to make it possible for say a Japanese and a Swede
to converse in their respective native languages. No one has yet been
able to create a program with enough grammatical rules to understand
every sentence in a single language, let alone two.
   A closer look at the translating telephone reveals that three
technologies are required. First a device for automatic speech
recognition, then a language translator and finally a speech
synthesizer. Furthermore, the set of devices has to be duplicated; one
for the hypothetical Swedish and one for the hypothetical Japanese
side (see Figure 7.4).

                                                                                                Japanese
                                                                                                side



                                                                                                           *



                                                                                                           f%
                 English text    , English   Japanese to       Japanese Continuous Japanese
                 to speech                                 t            speech recognition
                 synthesis      : text       translation       text     with large vocabulary



              Figure 7.4 Main parts of a translating telephone.
338        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The combination of the six modules should allow for a large,
relatively unrestricted vocabulary, continuous speech input and
speaker independence (little or no system training) in both directions.
An interesting technical aspect relates to the intermediate link of text
use. If an artificial language like Esperanto was used here instead of
a natural language, the technical problems might appear less daunting.
This is due to the fact that Esperanto is a very structured and
simplified language, designed to be easy to handle although rich
enough to facilitate good human communication.
   Computers are however growing increasingly powerful and data
storage is becoming cheaper. This fact was the impetus for an ongoing
Japanese project to solve the translation problem by brute force. The
JETS (Japanese-to-English Translation System) searches for entire
sentences in a huge database consisting of all imaginable standard
phrases with their variations. Because many similar sentence structures
can be identified by a single string, the amount of memory needed
is more restricted although still extensive. The main problem with
this solution is however the prolonged search time.
   Another application not to be forgotten is the listening typewriter
which would be able to write down and edit the incoming speech on
paper. A further use is pattern recognition which has applications in
several areas: picture analysis, radar detection in military and civilian
systems, cartography, etc.
   Language understanding, translation and pattern recognition are
extremely difficult areas for computer scientists and demand large
computers capable of high-speed processing. The systems must be
both self-learning and self-organizing in relation to the extremely
comprehensive information to be worked upon. In spite of impressive
funding and tremendous efforts in the last decade, any real
breakthrough within AI has yet to come. One impediment must be
the contemporary over-confidence in formal languages and the
opinion that all phenomena can be expressed in logical concepts.
Science seems to have been snared by expressions inherent to
mathematics, statistics and logic. While the computer, working
formally, that is, according to fixed models and algorithms fits this
style, human beings act instead on the basis of direct communication
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE                339


and associations. Certain semiconscious processes in human thinking
often emerge as concepts which might seem fuzzy but which are
superior when reality has to be described.
   The need for sophisticated AI is especially pronounced in the area
of robotics where the equivalent of goal-directed behaviour found in
biological organisms is to be implemented by mechanical machines.
From a purely mental point of view, no robot yet constructed can
compete with the capacity of an ant. Some sceptics contend that it
never will be possible to reach the level of that marvellous insect. It
should not, however, be forgotten that robots are often useful because
they do not reflect the nature of human sensing and being.
   In fact, robot technology does play an important role in scientific,
economic and military affairs. The main development has however
been within the area of practical industrial robots, where reliability
and cost-effectiveness is more important than an advanced artificial
intelligence. All over the world several manufacturing processes, both
menial and unhealthy for human labour, for example, welding and
spray painting, have been replaced by industrial robots.
   The real need for AI becomes apparent in the special categories
of robots used in bomb disarming, nuclear-environment repair
operations and similar tasks. In contrast to symbolic problem-solving
as in language understanding, these special robots interact with
the physical surroundings much as living beings would. They
therefore have to be sensory-interactive and managed by a hierarchical
control system. Problems to be solved may be illustrated by a robot
manipulating one arm while pursuing an uncooperative target.
Here the calculation of the coordinate's transformations have to be
performed continuously, with delays of no more than milliseconds.
A set of six equations with six unknowns has to be solved; this
requires massive computational capability.

                                     *


Artificial life

Artificial life, AL, is a fairly new science and a first attempt to define
the area involves parallels with artificial intelligence. As AI relates to
340         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



intelligence, so artificial life will relate to life itself. Like the AI
researchers, investigators in artificial life are attempting to create this
phenomenon in a medium other than the original and natural. A
virtual medium wherein the essence of life may be abstracted from
all details of its implementation is the computer. But where AI
begins with the brain and works down, AL begins with the "boots"
and pushes up.
    The promotion of artificial life has many different stimuli. One of
its gurus, Chris Langton, says: 'We would like to build models that
are so lifelike that they cease to become models of life and become
examples of life themselves.' A less spectacular motivation is to view
AL as a generator of insight into the understanding of natural life.
And, as always, when it comes to new and challenging areas, the old
technological imperative lurks in the background: if it is possible to
realize something, then do it.
    The accumulated views on AL have crystallized into two main
schools: weak artificial life and strong artificial life. The weak artificial
life school wants to simulate the mechanisms of natural biology.
The strong artificial life proponents strive for the creation of living
creatures, a process sometimes called computational ethology.
    Preoccupation with AL gives rise to several philosophical questions
and also to some problematic definitions. A definition of life given in
this book involves the use of autopoiesis. Suppose that a machine
extracts energy from the environment, grows, reproduces and repairs
an injury to its body. Is this machine living or not? Alternatively, is
something missing in the definition? Complexity, self-organization,
emergent behaviour and adaptive responses are attributes inherent
to all living creatures and are attributes hitherto only occurring in the
bodies of biological creatures. Anyhow, life is a process and it is the
form of this process, not the matter, that is the essence of life. Many
researchers state that the logic governing this process is what counts,
not the physical medium where it resides. Life is characterized by
what it is doing rather than by what it is made of. Apparently, the
secret of life lies not with the chemical ingredients as such, but with
the logical structure and organizational arrangement of the molecules.
But life is not located in the property of any single molecule. It is a
collective property of systems of interacting molecules.
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE               341


    Of all concepts to define life, complexity seems to have a key role.
In living systems, the whole is always more than the sum of its parts.
Living systems are tremendously complex and so many variables are
at work that the overall behaviour may only be understood as the
emergent consequences or the holism of all interactions.
    Now, let us assume that all of the qualities listed above exist
within a very advanced computer program. If human beings then
watch on a monitor how artificial organisms grow, eventually mutate,
reproduce and struggle for survival, is this life which is being observed
and if so, does it reside within a body or not?
    To solve this problem the Duck Test — a kind of Turing test —
has been proposed by some AL researchers. This witty idea can be
traced to the work of the French engineer, Jacques de Vaucanson,
who during the 18th century constructed an extremely realistic
mechanical duck. 'If it looks like a duck and behaves like a duck, it
belongs to the category of ducks.' In other words, if an artificial
organism gives a perfect imitation of a living being and cheats an
observer, it is living, no matter what it is constructed of. The core of
life is then to be found in its logical organization, not in the material
wherein it resides.
    Most biologists agree in that the sole purpose of life is living,
remaining and active; something which inevitably must bring about
various kinds of self-interest. Therefore, to build a machine imitating
life requires a construction oriented solely towards the maintenance
of its own physical frame where life resides. Such a machine should
not allow disconnection of its own electrical power and should react
like the computer HAL in the film A Space Odyssey — 2001. Perhaps
the HAL test would satisfy the needs of the computer ethologist.
    AL seems to have started with something that appeared to be
quite simple but developed into something very complicated — a
complexity that was sometimes impossible to distinguish from what
appears to be random. In 1968, the English mathematician Horton
Conway working at the University of Cambridge, invented a self-
developing computer game called the Game of Life. A deterministic
set of rules served as the laws of physics, and the internal computer
clock determined the elapse of time when the game started.
342        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Designed as a kind of cellular automata, the screen was divided
into cells whose states were determined by the states of their
neighbours. The set of rules decided what happened when small
squares inhabiting the cells were moved, thereby triggering a cascade
of changes throughout the system. According to their moves, the
squares could die (and disappear from the screen) or remain as
survivors arranging themselves with their neighbours into certain
configurations. New squares could also be born and placed on the
screen. From Conway's description we read the following:

• Life occurs on a virtual checkerboard. The squares are called cells.
  They are in one of two states: alive or dead. Each cell has eight
  possible neighbours, the cells which touch its sides and its corners.
• If a cell on the checkerboard is alive, it will survive in the next time
  step (or generation) if there are either two or three neighbours also
  alive. It will die of overcrowding if there are more than three live
  neighbours, and it will die of exposure if there are fewer than two.
• If a cell on the checkerboard is dead, it will remain dead in the next
  generation unless exactly three of its eight neighbours are alive. In
  that case, the cell will be 'born' in the next generation.

   What happened when the game started was that the game
played itself, determined by the overall rules. Most of the simple
initial configurations settled into stable patterns. Others settled
into periodical configurations while some acquired very complex
biographies. One of the most interesting discoveries was the 'glider',
a five cell object that shifted its body with each generation, always
moving in the same direction over the screen. It was an oscillating,
moving system without physical mass, apparently some kind of
evolving artificial life adapting itself and reproducing.
   Later, Conway proved that the game was unpredictable; no one
could determine whether its patterns were endlessly varying or
repeating themselves. Embedded in its logical structure was a capacity
to generate unlimited complexity; a complexity of the same kind as
found in real biological organisms. The emergence of a stable pattern
in the game is shown in Figure 7.5.
                        ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE                   343




                                    ••                ••
              ••••                  ••              •    •
                                    ••                ••
               Gc ner itio lO    Gt ner itio 11      Generation 2


       Figure 7.5 The emergence of a stable pattern in the Game of Life.



   A common view among the AL researchers emerged that life in
general was the result of a certain critical measure of complexity.
When this level was reached, objects might self-reproduce quite
open-endedly and thereby start a process of further complication.
This emerging process was entirely self-organizing and apparently
against all odds. But it happened over and over again as if life was
inevitable, propagating over time.
   For some researchers a corollary of this phenomenon was that the
building material of the Universe was pure information. The ongoing
creation and expansion of the Universe was an ultimate cosmic
simulation and the computer was the Universe itself. Life's pro-
gramming language was four-based instead of binary, built on the
four basic chemicals creating the genetic code. If Nature seems
unpredictable or random it has seldom to do with the lack of rules
or algorithms. The point is our difficulty to see whether they are
extremely complicated or overly simple. Therefore, nothing is done
by Nature which cannot be done by a computer. Deterministic
consequences of basic rules are however just as difficult to detect and
understand in complex AL-simulations as in Nature.
   A famous experiment in simulated biology was done by the
American Chris Langton in Arizona in 1979. He was one of the first
to use cellular automata programs to study environmental stability
for living organisms. The program consisted of an infinite plane
divided into square cells and populated at random. Cells that were
344        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



isolated died off because they could not reproduce, while cells in
overcrowded areas perished due to lack of resources. Survivors and
multipliers were cells with a specified number of living neighbours.
These basic rules allowed the production of artificial, electronic,
"living" organisms made up of many cells, which interacted with
each other in very complex ways. A parameter which measured the
size of the area where cells were influenced by neighbours, reflected
the amount of chaos in the environment. When this parameter was
too high, the ensemble of organisms become unstable, fluctuated and
died out. When too low, the organisms survived but did not change
due to too little competition. A middle value between the two extremes
was, however, an optimum place where the organisms thrived and
showed a gradual evaluation resembling life on Earth.
    In his artificial world built on the computer screen, Langton was
seeking the simplest configuration which could reproduce itself
according to the same principles as living organisms that obey
biological laws. His solution was a series of what he called loops, on
the screen, resembling the letter Q and consisting of a square with a
tail. The loops incorporated three layers of cells where the core layer
contained the data necessary for reproduction. The rules dictating
the generation flow allowed a certain growth of the tail until its
decided maximum was reached when certain conditions were ful-
filled. It thereafter turned 90° to the left three times until it had
completed a new square. When the newly formed square resembled
its parent, information was passed to the offspring and the two loops
separated. The internal arrangement of the cells was then changed to
an exact copy of the parent and the reproduction was completed (see
Figure 7.6).
    An independent shape, consisting of pure information and
reproducing itself, obeying deterministic rules of an artificial world,
existed on the computer screen. Apparently, it was an organism
 consisting of patterns of computer instructions maintaining themselves
 through time, executing the very information of which they consisted.
 The process was the same as in real organisms and the question was
whether it should be regarded as simulated or genuine life.
                           ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE



              22222222                          22222222
             2170140142                        2401111172
             2022222202                        2122222202
             272    212                        202    212
             212    212                        242    272
             202    212                        212    202
             272    212                        202    212
             21222222122222                    272    27222222222212
             207107107111112                   210710710710710711112
              2222222222222                     2222222222222222222

                 Initial                            Intermediate
                                                  2
                                                 212
                                                 272
                                                 202
                                                 212
              22222222   22222222          222222272           22222222
             2017017012 2111170172        2111701702          2170140142
             2722222272 2122222202        2122222212          2022222202
             212    202        212        21     272          272    212
             202    212        272        20     202          212    212
             272    242        202        24     212          202    212
             212    202        212        21     272          272    212
             202    21222222222272        2022222202          21222222122222
             271111104104107107102        2410710712          207107107111112
              2222222222222222222          22222222            2222222222222


                      Final                   Two new

                 Figure 7.6 Langton's self-reproducing loops.




    Several years have passed since the basic work of Conway and
Langton. Similar work has been done by many other scientists and
experiments with self-organizing, computer-insect colonies have
shown how local interaction creates emergent, unprogrammed
behaviour (see Langton 1989). Evolution of the same kind as in the
natural world clearly exists in a virtual computer world. Symbiotic
processes, natural selection including predation and growing stability
and order, have been detected in simulations by Danny Hillis (1985)
using his famous Connection Machine.
    A conclusion tells us that AL is to understand the phenomenon of
life by synthesis. That is joining simple element together in order to
generate lifelike behaviour in man-made systems. It said that life is
not a property of matter per se, but the organization of that matter.
It resides in the organization of the molecules, not in the molecules
themselves.

                                          *
346        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Computer viruses

Hitherto the only appreciable influence of AL on our own physical
reality has been the consequences of computer viruses. Computer
viruses reproduce and propagate by copying themselves into another
computer or to some kind of electronic memory. They manage the
metabolism of its host and implement their own functions just as real
viruses do in a cell. They respond to stimuli in their environment
and could even mutate and evolve. Living their whole life within the
computer and its network, they have no independent existence of its
own. Released computer viruses can be seen as an automated attack
on a computer system with certain destructive aims. The result of the
attack may have the following effects (Warman 1993):

• Interruption. Constant access to data stored in the computer is
  interrupted, sometimes for prolonged periods. This may have
  serious implications for business activities, for example.
• Interception. Access to internal information may be used to the
  creator's advantage.
• Modification. Internal information is changed by the attacker or
  replaced by misleading or inaccurate data.
• Fabrication. An extreme modification where data or transactions
  are entered into the information system in order to produce
  disinformation.

   Computer viruses represent the claim for strong AL and the
similarities between artificial and natural viruses are remarkable. Both
are incomplete organisms fulfilling their sole aim of surviving by use
of an host mechanism. By infecting, replicating and infecting again
they preserve their individual code in different locations. However,
the significant difference between a computer virus and a biological
one is that the former has been written by a programmer for a certain
purpose, whereas the latter arises spontaneously in nature.
   Computer viruses have their own natural history and may be
seen as a result of combination of predecessors like computer
worms, logic bombs and Trojan horses. The worm is a piece of
code which makes copies of itself intended to occupy accessible
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE               347


memory or disk storage space. When all space is occupied, the worm
proceeds to the next free space into another computer via the network
(if any).
    The Trojan horse is a computer code which generally looks
innocent and claims to be something other than what it is. When
activated, the program begins its destructive activity, that is, deleting
files from the computer's secondary memory. A certain kind of Trojan
horse is the trapdoor, which consists of hidden extra code that enables
the creator of the program to obtain easy and unauthorized access to
the computer system without the normal log-on procedure.
    The logic bomb is a relative of the Trojan horse with its program
code remaining dormant until a specific circumstance will release it.
The detonation may be initiated when a certain person is deleted
from a payroll or by the system clock (a time bomb).
    The various infecting and replicating strategies used by real viruses
generally have their counterpart in the computer viruses. Classification
of computer viruses according to their attacking strategy gives the
following.

• Shell viruses. Create a shell around the code of the original program
  which therefore becomes a subroutine of the virus. This can be
  compared with biological viruses infecting cells and operating
  outside the cell nucleus.
• Additive viruses. Hook their code onto the host program. This can
  be compared with biological viruses which link their genetic code
  to the DNA in the cell.
• Exchange viruses. Replace the host code with their own code lines.
  This can be compared with biological viruses which replace the
  cell DNA with their own.

    One of the most spectacular releases of a computer virus was
made in November 1988 by Robert Morris Jr, a 21-year-old student
at Cornell University. From the very beginning Morris lost control
over his program. He could only watch powerless as it replicated
itself through the university network and then beyond. This creation
came to be known as the 'Internet Worm' when it congested all
computers and finally shut down the whole network. When this
348        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



was a fact some hours later, millions of users were affected. The
losses were counted in hundreds of million dollars, including
reprogramming and lost computer time.
   Computer viruses have now existed for about 25 years, and hitherto
have only evolved through the actions of human programmers. Their
random variations have been clearly destructive for themselves and
some kind of spontaneous evolution has not yet been detected.
Effective vaccination programs written to neutralize all known
computer viruses are now standard in most computer applications.
In spite of this, many computer scientists and other researchers express
concern for a future uncontrolled development. The possibility for a
computer organism really going out of control by some kind of
mutation, operating only for its own needs, may cause serious threats
to our whole society.
   Unengaged people see this attitude as overly pessimistic and state
that one always turns the machines off if something seems to be
dangerous. The counter-argument says that we never know when
this point has come and that the turning off of our computers in itself
is a threat to our high-tech society.




A gloomy future

In a previous chapter (see p. 22) the existing pessimism at the turn of
the foregoing century was mentioned. In the presence of our own
turn of the century we must establish the fact that the world and
society still are considered to have a very gloomy future by many
scientists. The main threat to humanity accounted by them, however,
is not the year 2000 problem with its malfunctioning computers. It is
something much worse, namely the inevitable disappearing of the
human race in favour of a new, electronic creature. This view should
be interpreted in the light of what has been written in the previous
pages regarding AL and computer viruses.
    In a well-known paper, the computer mathematician Alexander
Bolonkin (1999), a professor of NASA, states that the worst threat to
                      ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE              349


humanity is not nuclear war, collision with comets or AIDS (somebody
will always survive). Instead it is the emergence of superior computer
brains which will extinct humanity.
    Bolonkin specifies that the main distinction of biological systems
is the ability for unlimited self-propagation or reproduction. Man has
now given birth to a new kind of complex top level systems which
are based not on biological but on electronic principles. Just now
they have evolved to the fifth generation and are built on new
principles of light. Within a century they will have the capabilities of
the human brain. The same path which took biological humanity
tens of millions of years to complete, will now be followed by
computers in an extremely short time. The electronic brains will,
however, not stop at the human level but continue to improve
themselves. They will soon surpass the human brain by hundreds
and thousands of times in all fields by use of all the data and
knowledge produced by human civilization and by other electronic
brains. The fullness of their education will only take the time needed
to write it into their memory.

   'When the electronic brain reaches the human level, humanity
   will have done its duty, completed its historical mission, and
   people will no longer be necessary for Nature, God and ordinary
   expediency'.

   When analysing such a situation, most intellectuals makes a grave
error when they believe that time for the big rest has arrived for
humanity. It is assumed that recreation, entertainment, art and creative
thinking now is in sight when electronic brains will do all the dirty
work. The electonic brains should be our servants. But will an upper
level mind become the servant for a lower level? Are we servant for
our nearest ancestors, the apes? Do not we use them for our own
needs — killing them in medical experiments if we find it necessary?
   It is an overwhelming evidence that an other kind of civilizaton
created on a superior electronic principle will regard us as in the
same way as we regard lower level animals. They will use us for
own purposes and kill us if we arrange for them. It is necessary to
remember that Europeans conquered the Americas and decreased its
350        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



native population to practically zero due to superior competence.
Furthermore, Europeans enslaved more than twelve million of the
African population. Consequently, we are lucky that superiour
creatures from other worlds have not visited us yet (otherwise we
would reach them first). In all probability they will treat us as we
have treated our own slaves.
   Another analytic error in this context would be to withhold that
why not construct computers which obey the famous robotic laws of
Asitnov (1968) reading the following:

1. A robot may not injure a human being, or, through inaction, allow
   a human being to come to harm.
2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings, except
   when such orders would conflict with the First law.
3. A robot must protect its own existence, as long as such protection
   does not conflict with the First and/or Second law.

    Unfortunately, this is just as unrealistic as to forbid the progress
of science and technology. Up to now humanity has not been able to
stop nuclear research which must be considered to really have a
devastating potential. Any nation doing this should immediately lag
behind and in the long run be the victim of its neighbours. It is
possible to state that any attempt to stop or slow down the techno-
logical progress is an action counter to the meaning of the existence
of nature — the construction of complex upper level systems.
Such actions would be against Nature and the law of "accelerated
exchange" formulated by the computer scientist Ray Kurtzweil. This
tells us that knowledge creates technological advances which in turn
generates more knowledge in a self-amplifying and accelerating
process.
    A single electronic creature cannot establish a stable system even
if it has great power. The new breed had to reproduce similar creatures
of equal intellect and the result will be that the collective first rises.
Of course they will give equal rights to those similar to themselves
as every individual can write into its memory all the knowledge and
programs created by their own society. With accelerating speed this
civilization will disperse into the solar system, then in our galaxy,
                        ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND LIFE                  351

then in the universe. The next level of complex systems will then use
the previous one and if the universe is bound in space and time, the
process will end by the creation of the Super Brain. Such a brain may
control the natural laws and may be considered the God.
   In his paper Bolonkin ends with the exhortation that Humanity
must realize its role in the development of nature. Its historical mission
has reached an end with the emergence of the electronic brain.
Humanity must exit from the historical scene together with all other
animals and the vegetable world and do it with dignity. Humanity
should not cling to its existence and should not make any obstacles
for the new electronic society. We were those who gave birth to the
electronic civilization which created the Super Brain!

                                       *

Review questions and problems

1. Why is the hardware considered relatively unimportant among proponents
   of AI?
2. What does the term human brain equivalent imply in the AI area?
3. Discuss if a computer ever should be able to pass a Turing test and if not,
   what should the main reason be.
4. Explain the functional principle of a translating telephone and interpret
   the use of Esperanto as an intermediary link.
5. AL researchers state that the core of life is to be found in its logical
   organization, not in the material wherein it resides. Discuss if this is a
   reasonable standpoint.
6. Considering the nature of AL and computer viruses, is it possible to
   imagine a completely harmless virus?
7. Does computer science know any self-mutating viruses?
8. Can Bolonkin's view of the future of humanity be taken as a serious
   scientific hypothesis?
                                 8

      Organizational Theory and
       Management Cybernetics
• The origin of modern trading corporations
• The development of classical organizational theory
• The non-avoidable hierarchy
• Organizational design
• Multiple perspectives of management cybernetics
• A systems approach in ten points

'In public service the organization's money is the means and
operations are the goal. In private corporations money is the goal
and business the means/



O    rganizations are a product of the surrounding society whose
     needs they serve. They have to survive and keep to its identity
in this environment which must be thoroughly known if success
should be possible. A characteristic of this social milieu includes the
following:

• All changes in society take place with increasing speed.
• Science and technology develop exponentially. Social adjustments
  and behaviour do not keep pace.
• The complexification of every system is rapidly growing.
• Environment as a whole is becoming increasingly turbulent.
• Society is increasingly materialistic and acquisitive.


                                  352
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS         353



• Contrasts between poor and rich, employed and unemployed, and
  between different ethic and religious groups increase all the time.
• Confrontation and violence of different kinds is becoming pervasive.
• Confusion and uncertainty is part of everyday life.
• The society as a whole is transformed toward global civilization.
• Information and its manifestation like money is instantly mobile
  around the globe.

   In spite of this turbulent environment, the organization has become
the most characteristic and powerful human system of our time. It
has replaced most of man's natural world which earlier was his closest
environment with an artificial structure. Many of the big organizations
has an economical turnover much exceeding the modern national
state. Governments are dependent of its profits and the citizen in
general for their support. It has involved man in a dependence of a
faceless growing power which often cannot be given a concrete form.
Organizations are creations of man, established with the sole aim to
realize goals that individually acting persons scarcely can achieve. Its
main idea is the division of labour which imply that when there is
no labour to divide, there is no need for the organization.
   Several economists state that the existence of organizations must
be associated with the concept of the invincible hand. This phenomenon
was introduced in 1776 by the Scottish economist, Adam Smith. It
tells us that if man strives for his own self-interest, this will
automatically induce advantages for all members of society. The wish
to be rich, to do business and participate in the market is shared by
most members of mankind. It is the traditional way to get social
prestige and is one of the main reasons why organizations exist.
   In spite of being the invention of man, organizations often appear
to take on a personality of their own and live their own lives. In this
process they indicate emergent properties which scarcely can be
unveiled by use of conventional scientific methods. Particularly big
organizations seems to survive independently of individual persons
or smaller interest groups. Thereby they seems to have an insatiable
appetite for new resources — not in order to grow — only not to
stagnate. What differs the human organization from other systems is
354        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



that communication both within and between them is mainly linguistic
and semiotic. Another difference is that the transactional exchanges
in the organization are based on the human values of the things
exchanged.
    Like all human creations, organizations can be both very fragile
and very robust. They can be established over one night and survive
in hundreds of years in contrast to the biological organisms which
originally created them. At the same time they can be crowded out
and dissipate their resources within a few month. Consequently,
they are both more vulnerable and more long-lived than biologic
organisms. Actions of one single individual may severely impel or
destroy even the most influential organization. In contrast to them,
however, they have the advantage of being able to renew their integral
parts and thereby (at least theoretically) continue to act in an unlimited
future. In contrast to genuine organisms, organizations are composed
of independent components like families, interest groups and,
individuals who often strives towards counteracting goals.
   The organization per se can never be assigned some moral
properties. It can neither be ascribed expectations nor plans and its
destruction is no more a catastrophe or success than the storming
of the Bastilj. From an organizational point of view, man is more
significant as a consumer than as a producer. Regarding the
bureaucrats of the organization, they have far more influence over
the existence of other people than they have regarding their own
position. For the bureaucracy, people are seen only as objects and a
source of irritation as long as they do not unconditionally surrender.
    There are many reasons for people to work in organizations. To
get away from home, to get an eagerly awaited paycheck, to make
friends, to make a social contribution, to learn particular skills and,
to get recognition are among the individual motives. Some enjoy to
work when they are being told what to do and feel safe in a structured,
well-ordered environment. Others are satisfied with doing one thing
well and over and over again while certain persons want to make
their own decisions and get new challenges. Quite general, people
join big organizations to satisfy needs that they cannot satisfy on
their own.
             ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS         355



    The organization includes special role-structures formed by human
beings to carry out specific tasks and realize particular objectives.
Organizations may be private or public, business, educational,
political, social service, or of other nature. They are the origin of the
creation and propagation of various kinds of technical systems. Its
paradox, however, is that it becomes all the less controllable with
each new appearing control technique. At the same time it becomes
all the less predictable with each progress in information processing.
Another paradox is that every organization has its own "mal-function
factor". Investigations show that between 20 and 25 per cent of all
instructions in the work are messed up by managers and workers
and nothing can be done about it. It is a kind of an organizational law.
    Finally, an attempt to define the distinctive mark of the human
organization may give us the following points:

• It represents certain preferences regarded as a unit.
• It makes decisions and tries to implement and optimize them.
• It determines its own internal structure and the aims of the
  subsystems.
• It has an internal control system.
• It leaves no stone unturned in order to ensure its continued existence
  (like human individuals).




The origin of modern trading corporations

To solve large-scale problems of different kind has always implied
the compiling and combining of resources with labour. Certain goal
can only be attained by cooperation and collaboration resulting in
division of labour and specialization.
   The mediaeval man was well aware of these facts which lay behind
his attempts of new social organization, where the most successful
become the corporation with limited liability. Such a corporation was
originally established to serve a public good. A plain example is the
foundation of the first universities in Italy and France during the
Middle Ages.
356        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The corporation in very early times, however, evolved from a
venture regarding public purposes to a phenomenon mainly dedicated
to the fulfilment of private gains. The league of merchants in Europe
can be considered the real creators of the modern corporation as it
promoted both growth and competition through apprenticeship.
These self-governing groups were usually presented its authority
from the king or crown and possessed exclusive rights of toll-free
trade in a given area. Such grants and also more specific blessings
given to certain persons were soon to be seen as rights rather than
privileges.
   The trading corporation or company soon grew in size with its
practices of using partnership in business. Partnership was, however,
an inadequate and often dangerous way of organization when the
trade grew. A big problem was the possibility to raise enough
capital for large projects. Another was that each partner was
responsible for all the others and if one of them died the partnership
was dissolved.
   The demands to be satisfied by a well-working corporation
therefore should be according to the following:

1. The accumulation of large sums of capital should be enhanced.
2. The life span of the corporation should outlast the life span or
   interest of its owners (it should have a life of its own).
3. Risks and liabilities of those participating in the corporation should
   be limited.
4. It should be possible to participate without involvement in daily
   management.
   These goals should be realized through 'incorporation', as a
'limited' liability company. Here we see the origin of the well-known
abbreviations 'Inc.' and 'Ltd.' in connection with British company
names. This new institutional structure was able to secure necessary
credits and span large blocks of space and time as well as handle
long-lasting ventures. It was supported by a governmental legislative
advocacy which by degrees accepted to threat companies as indi-
viduals. Facilitating factors for this new kind of corporation was the
familiarization with Italian double entry bookkeeping and Arabic
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS        357



numerals. Separation of accounts in connection with limited liability
and increased calculation speed was now possible and conquered
the world about 1600 BC.
   The new corporations soon proved to be a phenomenon of great
flexibility. Created for a specific purpose, documented in legally
specified instruments, it was only responsible to its owners. The
liability of its owners or stockholders was limited to what was
invested. New stockholders could constantly be added and old ones
could quit without hindrance. Owners could participate without being
directly absorbed of its daily management. Decision-making and
management could be standardized and simplified and productivity
enhanced. There was a clear distinction between corporation and
society and the modern corporation with its owners, managers, and
workers was born. By this organization, the company could fulfil (at
least in theory) the demands of the involved parties and assume the
necessary risks and raise enough funds even for very large projects.
   While the owners were interested in profit maximizing, the
government was interested in collecting taxes. The consumers of the
company production were interested in the quality of its goods and
services. The employed, in their turn, were interested in job security,
raised wages and working conditions. With this background, it
is easy to see that the modern organization is pluralistic, that is, it
comprises different kinds of goals and several types of independent
interests. Several models regarding the influence of organizational
stakeholders have been launched (for instance Simon 1976) which
recognize the following groups:

• shareholders
• lenders
• suppliers
• customers
• state and community
• competitors
• management
• employees
358        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   From a social point of view, the corporation has certain dis-
advantages. One is that unethical company behaviour only rests on
the company itself, not on its owners who scarcely could be held
responsible. Today, the corporation can, on principle, disclaim
practically all responsibility for what is happening outside the
organization. Another is the pressure from the stockholders that profits
always should be made, including social responsibility or not. 'Limited
responsibility' has proved to be both the strength and drawback of
the corporation.
   Today, when corporations transcend national borders, they have
got even more flexibility. Above all, they have been masters in playing
off one interest against another, but also to hide what really is going
on. Costs and profits are often hidden by moving them across different
borders. Human rights and ecological matters are seldom considered
beyond the responsibility to improve efficiency of organizations which
are guests in a (often third world) country. In finding ways to limit
liability, corporations also find ways to avoid responsibility...




The development of organizational theory

The industrial revolution and the resulting technological, economical
and social development initiated a great interest in organizational
questions. But first at the foregoing turn of the century, different
organizational schools had been established. The advancement
of organizational theory cannot be separated from contemporary
scientific and social development. Scientific management and
bureaucratic design were brain-childs of dominating broad social
trends involving the mechanization of life generally.
   The school of scientific management — or the movement for
improved efficiency — was introduced by the American engineer
Frederik Taylor (1856-1915), and got great influence in the first part
of the new century. By that time, American industry grappled with
great problems. The working tasks had been more and more
specialized and mechanized. Supervision and coordination of work
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS        359



had been increasingly difficult and working quality and moral tended
to deteriorate. No real training of the workforce existed and the
individual worker had to learn his task by asking and copying his
colleagues. The productivity was very low.
   When Taylor begun to analyze the problems, he come to the
following conclusions:
• The used method in production were built on old habits instead of
  systematical studies.
• A rigid hierarchical structure managed the production with
  implacable discipline and individual worker skill was not utilized.
• No measures existed regarding individual working performance or
  the average achievement per day for a standard worker.
• Workers opposed every attempt to increase productivity as this
  was a threat to their own employment and position.

   Taylor soon realized the connection between man-machine-material
and begun a close investigation of the critical factors. Process charts
regarding body movements, working methods and machine speeds
in connection with different kind of raw materials were worked out.
This new production analysis was called working studies and later on
resulted in what become the well-known industrial MTM-system
(method, time, measurement). To motivate and enhance working
performance, new settings of wage rates was introduced, the
piecework contract. Here the pay was set according to a standard
achievement. Achievements above this standard implied better pay
and below less.
   In his rationalization of production management, Taylor
recommended four measures.

• Every task should be studied according to scientific methods, not
  heuristics.
• A good cooperation between management and workforce must be
  established in order to facilitate and develop scientific methods in
  production.
• The most skilled worker should be selected for every specific task
  and thereafter be trained and developed for this very task.
360        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Assignments and responsibility should be shared between
  management and workers according to the idea of the functional
  organization.

   The functional organization should replace the old more
hierarchical one. It implied that planning and paper-work should
be moved away from the shop floor to a planning department.
Supervisors should take a more direct role in the production and be
responsible for a few specialized functions. The workers strength
and swiftness should be rewarded, rather than his ability of thinking.
He should have the best allotment of work and rest and have
the best available tools, all in order to bring about maximum
productivity.
   The school of scientific management has been accused of being
authoritarian and a promoter of a mechanistic view of man. Its
main orientation was to make humans fit the requirements of the
organization. Workers were expected to behave as predictable, reliable,
and efficient as the machines they were attached to. Thinking was
reserved for management and doing for the worker. He was regarded
as another cog in the industrial machinery and mainly understood
as a technical problem. The principles of scientific management
sometimes brought about a very negative attitude among the workers
although the productivity was increased dramatically. Alienation and
uneasiness were common consequences.
   Factors influencing working life and productivity were, however,
also studied from a psychological and sociological perspective. The
American sociologist Elton Mayo (1880-1949) become well-known
for his laboratory studies of monotony, tiredness and exhaustion and
established the school of Human relations. This school is a reaction
upon the mechanistic view of man in working life and mainly
associated with what has been called the Hawthorne-experiments.
   The Hawthorne plants were situated in Chicago and owned by
Western Electric Company during the 1920s. They were frequently
hit by strikes and an extensive dissatisfaction over the working
conditions prevailed. Engineers trained in working studies according
to Taylor were consulted but with no success. The owners then turned
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS       361



to the academic world which for the first time became involved in
problems regarding industrial production. Among the scientific
studies were illumination experiments. One hypothesis said that more
and better illumination of working places influenced the production
output. But one soon discovered that every change of the illumination,
both positive and negative, brought about beneficial effects.
   Other changes were also undertaken. Working periods were
shortened, free refreshments were introduced, pauses were prolonged
and curtailed etc. What was done brought about better production
which was considered mysterious. It was finally explained under the
name of the Hawthorne-effect. This effect was generated when the
working force met with every kind of interest directed towards it.
They appreciated that the management took interest in their working
situation and responded with better production.
   The main findings of the human relations school was the
importance of group-standards and informal managership. They are
summed up in the following points.

• The working man on the plant floor claims gratitude and safety.
  His behaviour is influenced by non-monetary rewards and
  punishments. The effect of economical incitement should not be
  overestimated.
• The group standards of the working force are stronger than
  prevailing standards of the company. The worker is in the first
  hand, a member of his group, only secondary one of the company's
  employees. If the difference between the two standards is small,
  individual resistance towards changes is small.
• Social standards together with technical and physical prerequisite
  define production output. Therefore, in practice, the working group
  determines the output and not labour management.
• Every company has both a formal and an informal organization
  working in parallel. It is often contra-productive to counteract the
  informal connections which are built on personal contacts and
  preferences. The best is to induce the informal structure to support
  the goals of the company. The formal leader states minimum
  performance while the informal states maximum performance.
362        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The human relation mentality has been accused of smoothing over
the conflict of interests which always exists between employees and
employer. Another weakness is that it exclusively works from a
sociological and psychological point of view. The implicit values of
the participating researcher are also said to have influenced the
obtained results.
   When Taylor saw things from 'bottom up', his contemporary
colleague Henry Fayol (1841-1925) saw organizational problems
from above and become a prominent name of what has been called
the administrative school. This school is particularly associated
with systematically organized management. In certain respects it is
based upon Fayol's view of man who he considered indolent,
responsibility avoiding and authority inclined.
   For Fayol's six management functions were the basis for a well
functioning industrial production. They were:

• administrative
• accountative
• securitative
• financial
• commercial
• technical

   These functions or activities could then be divided into the
following subactivities: planning, organization, giving orders, coordination
and control. He also recommended fourteen principles for a good
administration. However, they should be followed with a certain
care. The most important among them were:

• authority and responsibility should go hand in hand
• order and method should always prevail
• the wholeness is more important than the parts
• every employee should only have one superior
• information should flow though official channels
• all persons working in the organization must show discipline
• division of labour and specialization is necessary
             ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS           363



    In contrast to the school of human relations, Fayol emphasizes the
significance of the formal organization and gives many hints how to
solve practical, managerial problems. He is the father of concepts like
standard command, staff specialists, organizational chart etc. Fayol's
predecessors worked within the boundaries of the school when
they introduced the line staff concept. This states three existing
formal phenomena in every corporation, namely, line, function and
staff relation. With them, job descriptions were associated.
    Like scientific management, the administrative school has been
accused of a mechanistic understanding of man. It is naive to believe
that high productivity can be administrated without consideration of
psychological values.
    According to Max Weber (1864-1920), the well-known German
sociologist and university professor, bureaucracy was the most
efficient way to take advantage of human resources. Bureaucracies
arise and persist out of a basic human need for security and regularity.
The main goal of bureaucracy is to standardize procedures to reduce
ambiguity and variation. In organizations which demand stable
functioning, like the military and the church, decentralization leads
to disorganization or chaos and inefficient work of the whole.
Improving some parts reduces effectiveness of other parts.
    As founder of the bureaucratic school, Weber took the aim to
formulate general theories relevant for all kinds of organizations.
Weber defined the organization in a sociological sense as 'a system
of human activities continuously aimed at a specific goal'. The specific
goals were easily recognizable in stable, traditionally organizational
structures like the church, the military, public administration, heavy
industry etc. Typically, they were designed for most efficient allocation
and coordination of their activity by principles of bureaucracy.
    The most significant with the traditional and stable organization
was the structure of its authority relations which were examined by
Weber. Here he differentiated between power and authority. Power
has a man who can force others to obedience. A person with authority
is, however, obeyed voluntarily. Authority is a form of domination
which subordinates consider to be legitimate. It does not necessarily
imply any sense of rationality, right, or natural justice. It is rather the
364        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



willingness of the subordinates to believe in the claims of the dominant
which is important (and of course that the domination is bearable
and not worth challenging). Authority can be legitimated in three
ways.

• In traditional organizations by inheritance and custom.
• In bureaucratic organizations by formal rules and position.
• By energetic or charismatic personal attributes.

   For Weber, the ideal organization is a rule-bases phenomenon
established according to bureaucratic principles with a personal
hierarchy as a control system. Individual status and power is legi-
timized with position in the structure — not with formal qualification
or talent. The ideal organization has:

• Hierarchical structure
• Rigid organization
• High formalization
• Departmentalization
• Specialization and division of labour
• Strict distribution of responsibility
• Vertical chain of command (each subordinate one superior only)
• Well-defined internal relations and clear lines of command
• Impersonal relations and communication. The written report is
  standard
• Official reporting is used for coordination. The employee only
  communicates with levels just above or below himself
• The superior has the right to command the subordinate, the
  subordinate has the duty to obey the command
• Program management, e.g. specified norms and rules for the
  behaviour
• A system of authority which is impersonal and belongs to the
  position rather than the individual
• Positions awarded on the basis of formal competence. Personnel
  are not chosen as in political bodies
• A system of responsibility and accountability, that is, obligation to
  carry out the task according to policy and standards
             ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS        365


• Safe employment and regulated system of promotion with
  possibility to earn one's living (bribes and extras unnecessary)
• Distinct separation of members' organizational and personal lives

    The existing world-view of the bureaucratic school takes it for
granted that the individual is willing to regard himself like a cog in
a big machinery. If not, several disadvantages must be associated
with bureaucratic management. The main weakness has always been
that rules and regulations not only define unacceptable behaviours
but also define minimum levels of acceptable performance.
    The structure-functionalists (or modern bureaucrats) has taken as
their task to explain the functional consequences of the formal classical
organization. Their investigations is directed towards both desirable
as well as non-desirable effects of such organizations. A starting point
for the organizational researcher Atnitai Etzioni was that a condition
of tension always exists between the need of the organization and that
of the individual. To be a subordinate always means an encroachment
of personal integrity and a source of conflict.
    A condition of tension prevails between formal and informal
relations and between management and directed persons. Also, a
tension exists between rational and irrational behaviour and between
 discipline and independence. Such tensions can be decreased but
never completely eliminated just as the phenomenon of alienation
which sometimes is desirable.
    Why do people in an organization obey orders and follow
 instructions? According to Etzioni, the answer was engagement and
formal guidelines. These must, however, be based upon some kind of
 power. Etzioni differs between the following kinds of power:

• normative power (symbolic means like prestige, appreciation,
  devotion);
• benefit power (founded in material benefits like food, clothing,
  money);
• compulsive power (violence, physical punishment).

   Another well-known structure-functionalist is Philip Selznick. He
prefers to talk about responsible and creative leadership instead
366        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



of organizational efficiency. He has introduced five important,
management concepts.

• Creative leadership. Interpreted as the importance of creating a myth
  of the organization and its products.
• Responsible leadership. To be engaged, understand his task and be in
  touch with the environment.
• Institutionalizing. To create an image of the organization as very
  important and difficult to replace.
• Clinical organizational analysis. The instrument to be used in creating
  the institution.
• Distinctive competence. If an organization transforms into an
  'institution', it has developed a special, needed competence.

   The starting point for contingency theory, the dominating manage-
ment school during the 1970s, is that organizations are open systems.
As such, the exchange with the environment is of basic importance
when understanding them. This theory presumes that organizational
structures are neither freely chosen, nor incidental. Instead they
are developed under the influence of external demands, size and,
above all, technology. The aim of contingency theory is to show that
under given assumptions, certain types of organizational design are
more efficient than others and give better adaptability. Designing
parameters or contingencies of great importance (also called classic
contingency variables) are:

• organizational strategy
• organizational size
• organizational technology
• organizational environment

   The organizations need to adapt their structure to these contingency
factors. The situational imperative states that in reality there is no
strategic choice. Relationships between the contingency of strategy
and the structure of divisionalization, between size and bureau-
cratization, between environmental uncertainty and organic structure,
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS          367



are generally valid. The general theory also relates organizational
size and overall standardization and formalization positively.
Formalization is the extend to which the specific structure seeks to
regulate employee behaviour. This is done through written job
definitions, manuals of procedure, written communications and
written records of role performance.
    Organizational challenges and demands are often conflicting and
it is not possible to satisfy all of them. A common solution is to
compromise, something which is not especially inspiring for the
involved parties but many times gives rise to stable solutions.
    After the contingency theory, organizational thinking entered the
era of countless management ideas. More or less brilliant scientist
and practitioners have built a huge edifice of management abstract-
ions. Popular concepts have been included which no doubt fall outside
the scope of this book. A good summary of contemporary thinking
has, however, been edited by Auden Uris (1986) in his book 101 of
the Greatest Ideas in Management.




The non-avoidable hierarchy

To follow the development of modern organizational design is to
witness a perpetual attack on the idea of the hierarchical organization.
It has been accused from a great variety of perspectives and every
new generation has taken the aim of breaking down its vertical
boundaries. Instead they have a new revolutionary alternative design
just waiting around the corner. These alternatives includes heterarchies;
that is, systems whose components interact in such a way that none
of them is excluded from the decision process on an organizational
basis.
   The hierarchical organization has been accused of many things.
As a first and foremost vertical structure it has managers at the top
and workers at the bottom. The top is the head (headquarters!) and
at the bottom are the hands. Between are several layers translating
orders, making corrections, measuring outputs, providing materials
368        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



and reporting to the top regarding final results. The workforce are
divided in superiors and subordinates with high respectively low
status. High status employees have their career ladders while low
status workers have nothing. When rewards are based on position in
the hierarchy the only thing that counts is vertical advancement up
the ladder. Furthermore, people are paid for their position, not for
their contribution to the organization. Too often hierarchies in general
are associated with stiff bureaucracy and pertinent malfunctions such
as slow response time, rigidity toward change and internal alienation.
   In spite of all criticism, one thing is sure — the hierarchical design
of various kind of organizations will continue to exist. Hierarchies
exist because leaders exist. As long as certain persons resolve conflicts,
set direction, allocate resources and step forward as leader of
an organization in the face of the outside world, hierarchies are
unavoidable.
   Our surroundings, both natural and artificial, is arranged in a
hierarchical order. We grow up in the family hierarchy, go to school
in the school hierarchy. Later, we possibly join the army hierarchy
from the bottom or churchly hierarchy in a parish church. It is not to
overstate that the concept of hierarchy is a basic part of man's mental
world. An organization which does not have some kind of up-down
structure is very difficult to imagine. In every organization, people
want to know who is in charge, who represents them and take charge
of their interests. The problem seems to be not to avoid the hierarchy
but to make it well-functioning or healthy. In a sense, that is what
the next part deals with.




Organizational design

When society changes in many areas, the shape of the organization
quite naturally also changes. But like other phenomena in our world,
new and old organizational design also exist side by side. We therefore
can see old bureaucracies in the best of health as well as new matrix
organizations existing simultaneously. A continuum of organizational
             ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS         369



forms from mechanistic to extremely flexible is an integrated part of
our society. During the development of an organization, its age, size
and growth of the line of business are determinative for choice of its
design. Another designing parameter is environmental uncertainty.
If this is high, the organization will be designed along flexible lines
to adapt to rapid changes.
    In the attempt to find a general definition, the majority of
organizational researchers agree that the most characteristic for an
organization is the division of labour, managed by an administrative
apparatus. Such an apparatus tries to secure coordination, continuity
and goal-fulfillment by use of certain rules and by a certain structure.
What is done in practice is to execute processes of planning, command,
coordination, control and communication.
    A general problem to be solved in organizational design is the
balance between centralization and decentralization. Centralization exists
when the decisions are taken in higher levels of the organization.
Decentralization presumes that decision-making is transferred to
lower level employees. Normally centralization is associated with
certain large-scale production advantages while decentralization
implies better motivation, initiatives and accommodation among
the personnel. It must, however, be emphasized that no perfect and
normative solutions exist when it comes to organizational design.
Organizational structures which have proved to be excellent for one
company have been complete failures when transferred to others.
    No matter how the structure is arranged, an organization can be
defined as a partially self-organized system with the following
qualities:

1. Some of its components are living variables (human beings).
2. The responsibility for choice between possible alternatives of action
   in a specific situation are shared by one or more individuals
   a n d / o r groups.
3. Decisions can be related after    (a) function
                                     (b) geographical position
                                     (c) time.
370        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



4. Functionally distinguished groups are conscious about each other's
   actions by communication or by observation.
5. Certain freedom of choice exists regarding means as well as goals.

    An informal organization always accompanies the formal one. By
informal organization, it means the aggregate of personal contacts,
interactions and associated groupings of people, which do not have
any conscious common or joint purposes. As a phenomenon, it is
indefinite and structureless and has no definite subdivision. It creates
certain attitudes, understandings, social norms and ideals. As a hidden
source of power, it may sometimes influence the formal organization
in an unpredictable way. A good example is the informal organization
of the White House (in the US) during President Reagan's time. There,
the real boss very often was his wife Nancy with her own influential
personal network. Thus, the classical organizational chart on the wall
behind the managing director seldom tells the real truth.
    The most basic form of organizational design is the simple,
hierarchical structure with its pyramidal shape. It is often exemplified
by the classical organizational chart. This tells us who is the boss's
boss. See Figure 8.1.
    This chart quite naturally tells nothing about the ever-existing
informal relations in the organization. The most significant example
is the military unit from which the concepts of line/staff originate.
The "line" can be described as an order line or a chief system. An
organizational chart is often completed by job descriptions for the
different employees.
    The size of the hierarchy depends of the size of the organization.
Spontaneous cooperation in small enterprises vanishes when an
increased number of people should work together. A vertical division
of labour arise, especially when distinct leaders emerge who want to
distribute assignments, coordinate, reward and punish. Another
reason for a growing hierarchy is a growing complexity with a need
for experts, better planning and control.
    The need for hierarchy can also be related to internal a n d / o r
external conflicts and the need to resolve them. Here, a construction
is necessary which can come to a decision and implement it for
              ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS                          371




                                        President

      Who is the boss of the boss?




                                     Vice Presidents



  I          II          III                              IV           V       VI
                         Depar tmental Managers



       a          b            c         d          e          f           g        h

                                    Group Managers

                      Figure 8.1 The classical organizational chart.



example when a collision regarding choice of ends and means exists.
Strong leaders give rise to strong hierarchies.
   In the functional organization, which has some clear advantages,
the organizational tasks are divided in a number of main areas like
production, sales, economy etc. See Figure 8.2.
   The main value is specialization in procedures for problem-solving
and a homogenous background with the same terminology and
description models. Among the disadvantages are inclination toward
self-isolation of the various functional departments and a tendency
to get into conflict with each other. It is also difficult to localize
where the final responsibility lies when something goes wrong.
The various departments can easily blame each other. This kind of
organization is split-up which gives the boss the possibility to divide
and rule. Generally, power, coordination and critical information
372              GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                          Adm
                                       DIREKTOR




      Funktion          Funktion        Funktion        Funktion        Funktion
      LEADER            LEADER          LEADER          LEADER          LEADER



                         PRO-            PRO-
 PERSONNEL             DUCTION         DUCTION          MARKET         ECONOMY


                          Figure 8.2 A functional organization.



is concentrated to the highest boss who normally has a superior
overview of what is going on.
   The product or division organization is a design which is particularly
useful when there are clearly separated groups of products or services.
This gives the possibility of rapid response to a changing, competitive
market. The specialists of a certain company sector can concentrate the
effort on the product in question and take rapid decisions. A structure
of this kind is organized in independent result units (divisions), each
of which have their own product, market or business idea. (See
Fig. 8.3).
   The central management or concern management nominates and
dismisses the bosses of each division, stipulate expected results,
approve the budget and so on. The concern management also reserves
the right to make decisions which are considered common for more
divisions. All other problems are managed by the divisions themselves
in a decentralized manner.
   A relatively new kind of basic organizational structure is the matrix-
design. This organizational form has a double profit responsibility
where no particular person has a total, individual responsibility for
what is going on. Instead a joint obligation of results in two ways,
both horizontal and vertical, exists. A matrix-organization rests on a
general model which can be implemented in different ways. One
             ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS            373



                                     CENTRAL
                                   MANAGEMENT


                                                              CENTRAL
                                                               STAFF
                                                              SERVICE



               CAR            MARINE         CYCLE             SPORTS
             DIVISION         DIVISION      DIVISION          DIVISION


                        Figure 8.3 A division organization.



solution can be a double-acting structure where two or more basic
organizational forms are combined. Two divisions or one functional
subunit and one division are possible parts of the matrix-organization.
It is often stated that such an organization gives the possibilities both
to protect desirable dissimilarities between different business areas
and take advantage of existing dependencies.
    If a manufacturing company produces a number of different articles
to be sold in between themselves in very different areas, a matrix-
structure seems natural. See Figure 8.4.
    The organization must be adapted to the various local conditions
but on the same time it is natural to maintain an overarching
responsibility for the different products, regardless of where they are
sold. Here the product directors answer for the sales result for each
product in all areas while the area director is responsible for the
result within each area for all groups of products. Of course the
matrix-principle can be used within one of a companies subfunctions,
and not in the company as a whole. It can also be used to build a
matrix within a matrix (multiple-dimensional matrix).
    According to Davis and Lawrence (1977), the matrix-organizational
principles tend to generate some common problems. Among the most
obvious are:

• decision agony (the demand for joint resolution);
• struggle for power (to give up the thought of personal decision-
  power);
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS         375



companies, however, use the project-organization as their basic form.
It is employed to solve project of the following character:

• it is a non-recurrent phenomenon;
• it is a complex and far-reaching task of sufficient dimensions;
• prerequisites and condition are uncertain;
• it will mobilize parts of most existing organizational subunits;
• it has relatively well-defined start and terminal points.

   Concrete project with such character can be the development of
new administrative computer systems, rationalization of factory
production, big investment programs etc.
   Project-organization has been very popular in both private and
official enterprises as a deliverer of new advantages. Among these
the most important are:

• freedom to act in a better way
• more solid and well thought out solutions
• instructive and inspiring for the participators
• creates new pattern of cooperation
• creates influence on the organizational development
• more easy to implement solutions

   All projects normally pass through the following 6 phases:

1. project formulation (interpretation and specification of the task);
2. planning (formulation of subtasks and time schedule);
3. execution (working and work coordination);
4. coordination (of subtask to the complete project);
5. documentation (reporting the final result);
6. implementation (converting into action of the final result).

   A configuration demonstrating the relation between a temporary
project group and the basic organization is presented in Figure 8.5.
Note the similarity with a matrix-organization.
   The figure shows that the two project groups are made up of
persons from the basic organization which subsequently are released
from a corresponding amount of work there. The coordinating or
reference group work close to the high-level management. The leaders
           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                            MANAGEMENT




              REFERENCE
                GROUP




                               DEPARTMENT   DEPARTMENT   DEPARTMENT




                     PROJECT
                      GROUP




                     PROJECT
                      GROUP




                                        BASIC ORGANISATION


                      Figure 8.5 A project organization.



of the department/functions are also often represented there. The
project leader is a mandatory member of the coordination group.
    Project-organizations have their problems. One of a basic kind is
if the project leader should be appointed by the top management or
be chosen by the dedicated group. The assignment of personnel
for the project task implies that somebody is missing in the basic
unit — something which must be solved. The return to the basic unit
after a finished project can pose problems. The former group member
has accustomed to new and better working procedures and when he
returns he is only a co-worker in a traditional hierarchical system. In
general terms, the three main threats to project success are cost
escalation, delay and client dissatisfaction with the outcome.
    If critical success factors in project management should be defined,
the following are the most important

Aims
Project goals are clearly defined
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS        377



Organization
Resources are sufficient
Control mechanisms are in place and used
Project has support of top management
Communication channels are adequate
Feedback exists
Contractors are responsive to clients
People
Project manager is competent
Project team is competent

   With the establishment of modern communication technology, a
new kind of organizational structure has emerged. This is called the
virtual organization — a kind of flat and boundaryless arrangement.
It is made up of representatives from different organizations in
differing physical locations and with differing organizational
cultures.
   Its fundamental idea is to take advantage of an entrepreneurial
situation in which organizations (or pieces of them) exploit oppor-
tunities and take advantage of shared expertise, market access and
the sharing of costs and risks. Depending on the specific situation, it
is possible to define permanent virtual organizations, virtual teams,
temporary virtual organizations and virtual projects.
   To provide control and support to virtual structures, the primary
solution consists of information technology. Here, Internet and
fax are main tools used together with local area networks (LANs),
wide area networks (WANs), Intranets, electronic document
interchange systems (EDIs) etc. The four different kinds of virtual
forms may work in different ways and therefore have different IT
needs. Also, the number of personnel involved, range of involvement,
time spent in virtual work change considerable between them.
The character of the different virtual configurations is shown in
Table 8.1.

                                   *
374          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



        \DISTRICT
                            EUROPE        AUSTRALIA           ASIA
         PRODUCT\

         A                                                         N
                                                                   ?


         B                                                         N
                                                                   ?

         C                                                         S
                                                                   •>




         D                                                         y
                                \/              \|/          vl/

                        Figure 8.4 A matrix-organization.



• unclear responsibility (who should really take the decision);
• multiple-matrix generation (in order to avoid individual responsi-
  bility);
• increased costs (the demand for more bosses, double roles, etc.).

   Sometimes companies must handle problems which overstep
the borders between various internal functions and divisions. A
demanding research and development project can, for example,
initiate such a process. Quite naturally, for certain problems, a certain
organizational design suits better. An example of such a transverse
organizational form is the project or ad hoc organization. Appropriate
for complex and uncertain tasks in turbulent environments, it is set
up and used until the task is solved and the goals achieved. Then it
is dismounted.
    The project director normally has total command over the
participating specialists (pure project-organization). If he shares the
specialist with the function bosses, a matrix-project organization exists.
A project is often fortified with resources from outside as an alternative
to an expansion of the companies own resources.
    The project-organization is most often a complement to an
already existing basic organization. Certain contractor and consulting
                            Table 8.1 The character of different      confi

                      Permanent virtual                               Temp
                        organizations            Virtual teams          org

Involvement         Across organizations     Internal to an          Across
                                             organizational
                                             function or
                                             departmental unit

Membership          Typically smaller, but   Small, local            Typical
                    scaleable

Mission             All functions and full   Teams on specific,      Multip
                    functionality as a       ongoing tasks           respond
                    working organization                             market



Length of project   Permanent                Membership varies,      Tempo
                                             form is permanent

Uses of IT          Channel for marketing    Connectivity, sharing   Shared
                    and distribution,        embedded knowledge      (groupw
                    replacing physical       (E-mail, groupware)     remote
                    infrastructure (Web,
                    Intranet)
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS        379



Multiple perspectives of management cybernetics

As we already know, systemic and cybernetic scientists use metaphors
as a means for explaining and providing insight and understanding
into complex phenomena. When it comes to organizations a plethora
of metaphors and perspectives have been suggested. Some of
them are:

• Organizations as organisms
• Organizations as control systems
• Organizations as brains
• Organizations as machines
• Organizations as cultures
• Organizations as political systems
• Organizations as theatres
• Organizations as instruments of domination
• Organizations as information systems
• Organizations as social contracts and many more...

   No single perspective, however, comprises the whole truth and it
is wise to start from the premise that organizations can be many
things at the same time. Therefore the possibility to apply multiple
perspectives seems to be a fruitful approach. For the purpose of this
book, some perspectives are more interesting than others.
   The organismic metaphors of the organization takes it as a
superorganism. It assumes that principles guiding the living organism
also hold for higher conceptual levels like organizations. The life-
cycle with birth, growth, senescence, death as well as the struggle for
survival in the individual has its parallels in the organization. The
organization or socio-technical systems in general, is regarded as the
medium within which autopoietic principles could interact under
condition of mutual acceptance. Autopoietic systems are characterized
by autonomy since they are not dependent on external production
processes. Their structure is self-defined and can be so as long as it
is autopoietic.
   The organization often lacks defined boundaries. It is rather a
structuring of events than of physical parts and it therefore has no
380        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



manifest composition apart from its functioning. Its structure can
be temporarily defined, like mutual related events which recur,
repeat and accomplish an activity-cycle. Such a temporal definition
is first of all related to the organizational function. Physical or
biological systems have both an anatomy and physiology while the
organizational system lacks a body. When such a system ceases to
function, no identifiable structure remains. In need of concepts and
concrete details, we often mix up the organization with its buildings,
technical equipment and people.
   Organizations are not tied to the same physical constraints as
organisms. Thereby they are able to have boundless counteracting of
entrophical processes. This is done by incorporation of external
resources necessary for survival through their relatively undefinable
boundaries. The organizational growth is in contrast to the organism's
exponential if it exists in an environment which supply unlimited
energy resources. Their quantitative growth gradually give rise to
qualitative changes by the emergence of specialized subsystems, not
necessary in smaller organizations.
   As systems that evolve through life-cycle stages, organizations
pop up and disappear in every society where they are born, grow
and someday die. Also some develop faster than others just as well
some grow old better than others. A common used five-stage model
is the following:

1. The entrepreneurial stage. The organization is young. Creativity is
   high and goals are ambiguous. It maintains a steady supply of
   resources.
2. The collective stage. The organizational mission is clarified and it
   continues the innovation of the previous stage. The style remains
   essentially informal.
3. Formalization/control stage. The structure is stabilizing. Formal
   procedures and rules are imposed. Stability and efficiency is
   promoted while innovation comes into the background. Decision-
   makers have collected power and are growing conservative. The
   organization is no longer depending on separate individuals when
   they depart.
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS        381


4. Structure-elaboration stage. The organization structure becomes more
   elaborated and complex. Management introduces new products
   and growth opportunities. Decision-making is decentralized.
5. Declining stage. Demands for products and services are diminishing
   due to shrinking markets, competition etc. Management struggle
   to hold markets and to keep personnel. The most skilled people
   take farewell. Conflicts increase within the organization. New
   leaders take the leadership in order to stop the decline, often with
   little effect.

   Another way to look at the organizational life-cycle is in terms
of evolution and revolution. According to this view organizational
maturing is characterized by phases of calm growth, followed by
periods of internal turbulence — a crisis. The resolution of the
crisis initiates a new evolutionary period. Larry Greiner (1972) states
that such an evolutionary path comprises at least five-stages. See
Figure 8.6.
   When viewing organizations as organisms, they are part of a social
ecology which has been thoroughly described by James Miller (see
p. 118). Organizations are as old as society and considerably older
than science. Thereby organizations have a longer time horizon than
individuals and do not expect to die like human beings. Their scale of
social time is multigeneral and they have a spectrum of time horizons.
   Organizational work activities are more influenced by the nature of
man than of the organizational design. A direct connection exists bet-
ween the satisfaction of human needs and the effective organization.
To integrate organizational and individual compulsions, according
to the well-known hierarchy of needs by Abraham Maslow (1954), is
highly relevant. Individuals and groups operate most effectively when
their needs are satisfied.
    According Maslow, fundamental needs of physical well-being and
security has the highest priority and must be satisfied first. When
lower levels of the hierarchy are satisfied, needs on the next higher
level will be actualized. The following sentences are arranged from
bottom and up according to the five levels of a Maslow hierarchy.
382           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                                                               Phase 5




                                    Organizational Age


      Figure 8.6 The five phases of organizational growth (from Greiner 1972).



        Self actualizing Job as expression of personal life.
    Ego Autonomy, responsibility, personal control, feedback.
  Social Interaction with colleagues, social and sports facilities.
Security Job tenure, plans of health care and pensions, career paths.
Physiological Safe and nice working conditions. Good salaries and wages.

    The organismic view of organization bring to the fore Darwin's
evolutionary theories — often interpreted in the form of population-
ecology reasoning. Here, organizations compete with each other
regarding scarce resources in order to endure. Thereby only the
fittest survive. Like all other organisms in nature, certain species of
organizations are better adapted to specific environmental conditions
than others. The critical factor is the environment which determines
or selects the most robust competitor while the other are eliminated.
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS         383



By variation and modification new competitive advantages emerge
and enhances the survival process.
    When new incoming organizational species invade the resource
niche, the old species as a whole tend to survive or fail. The reason
is that it shares both strengths and weaknesses in their adaptation.
By this mechanism whole lines of business sometimes are wiped out
within a short period of time. However, it should be remembered
that in the organizational sphere as in nature, collaboration is just as
common as competition.
    The organismic perspective has its limitations when the organi-
zational environment can be understood as socially constructed
phenomena. The same environment, that by one organization may
be seen as complex and unpredictable, may by another be seen as
static and easily understood. The organization itself is created of
components like beliefs, visions, norms and products with no
correspondence in nature. Such facts makes the organization more
fragile than the simple organism of nature but also more robust.
Organizations and their members can to a certain extent influence
their own future in a way not possible for organisms in nature.
    When it comes to large and powerful organizations, population-
ecology concepts tend to be invalid. Such organizations can insulate
themselves against failure and often have governmental protection.
Government universities and the community fire brigade do not
simply go out of business. It is very difficult to imagine the Roman
 Catholic Church to be declared bankrupt. Organizations like them
exemplified here, are very unaffected of external, environmental
 threats and seldom eliminated in struggle for life.
    The understatement when organizations are viewed as cybernetic
 control systems is that they are strongly influenced by their environ-
 ment and therefore must be able to control it in order to survive.
 Adaptation and pertinent design is dependent on the smooth function
 of the basic control mechanisms. These in turn, must assume a
 measuring device giving information whether one should step on
 the gas or brake, that is, if negative or positive feedback should be
 applied in order to reach a goal.
384        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Within organizations, keynumbers are such an indicator. A
keynumber is data which has been aggregated and transformed
into information and communicated throughout the organization.
Keynumbers can reflect the organization from different perspectives.
One system of indicators is 'Balanced Scorecard', a number of
keynumbers which make clear the balance between different
organizational perspectives. Such perspectives can be:

• financial from the keynumber profit-margin;
• the customer's from the keynumber satisfied consumer;
• process-oriented from the keynumber stock-turnover velocity;
• human-oriented from the keynumber personal-turnover;
• renewal and development-oriented from the keynumber educa-
  tional costs per employee.

   It is possible to divide internal feedback into two categories.
On one hand they consist of processes regulating the core activity
which can be labelled hard feedback and on the other hand of
soft feedback which affect the behaviour and conduct of sections,
groups and individuals. Among the hard feedback processes, the
economical follow-up is the most important. This follow-up is
executed almost daily for each department by daily reports. For the
whole business it is done monthly by the balancing of the books.
Follow-ups are also done by checking of customer statistics and
marketing activities.
    To prevent a decline of business, a time schedule can be done
where new activities and attractions are put on the market in order
to entice back old customers and attract new ones. Another feedback
for the activity, which can be regarded both negative and positive, is
a pricing strategy with low prices when slack demands prevails and
higher with bigger requests. However, the most important feedback
in all categories, must be considered customer feedback on the
marketed product.
    When it comes to soft feedback processes, a formal feedback exists
by the accomplishment of personal education and development
interviews. Non-formal feedback exists in the interaction between
different working groups or directly between individuals in the
            ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS        385



organization. These soft feedback processes have the aim to get all
co-workers in the organization to work according to common moral
and ethical codes but also to weed out persons who do not fit into
the system.
   All healthy organizations must be able to handle mechanisms of
negative feedback in order to check and arrest sudden forces of
positive feedback emerging from the market.

• For enterprises growing by gaining more shares of the market and
  by buying other enterprises, restriction of competition by law is a
  negative feedback working outside the system boundary (extrinsic
  feedback). This will prevent a monopoly situation where the free
  market is threatened.
• Growth through excessive earning capacity is controlled by a
  negative feedback profit-tax on large-scale production.
• For excessive growth through increased business volume is
  decreased demand a negative feedback controlling marketing.
• Increased price level is a negative feedback responding to increased
  wastage and decreased company loyalty.
• Economy measures can work as control of expanding service-
  commitment.

   A vitally important phase of organizational growth (positive
feedback) can be realized by increasing shares of the market, increased
sales and increased profitability. For organizations in this phase

• increased shares of the market works as positive feedback on price
  reductions related to price levels of competing firms. For merger of
  companies and company acquisitions, increased market shares also
  work as positive feedback;
• increased sales works as positive feedback on well-aimed
  marketing;
• increased profitability works as positive feedback on changing scale
  of economies;
• increased waste and bad loyalty in relation to the organization
  works as positive feedback on bad compensation of the personnel;
386        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• increased number of satisfied customers works as positive feedback
  on good service. Good service in turn, is positive feedback emerging
  from well-being among personnel.

   By use of feedforward with simulation of certain processes, it is
possible for an organization to predict the outcome of individual
courses of events. From this information, decisions can be made
which realize survival and organizational goals. A typical example is
planning and operational control.
   If a customized product is going to be produced in a mass-
market (mass-customized marketing), this can be done by computer
supported simulation. It is cheaper and more rapid to modify the
information in the simulated production than to do physical changes
of the real product. With this kind of feedforward it is possible to
customize the product and keep the prices on a level adjusted for a
mass-market. Manufacturing industries constructing cars and textile
goods rely heavily on such simulations.
   Within medical therapy feedforward mechanisms are used to plan
and simulate tumour radiotherapy. It gives the therapist a possibility
to determine radiation dose and radiation angles in advance to
optimize the coming treatment. If so, the sound tissue surrounding
the tumour will be minimally damaged.
   Another way to think about organizations is as if they were
brains. This can be the a starting point for adaptive organizational
designs, appropriate in a modern, turbulent environment. The brain
perspective understands organizations as integrated information,
communication and decision-making systems capable of learning how
to learn. Its holographic qualities, where the whole is included in all
the parts (or the parts reflect the nature of the whole) are especially
interesting.
   In a brain, different regions are specialized in different activities.
The various parts are, however, closely interdependent and act on
behalf of each other when necessary. The memory functions are
distributed and vast redundancy permits the brain to operate
probabilistically rather than deterministically. The basis for this
kind of brain rests in the pattern of connectivity. Each nerve cell
             ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS         387



is connected with millions of others, creating the total effect of a
brain being both generalized and specialized at the same time.
Such a structure allows new functions and activities to emerge
and give rize to self-organization and adaptation. More about the
specific qualities of the brain is to be found in a previous chapter (see
Chapter 5).
   To use holographic principles in organizational design is to build
on the fact that many good brains and computer networks already
exist in modern enterprises. The design has to correspond to the
following guidelines:

• Construct connectivity and redundancy
• Produce at the same time specialization and generalization
• Facilitate a capacity to self-organize
• See to that the whole is into the parts

    In a sense, the holographic organization has become synonymous
with its information system. In the words of Gareth Morgan (1986),
it is possible to say that the organization rests in the information
system. Its advanced computer systems realize the capacity for
decentralization and control even if it has no fixed location (virtual
structure). Employees interact in networks of personal computers
and audiovisual facilities including remote-controlled automatized
factories for physical work.




A systems approach in ten points

To conclude this chapter of the complex organization and its
management, the following ten points is an attempt to sum up in
systemic terms what has been discussed.

 1. Organizations change according to processes that take place on
    its own organizational level. The individual members only set
    the specific control parameters that define its behaviour range of
    possibilities and constraints.
388        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



 2. The organizational environment is both natural and social. It is
    part of biosphere as well as sociosphere.
 3. The organization is neither a natural system like a cell nor an
    artificial system such as a processing plant. It is the result of both
    human interaction and conscious design.
 4. The organization, although composed of both human beings and
    artifacts, is not reducible to the sum of their parts. It evolves
    functions and attributes which are typical of its own level. One
    of these is the capacity to replace its parts (both humans and
    artifacts) and to change its structure according to external or
    internal fluctuations.
 5. Although a suprasystem is in relation to its subsystem, the
    organization's structural complexity is less than of its individual
    human members. Systems on higher levels of organization are
    initially always simpler than the subsystems which compose their
    main components. Therefore a new systemic (or organizational)
    level imply a simplification of the total system function.
 6. Organizations evolve by developing progressively higher organi-
    zational levels through convergence. With an increasing flow of
    M/E and information formal boundaries are transcended and
    new systemic levels are formed.
 7. The organization is operated by human beings but are not entirely
    under control of any individual. The individual position seldom
    permit a change of the overarching rules.
 8. When destabilized by uncontrollable fluctuations, an organization
    may disintegrate but survive on a lower systemic level as groups
    of various kinds. Its component may also compose parts of other
    organizations which integrate them.
 9. The organization is a self-determined system which evolution
    cannot be predicted. However, it can be controlled by humans
    who act from within in the right way, at the right place and at
    the right time.
10. The organization is a system where the parts are conscious while
    the whole is not.

                                      *
              ORGANIZATIONAL THEORY AND MANAGEMENT CYBERNETICS             389



Review questions and problems
1. How is it possible that only four contingency-variables can determine the
   whole future of an organization?
2. What is the most characteristic pathology of the bureaucratic organization?
3. Is it possible to realize the highest levels of Maslow's hierarchy of needs
   without realizing the lower ones?
4. Why was a negative attitude among the workers growing although
   effectiveness and productivity was increased dramatically when scientific
   management was introduced?
5. Demonstrate the psychological difference between power and authority.
6. Which of the multiple perspectives on organizations presented in this
   chapter makes more sense when regarding the scope of the book?
7. Explain why the modern organization sometimes has been synonymous
   with its information system.
                                 9
            Decision-Making and
               Decision Aids

• Some concepts and distinctions
• Basic decision aids
• Managerial problems and needs
• Four generations of computer support
• C3I systems
• Some psychological aspects of decision-making
• The future of managerial decision support

•What is the problem? What are the alternatives? Which alternative
is best?' (John Dewey)



S   ystems can be described in terms of inputs transformed into
    outputs, as a process of fulfilment of a purpose, or the pursuit of
a goal. The last is the equivalent of decision-making and together
with monitoring and evaluation it is a basic human activity. As such,
it concerns the main components of the cybernetic control loop in
all kinds of organizations.
    Decision theory is a formal, logical science without normative
elements. It tells how to choose between different alternatives, but
not how to realize them. It therefore studies a detector/selector
function. Practical decision-making is called praxeology and must be
considered both a science and an art. It calls for experience and
intuition, is sometimes normative and focus on the effector function.


                                  390
                     DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                391


Aspects of human action that can be grasped a priori like conceptual
analysis and logical implications of preference, choice, and means-
end schemes are typical for praxeology. It is evident that decision
theory can be studied separate from praxeology although this in turn
always must include components of decision theory. In normative
praxeology, the goals are given and the decision method to reach
them is prescribed and considered the ultimate. Descriptive praxeology
is concerned with the way people actually make decisions without
reference to the efficiency of their method.
   Game theory is associated both with decision theory and
praxeology and has a mathematical approach to problems of games
involving conflict or cooperation among the participants. The aim of
this area is to find patterns and rules for human behaviour when
people try to deceive, mislead and trap each other in order to be a
winner. It tries to answer the question what happens if each player
acts for his own selfish advantage and what kind of coordinated
actions will emerge. Especially, the conditions under which
cooperation will emerge is studied. Game theory also works without
conscious participants and is then called evolutionary game theory.
Complicated interplays and collaboration can originate without central
planning or a conscious general view.
   The incentive that impels man to make decisions and act has always
caused some uneasiness or cognitive dissonance. The acting man is
eager to substitute a less satisfactory state of affairs for conditions
which suit him better. The rational decision is a typical information
processing activity and is the alternative where future benefits exceeds
contemporary costs. A decision is always based on the ever existing
conflict between different alternatives of costs. If no costs exist, there
is no need for a decision.
    A decision which is not communicated and put into action
is, however, no decision at all. Therefore decision-making and
communication must be considered as totally interdependent.
    The inner core of decision-making is to make things happen
or to prevent them from happening; something which includes
both prediction and control. In hierarchic, multilevel systems such
as organizations and societies, this kind of operation is mostly
392        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



dedicated to a specialized group, the management or the government.
Mechanisms of decisions are strictly related both to the system to be
managed and to the nature of human information processing.
   Like other intellectual activities, decision-making can be learned
by the use of sequential steps. Its complete success can, however,
never be guaranteed because it involves components of both uncer-
tainty and creativity. To make choices is part of mankind's condition.
As an uncertain and erring creature, he sometimes makes decisions,
the results of which are often both unknown and unintentional.
   Since its arrival, the computer has been used as a means for
decision-making, by augmenting the human capacity to gather, store,
retrieve and process various kinds of data. As the key component
of an information system, it has greatly enhanced the transformation
of data into information. As subcomponent of a knowledge system (of
which an information system is only a part), it has facilitated both
understanding and accumulation of wisdom.
   Today, both air force and naval officers are trained for decision-
making in simulator installations which resemble the cockpit and the
bridge. Decision-making by management staff can also be practised
in computerized business simulators that are made to resemble the
ordinary decision environment as closely as possible. Beer's 'decision
room' or Frontesterion is an example of such an environment (see
Beer 1979).
    In the light of the close interconnections within the modern
world system, bad decisions may have both directly devastating
consequences and unforeseen effects. The understanding of decision-
making processes, particularly in association with computers, has
therefore been a high-priority area of systems science. Knowledge of
human capacity, specialty and weakness — alone or together with
computers — is a basic requisite for every decision maker. Systems
theory and related areas such as information theory, computer science
and management cybernetics have long been devoted to the study
of decision-making. A common assumption of these areas is that all
organisms are information systems.

                                      *
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                393


Some concepts and distinctions of the area

In order to understand the nature of decision-making (and the need
for computer support) a description of the characteristics of a decision
situation must first be given. It can be defined with the items below.

• A problem exists.
• At least two alternatives for action remain.
• Knowledge exists of the objective and its relationship to the problem.
• The consequences of the decision can be estimated and sometimes
  quantified.
   Generally, different aspects such as economic, environmental and
political fitness create the background of a decision. In this setting
the decision maker first has to find existing alternatives and then
make a choice between a set of them (normally small). In turn, every
alternative has consequences, connected to the aspects via the
alternatives. Given these sets of aspects and consequences the
decision maker has to choose the best alternative.
   All decision situations belong to one of the following three classes.

• Decisions under strict uncertainty. Here the decision maker is
  unable to know anything about the situation. Quantification of the
  uncertainty is not possible.
• Decisions under certainty. In this case the decision maker has full
  knowledge of the situation, and the consequences of the decision
  can be predicted. The alternative which has a value not less than
  the value of any other alternative is chosen.
• Decision with risk. In this situation, the decision maker is able to
  quantify the uncertainty by assigning probabilities, generally known
  in advance, to each alternative. Note that the level of risk increases
  exponentially as more data are left out. A decision-maker must
  also be aware that unlikely events is likely to happen because there
  are so many unlikely event that could happen!

   A special problem with decisions under strict uncertainty is the
famous "Prisoner's Dilemma". This problem was first formulated in
1950 by two American mathematicians, Flood and Dresher. It presents
394        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



the very essence of personal decision-making related to both
cooperation and defection and is a typical game theory problem.
    In the Prisoner's Dilemma, we assume that the reader and his
companion has taken part in a crime with a stolen car and now are
in custody, held for questioning in separate cells. They cannot
communicate with each other. The procecutor offers each in turn the
following deal: "We have evidence enough to convict both of you for
the crime. If neither of you confess, you will probably be sentenced
to one year each (for the stolen car). If you confess and testify against
your partner, you will be pardonned and he will get ten years". "But
if we both confess?" you ask and the reply is that "you will both
get four years" (confessions are mitigating). The best for you and
your companion would be to stay mum, both getting off with light
sentences. This, however, demands cooperation and communication
which is not possible for the moment. If you are a scoundrel, why
should you care for your partner? And if he gives way to the same
temptation? Then you will be the sucker who spends ten years in jail.
    The existing alternatives say that if your partner has decided to
stay mum, it will be best for you to confess and avoid all punishment.
If he confesses it will no doubt be best for you to confess too, because
then you get four years instead of ten. So either way, it is best for you
to confess and by doing this you know that your partner will do the
same thing. Apparently it seems inevitable that both of you will
spend four years in jail, although there were alternatives which both
of you knew about resulting in one year each. The Prisoner's Dilemma
gives a good example of how a rational, selfish analysis will have
consequences not within the real interests of the those involved.
    In the real world, many situations are like the Prisoner's Dilemma.
The difference is that companions can communicate and the process
is repeated. Statistical analysis and computer simulations have shown
that the most successful strategy will be to use either a randomized
or a conditional response and use the memory of previous dealings
with the same partner. Called TIT FOR TAT, this strategy tells us to
cooperate on the first trial with a new partner. On every subequent
trial, one has to do what the other player did on the preceding trial.
It can be found that those who never defect before their partners
                     DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                 395


were, in the long run, the more successful. Totally random strategies,
fixed strategies or those totally unresponsive to the actions of a partner
can never succeed as they invite defection which will go unpunished.
    The secret of TIT FOR TAT is simply that it spends more of its
time to cooperate than defect with partners. That this also does the
partners some good makes it the best available strategy. Interesting
is that TIT FOR TAT- strategies lead to cooperation in the natural
world even without intelligence.
    Furthermore, a problem can be solved, resolved or dissolved. A
solution occurs when one of the alternatives in the existing repertoire
is chosen and then implemented. To solve the problem is to select the
means which yields the best possible outcome. To resolve a problem
is to select a means that gives an outcome good enought. If the whole
view of what is defined to be a problem is changed, or if a completely
new alternative is generated to handle the situation, the problem is
said to be dissolved.
    For the decision maker, the ultimate goal is considered to be to
arrive at as effective and precise decisions as possible. But in reality,
different qualities of a decision must be accepted as inevitable.
R. Ackoff (1970) has categorized the quality of a decision into three
levels. Optimizing implies finding the best possible existing solution.
The tools available in such situations, apart from the decision maker's
own intuition and experience, are different types of models to support
the decision maker. The majority of these models are, however, either
of a mathematical or statistical origin and of a rather complex
nature. With the aid of a computer, these models can be handled
more effectively and efficiently, often by use of an algorithm. An
algorithm is a step-by-step procedure (often of a mathematical nature)
that guarantees that an optimum solution is achieved.
    Satisficing is attaining a certain minimum quality level for the
decision, enough to solve the problem but not necessarily more. The
satisfier seldom evaluates the existing alternatives, because the first
acceptable solution is considered to be as good as all the others. To
 satisfy is to use the principle of least effort. Most satisficing problem-
 solving strategies are based on heuristics — rules of thumb that are
 good enough for most decisions.
396        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The main reason why decision-making in most cases appears to
be satisficing is the following limiting circumstances:

• Limited time. The decision has to be done in a finite amount of time.
• Limited information. It is impossible to gather all necessary data
  relevant to the problem due to finite resources.
• Limited information-processing capability. Most human can only handle
  about seven items of information at any one time.

   Idealizing is to change the whole system or its environment in
order to bring it closer to an ultimately desired state, where the actual
problem does not arise. Ackoff himself called this alternative for the
design approach.
   Ackoff is also the originator of an often cited typology of decision
making and planning (Ackoff 1981). This includes four basic
orientations with different temporal adaptation. Ackoff, however,
emphasizes that these orientations are like the primary colours; seldom
to appear in pure form.
   If the dominant orientation belongs to the past it is said to be
reactive. The reactivist seeks to return to a previous state in his
decision-making. He is nostalgic about the past and has a better view
of where he has been than of where he is going — that is, to drive
into the future while looking in the rear-view mirror.
   The inactivist is satisfied with things as they are. He does not
want to return to a previous state, is not fond of the way things are
going and tries to prevent change. Survival and stability is his primary
aim. The strategy could be defined as satisficing by muddling through.
Ackoff thinks the best example of an inactivist organization is the
typical university which is as 'difficult to change as a cemetery and
for the same reason'.
   Preactivists believe that the future will be better than the present
or the past and subsequently try to accelerate change. New technique
and technology is considered as a general panacea and experience is
not considered very valuable. Generally, errors of commission are
less costly and easier to correct than errors of omission. The preactivist
style is normally to optimize.
                     DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                 397


    The proactivist is not willing to return to a previous state, nor
neither to accept thing as they are or to accept the future that appears
to confront him. The future is largely a subject of his own creation.
Learning and adaptation are lodestars as no problems stay solved for
long. The style is to idealize and to develop.
    A metaphorical summary of the different typologies is that the
inactivist tries to hold a fixed position in a moving stream; the
reactivist tries to swim against it; and the preactivist tries to ride with
it along its leading edge. The proactivist in his turn, tries to change
the reaches of the river.
    Interesting arguments questioning the need for optimization have
been published by C. Holling (1977). He notes that ecological systems
strive to maximize options rather than to limit them by selection of
an optimal alternative. From a human point of view, the possibility
of a bad choice and pertinent failure is not rejected. Instead, a strategy
which minimizes the cost of such a choice is applied. In that way,
efficiency is sacrificed for adaptability.
    A theory of decision-making has long existed in economics, being
associated with the idea of homo economicus, the strictly rational
decision maker. This ideal human being has the following qualities:
1. He can always make a decision if faced with a number of
   alternatives.
2. He ranks the consequences on a scale of preferred results (a value-
   scale).
3. His order of preference is always transitive (first A then B, not C
   then A).
4. The first alternative is always chosen (utility maximizing).
5. The same choice is always made if the situation is repeated.

   According to Herbert Simon (1976) the process of rational decision-
making is an act of choosing among alternatives which have been
assigned different valuations. It involves the following process:

1. Listing all of the alternative strategies.
2. Determining all the consequences that follow upon each of these
   strategies.
3. Comparatively evaluating these sets of consequences.
398        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Simon, however, admits that total rationality is an unattainable
idealization in real decision-making — who can be aware of all
existing alternatives?
   The task of making decisions can generally be seen as an (iterative)
procedure of information gathering and processing, summed up by
the following keywords.

• Intelligence: Find raw data to be processed
• Design: Evaluate different alternatives of action
• Choice: Choose one of the alternatives
• Implement: Firmly establish the chosen alternative
• Control: Check that orders are obeyed and make necessary
  adjustments

   The decision maker can only obtain information and thus only
have real knowledge about future development within a rather
short time frame. This frame is defined by the decision maker's and
his assistant's specific knowledge about the expected and agreed
consequences of already known projects. The first step in the above
process will inevitably suffer from an inherent discrepancy called
'the information dilemma' or even the 'uncertainty relation of decision-
making'. It is associated to the need for explicit and actual information
and states: 'the precise information is not timely, and the timely
information is not precise'.
   It is important that the whole procedure is understood to be
cyclical; repetition and feedback of certain steps are virtually always
indispensable. Even redefinition of the original problem and the
existing alternatives may be necessary.
    Using the above keywords, the following more detailed steps in
the decision-making process can be elaborated.

 1. Identify the problem (recognize a situation that requires decision/
    action)
 2. Gather the facts which will affect the decision
 3. Generate possible alternative solutions
 4. Specify the alternatives
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                399


 5. Select the best one
 6. Gain acceptance by motivating/explaining the basis of the
    decision to other members of the decision-making group
 7. Communicate the decision to all those affected
 8. Put the decision into action
 9. Supervise the execution
10. Follow up the results

   The decision maker thus has to choose the best option given the
existing set of consequences. Note that a non-decision exists as an
ever-present alternative (unfortunately most often the worst!). A
classic reminder to the decision maker is ever present: 'You may be
so preoccupied with doing things right that you forget to do the right
things.'
   When ready to make his choice, the decision maker will meet four
basic types of difficulty:

• How to compare the alternatives with regards to different aspects
  of the decision.
• How to compare the alternatives within each aspect.
• How to estimate the probability that the given consequence will
  occur if a certain action is taken.
• How to estimate the value of the consequences.

   It is, however, obvious that in many critical situations where rapid
decisions are necessary, the decision maker has to act in a less
analytical and more instinctive manner. There is no time for careful
calculations when the sabre-toothed tiger is attacking. As evolutionary
survivors, we have brought with us mental decision tools based on
very little information and simple rules or decision heuristics. Although
applying to different kinds of problems, these rules have a common
structure and use a mixture of probability and chance as basis for
decision. First, we search the environment for cues or information,
upon which to base a choice. The heuristics contain rules which direct
the search and a stopping rule after a few cues have been analyzed.
After that, the choice is made — to run, to stop and fight or to attack.
But of course all the benefits of a rapid decision is wasted if the
wrong decision is made.
400            GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   In most situations, the choice of what you recognize works better
than a choice at random. But heuristics does not work well when you
know too much. Regarding emotions, they are part of each heuristic
rule and help us to make correct decisions. Outmost fear will certainly
reduce the options to only one; to run away. Unpredictability can
also be a part of heuristics, especially in social decision-making.
Sometimes it can be rational to be inconsistent.
   A short look at the internal nature of problems which have to be
solved by different kinds of decision reveals that they may be
structured, unstructured or semi-structured. Structured problems are
those for which we can define an explicit procedure to solve the
problem. An example is the construction of a schedule for the use of
existing classrooms in a school. To solve unstructured problems the
decision maker must show judgement, evaluating capacity and insight
into the problem-definition. Political decisions are often unstructured
as their success is dependent upon the changing opinions and hidden
beliefs of the people. Semi-structured problems are partly structured
and partly unstructured.
   If the structure of a problem is related to the operational, tactical or
strategical decision levels identified in most major organizations, the
examples in Table 9.1 will be typical.
    Not apparent from the table is the general tendency to find the
majority of structured problems in the operational level. Also, most
semi-structured problems are to be found at the tactical level, while
unstructured problems are most common at the strategical level.


                   Table 9.1 Decision levels and problem structures.

      Kind of problem      Operational level   Tactical level   Strategical level

      Structured           Construction of     Purchase of      Location of new
                           timetables          service-cars     railway

      Semi-structured      Stocktrading        Dimensioning     Choice of new
                                               PR budget        business office

      Unstructured         Composing of        Hiring new       Choice of new
                           cafeteria menu      managers         company logo
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS              401


   Structured decisions seldom involve managers and can hence
be made by lower level personnel or by a computer. Semi-structured
decisions are by their nature appropriate for managers with computer
support. Computational complexity, problem size and the precision
of the solution often make strictly managerial judgement insufficient.
Unstructured problems are not able to be formalized in a technical
sense and hence are impossible to feed into a computer. The nature
of the problem, the volume of data, or the lack of an appropriate
method make any decision entirely dependent upon human
experience and intuition.




Basic decision aids

During the past years a number of mainly mathematical techniques
have been developed to assist the decision maker. These techniques
are called decision aids and their use is intended to maximize the
probability that the chosen decision is the best one. Among the better
known are the following:

— decision trees
— decision matrices
— linear programming
— game theory
— linear regression
— mathematical modelling
— forecasting
— PERT (program evaluation review technique)
— critical path method

   Of these, decision trees and decision matrices must be considered
genuinely basic and are the only ones treated here. Decision trees
and decision matrices are not dependent on advanced mathematics
or the use of computers.
   A decision tree is a model which gives a visual presentation of the
structure of a decision situation. It has branches spreading out from
402        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                   Management decision

               Q   Uncertain event

                                                     .4,0.7,0.8,0.9 = 0.2


                                                           etc.



                                                           etc.



                                                           etc.




                                                     0.6,0.1 = (LQ6.
                                                        sum = 1.00


                             Figure 9.1 A decision tree.




nodes like a tree. The nodes are of two types: decision nodes (usually
presented as a small square) and event nodes (usually presented as
a small circle). From each decision node all the potential decisions
branch out. Seen as series of decisions, the second step is dependent
upon the first step, the third depends upon the second, etc. If risk or
uncertainty is associated with each step, these qualities are gradually
accumulated. An example of a decision tree is shown in Figure 9.1.
Note the probability assignment given for each branch.
   To make a decision involves in practice cuting off a branch of the
tree that is no longer possible to reach. A transition takes place from
openness to closure, something which presupposes a moment in time
when all necessary information is collected.
   A decision matrix is another aid for enhancing the choice of the
best alternative when the various options have been sufficiently
identified. The value of a decision matrix increases when the number
of alternatives increases. The use of the matrix can be clarified by
explaining four consecutive user steps. Step one is to identify all the
alternatives which seem reasonable in the pertinent situation and to
assign them to the matrix.
                     DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS              403


             Table 9.2 Criteria ranking and weighting factors.

              Criteria   Ranking factors    Weighting factors

             Quality A           1              8/36 = 0.22
             Quality B           2              7/36 = 0.19
             Quality C           3              6/36 = 0.17
             Quality D           4              5/36 = 0.14
             Quality E           5              4/36 = 0.11
             Quality F           6              3/36 = 0.08
             Quality G           7              2/36 = 0.06
             Quality H           8              1/36 = 0.03

                         Sum = 36              36/36 = 1.00



   In the second step, criteria are established to provide a basis for
the selection of one alternative over another. Here, each quality is
given a number in relation to its order of importance. The numbers
are summed, and weighting factors are assigned by dividing this
total into each item's individual number. An example with eight
criteria is given in Table 9.2.
   The third step is to assign rating factor values to all the present
alternatives considering the selection criteria. A scale from 1 to 10 is
applied, where 10 is best. The assignment of these values is best done
one criterion at a time, evaluating each alternative according to that
particular criterion.
    The fourth and final step in completion of the matrix is to multiply
each ranking factor by its corresponding weighting factor and to
record the product to the right in the column. Ultimately, all products
are summed as in the completed matrix of Table 9.3.
    Mathematically, the highest sum can be 10, since all weighting
factors together must be 1 and the highest ranking factor value is 10.
In this example, the third alternative had the highest value and was
thus chosen. The great advantage with this matrix is that all steps in
the decision process are clearly documented and the idea behind a
given choice can easily be demonstrated.
    Besides the techniques described here as decision aids (used inside
or outside a computer), the computer itself is a kind of decision aid
404            GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                         Table 9.3 A completed decision matrix.

                                                   Selection criteria

                                Eight different qualities, labelled from A to H

                         B           C             D            E       F         G         H       Sum

Weight         0.22      0.19       0.17        0.14          0.11      0.08      0.06     0.03     1.0
1st Alt.     3/0.66    6/1.14     1/0.17      9/1.26        8/0.88    9/0.72    2/0.12   3/0.09     5.04
2nd Alt.     6/1.32    9/1.72     9/1.53     10/1.4         9/0.99    2/0.16    5/0.3    7/0.21     7.62
3rd Alt.    10/2.2     7/1.33     8/1.36      9/1.26        7/0.77    6/0.48    8/0.48   8/0.24     8.12
4th Alt.     2/0.44    9/1.71     3/0.51     10/1.14        4/0.44    3/0.24    9/0.54   9/0.27     5.55
5th Alt.     4/0.88    2/0.38     7/1.19      9/1.26        2/0.22    2/0.16    2/0.12   9/0.27     4.48



      Table 9.4 Basic principles for general computer aid in decision making.

                                     The computer is employed to present:

 Human
 information                                           Consequence
 u s e d for          Data                             calculations              Decision      advice

 Inspiration          Improved                         What-if                   Advice-giving
                      environmental                    calculations              ideas

 Idea control         Computational        basis       Filter   human            A choice of better
                                                       ideas                     alternatives

 Decision             Databanks                        Alternative    testing    Accepted/rejected
                                                                                 alternative



if sensibly used. The general principles for use of this type of assistance
is presented in Table 9.4.
    The horizontal axis shows an increasing degree of computer
processing. The least processed output is data which can be further
processed together with human supplements. By this means, what-
if questions can be asked and sensitivity analysis can be performed.
Of course, the computer may be able to recommend a certain course
of action if enough information and structure has been programmed
into it.
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS              405


   The vertical axis shows how output from the computer can be
used by man with increased degree of human processing. On the
lowest level the computer is only used as a source of inspiration
while at the highest it is used as a decision adviser.
   The table can also be used to describe how the good decision-
maker can interact with his assistants. The computer, however, has
a tremendous advantage in that it has no ambition for a career of its
own. It can never be a yes-man.




Managerial problems and needs

Today, all kinds of organization are constantly exposed to changes in
a dynamic and moving environment. In order to survive they have
to predict these changes and be prepared to respond quickly and
adequately. When it comes to commercial enterprises, the following
major driving forces seem to be the most influential today:

• Development of new production technology.
• A shifting competitive balance, from domestic to global competition.
• A slower expanding market.
• Changing market preferences with a demand for high quality at a
  low cost.

   With this background it is natural that market share must be
captured from competitors in a global marketplace. Success is possible
if the enterprise gets the information about the changes as they
occur and possesses the qualifications to process it adequately. The
competitive edge belongs to those enterprises which can rationalize
and use the new technology in planning, operating, directing and
control of available resources. Use of decision support systems of
various kinds has thus been one of the critical success factors in
modern enterprises. It is here defined as 'a computer-based information
system designed to support decision makers at any level, working with
semi-structured or unstructured problems'.
406        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    With respect to this definition it is important to understand that
it is not a question of how to man a computer system. Instead it
is a question of how to equip a small group of decision makers
with individually adapted computer tools. The benefits of imple-
menting such a system have been investigated by several researchers
(e.g. Kroenke 1989). These are:

— Increase in the number of alternatives examined
— Better understanding of the business
— Fast response to unexpected situations
— Ability to carry out ad hoc analysis
— New insights and learning
— Improved communication
— Improved control
— Cost savings
— Better decisions
— More effective teamwork
— Time savings
— Making better use of data resources

   Some typical tasks facilitated by a decision support system have
been pointed out by Bidgoli (1989) and are:

• What if analysis: The effect of a change in one variable can
  easily be measured in relation to others. If labour cost increases by
  4 percent, what is going to happen to the final cost of a unit? If the
  advertising budget increases by 2 percent, what is the impact on
  total sales?
• Goal-seeking: Goal-seeking is the reverse of what if analysis. How
  much must be sold of a particular unit in order to generate an
  increase in profit of 5 percent?
• Sensitivity analysis: Using sensitivity analysis will enable the
  detection of the most influential and critical variables of a
  calculation. What is the maximum price you can pay for raw
  material and still make a profit? How much over-time can you pay
  and still be cost-effective?
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS               407


• Exception analysis: This calculation monitors the performance of
  the variables that are outside of a predefined range. It highlights
  the region that generated the highest total sales or the production
  centre that spent more than the predefined budget.
• Trend analysis: Before making a prognosis the past has to be
  studied. Useful building blocks of the past are time-series which
  are computer processed and current long-term development or
  trends. These, in turn, are extrapolated into predictions of the
  future.
• Revenue generation: Can be used to assess sales strategies, effective-
  ness of the sales force, allocation of sales personnel to territories,
  and appropriateness of the commission plan. As for marketing
  strategies, effectiveness of PR and advertising can be studied.
  Order-processing effectiveness can be assessed by examining the
  time required to fill orders, the number of backorders, and so on.
• Purchasing: Can be analyzed by comparing the cost and terms of
  goods purchased to industrial averages. Cash flow requirements
  for future periods based on past experience can be estimated as
  well as the payment policy (when to pay invoices, whether to take
  discounts and so on).
• Personnel and payroll: Plans can be developed, and changes in
  them can be carried out. Lead time for hiring and training employees
  on the basis of sales plans and manufacturing can be calculated
  and acceleration or retardation of the plans simulated.
• Asset control: The estimation and calculation of the market value
  of different types of assets can be facilitated. The impact of changes
  in asset depreciation schedules and the evaluation of asset control
  effectiveness can be performed by estimating losses due to theft,
  accidental destruction, or bureaucratic bungling.
• Product planning and budgeting: Can be performed. The cost and
  schedule of developing new products can be estimated and the
  financial result of planned product portfolios can be forecast. Trial
  budgets can be developed and analyzed in order to estimate their
  impact upon different types of divisions, etc.
408        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Manufacturing planning: For example, how large production
  facilities need to be in order to meet the manufacturing schedule, is
  conveniently calculated on the decision support system. Monitoring
  of the manufacturing process and assessing the costs and benefits
  of different alternatives is also possible. Quality measurement and
  subsequent detection of the causes of changed quality is another
  possibility. Finally, the effectiveness of production scheduling can
  be studied and better ways of organizing the production effort
  simulated.




Four generations of computer support

During the 1960s, when the first generation of useful all-purpose
computers reached the market, a kind of decision support called
electronic data processing, EDP, became available. It was designed to
do the task of implementing decisions which had already been
made. Very large quantities of data were processed, each in accordance
with a well-defined and programmed series of choices and conditional
branches. In a loose sense this processing can be considered to have
comprised decisions, although the 'decisions' were nothing more
than mechanical recognition of patterns without the aid of human
judgement. Its designers were typical computer scientists and it was
applied in transaction systems, among other uses.
   Later, the concepts of Management Information Systems, MIS,
emerged. These systems were the result of a cooperation between
computer science and the area of management. The underlying
need grew out of an increased internationalization and competition
among organizations in a more complex world. Visions of computers
revolutionizing the business sector with online, real time systems
supporting rational, quantitative decisions by large amount of data
were common. In reality the MIS has become a tool for routine middle
management decisions by supporting simple bookkeeping, updating
inventory and calculating cost over-time, and so on.
   As a predecessor to MIS, the Decision Support System, DSS, arrived
in the 1970s as an instrument primarily for modelling. Also, this
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS               409


system was intended to be a tool for decision makers, but became
a little too complicated for the average executive. DSS systems
were generally geared for special, limited processes of decisions
involving multidimensional models, ad hoc analyzing, reporting, and
consolidation. Today, these systems are used mainly by controllers
and analysts for calculating, budgeting, simulation and aggregating.
    During the 1980s, two generations of Management Support Systems,
MSS, were introduced. The first generation comprised mainframe
computer systems with links to personal computers. A private
database was included in the system, which had a menu-driven,
character-based user-interface. The system-support was manual,
usually administered by a special computer department. The soft-
ware consisted of different software packages for different functions.
    At the end of the decade a change of generation took place among
management computer systems and a second generation MSS emerged
with the client/server technology. No particular databases were used
and communication took place with databases belonging to other,
external, agencies. The user-interface became a graphics screen used
for data-driven models, consolidations and reports. The software
packages were integrated for all functions.
    At the beginning of the 1990s the demands on computer systems
grew rapidly. From the executive's viewpoint the data provided was
produced too slowly and was not good material for calculations.
With the rapid technical development that led to powerful work-
stations, relational databases and improved data communication, new
 demands arose. These demands were met by the concept of the
executive information system, EIS, which emerged in response to the
 demands. (Some computer scientists use the acronym ESS, executive
 support system which is synonymous with EIS.)
    The idea was that EIS should be a support for top-level executives
 in their daily work involving decision-making, planning, and control-
 ling. Information should therefore be presented, processed, and
 handled in a very simple manner appropriate for the layman. The
 main point of the system should be flexibility and user-friendliness.
     A closer look at EIS shows that the system is customized for a
 particular decison maker and it is used directly by that decision maker
410          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



without an intermediary. The system is extremely user-friendly,
requires relatively little learning time and gives the user-support for
all kinds of problem definitions. It is designed to process large
amounts of data from both internal and external sources and gives
the user the possibility to predict and simulate various courses of
action.
   EIS may be described as a computer supported presentation/
analysis tool which collects data from other systems or from its own
database. It facilitates drill-down, that is, the selection of information
and navigation from an aggregated to a more detailed level, in a well-
structured way. Requested data is processed by the user according to
his wishes. Its main functions lie in analysis and modelling where
information from different sources is combined. Information can also
be distributed by the system to employees in other departments by
electronic mail. The presentation of information is achieved via
high-resolution graphics on screens and by tables and text.
   Today, decision support is also found in expert systems, ES, which
can adapt their own rules in a manner predetermined by another set
of rules (see p. 332). By the use of artificial intelligence and by imitating
processes that human experts unconsciously perform, the system
can serve as an advanced problem solver and decision maker. Note,
however, that the problem to which an ES is applied must be
complicated enough to require an expert. It can also be worth to note
what the well-known physicist Niels Bohr said about experts.

      "An expert is a person who has made all the mistakes that can
      be made in a very narrow field".

    AI systems, which must be considered a tool for more loosely
structured problems, can be characterized as inductive, synthetic and
trial-and-error based. When there are no well-defined problems or no
consensus exists regarding the right solution, an ES makes no sense.
ES are typically used where expertise is unavailable, scarce or too
expensive in order to manage inconsistent, incomplete or uncertain
information. Another typical area of use is where time and pressure
constraints are involved and a need exists to secure knowledge before
an expert person quits a company. Time-consuming problems where
                     DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                        411


   Table 9.5 Domains of different computerized decision support systems.

  Kind of problem    Operational level   Tactical level   Strategical level

   Structured               EDP               ES

   Semi-structured          MIS                                 MSS

   Unstructured                               DSS               EIS



several days are required for a solution are not suitable for ES systems.
In principle, the expert system can deliver its own solution at decision
time and do the whole job itself, although a responsible decision
maker is unlikely to give up his right to decide.
    Table 9.5 shows how the various kinds of computerized decision
support systems have been used at different management levels.
    From Table 9.5, it is clear that DSS is especially adapted to support
decisions at the tactical level and in some cases at the strategic
level. Observe that an ES is not suitable for solving unstructured
problems; this type of problem occurs frequently at the strategic
level and requires human judgement and skill at the moment of
decision.
    Decision support systems are either data-oriented or model-
oriented. Data-oriented systems could be, for example, online budgeting
systems while model-oriented systems can be exemplified by an
accounting system which calculates the consequences of a particular
action. When designing systems for structured tasks (MIS) the
approach is mainly analytic, planned and deductive. The creation of
systems for more loosely structured problems (AI systems) can be
characterized as inductive, synthetic and trial-and-error based.
    The general structure of a system is shown Figure 9.2.
     The user-interface for the dialogue management unit consists of a
workstation with a set of programs which manage the display screen.
 It obtains input from and sends output to the user and translates the
 user's requests into commands for the other two units. The model
 management unit contains models of the business activity. Examples
 are spreadsheets, financial models and process simulation models.
412        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




          Figure 9.2 General structure of a decision support system.



This unit also creates, modifies and invokes the models. The data
management unit maintains the internal database and interfaces other
sources of data from external databases.
   Something typical for an ES is that the control structure is separated
from its data-content. The reason to separate the general reasoning
mechanism from all the stored facts and heuristics is that the system
then can be incrementally built-up and refined on a continuous basis.
Such a structure also facilitates a testing of the whole system.
   An important feature of an ES is that it is able to comment its
reasoning like a human expert by an explanation facility. It is thereby
possible to ask how certain facts were considered and how the system
delivered the specific conclusion. Involved in this process is the
possibility to handle uncertainty which is allowed to be entered in
the system when consulted.
   An ES delivers its solutions according to three main strategies.
When the starting point emanates from concept formulation or
design, a reasoning procedure called forward chaining is used. In lack
                   DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS              413


of particular goals, the computer here processes and analyses all
accessible data and gives a solution. This can sometimes be very
random or overloaded as everything possible could be presented.
Backward chaining is a kind of goal-directed reasoning starting with
a hypothesis. The search is done backwards along a certain track
to verify the hypothesis. This strategy is often used in planning;
a drawback which sometimes occur is, however, a combinatorial
explosion of possibilities. Combined chaining is mainly used when
complex problems with pronounced uncertainties exists. An example
is oil drilling prospecting.




C3I systems

This heading is an acronym for Command, Control, Communication
and Intelligence, mainly used as a general concept for a military
command structure. The acronym has its origin in the notion of
command & control (C2) which has been defined as:

   'In general terms, C2 is everything an executive uses in making
   decisions and seeing that they are carried out; it includes the
   authority accruing from his or her appointment to a position
   and involves people, procedures, equipment and the executive's
   own mind. A C2 process is a series of functions which includes
   gathering information, making decisions and monitoring results.
   A C2 system is a collection of people, procedures, and equipment
   which support a C2 process.' (Coakley 1991)

   Lately, this concept has been used more and more in a civilian
framework synonymous with 'management and decision-making'.
Although a certain similarity with normal management decision-
making always exists, military decisions are often made under quite
extreme circumstances including fear for one's own life. The design
of military decision support therefore in general emphasizes different
qualities from those accentuated in the corresponding civil support.
An example is the ever-present demand for higher decision speed.
414        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Something has to be discovered, reported, processed, presented and
a decision to take an action has to be made. If this is to take hours
or even days, as earlier, the modern battle is lost before it has even
begun. Therefore, certain qualities must be present in a C3I system.
These qualities are listed below.

• The system should be specially designed with regards to the needs
  of the limited human capacity.
• The system must relieve the decision maker of physical effort and
  counteract the effects of tiredness. The system should be able to
  'remember'.
• The system must strengthen the self-confidence of the lone decision
  maker by amplification of his strong points. It should be possible
  to adapt to the idiosyncrasies of various decision makers.
• The system should counteract an adaptation of reality to already
  existing plans.
• The system should interpret reality without distortion.
• The system should amplify signals and trends normally too weak
  to be noticed.
• The system should enhance systematic interpretation of a massive
  data and information flow by filtering and sorting.
• The system must enhance instant exchange of information in all
  known forms without barriers.
• The system must be able to manipulate time, to 'look into the
  future' by simulation and the making of prognosis.
• The system must be able to canalize "orders" from below — for
  example when somebody in the lowest hierarchy delivers
  information which cancels or stops a plan already made.

   As a means for understanding the commanding process a
standard model has been developed (/. Lawson 1978) according to
Figure 9.3.
   The model identifies five functions as follows:

• Sensor: The sense-function collects data regarding the environment:
  own and enemy forces, terrain, weather, visibility, etc.
                       DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                        415




                                             1
                                                            External
                                          Process            data


                                             i'
                                                            Desired
                                          Compare            state


                                             1
                                           Decide
                                                            Decision
                                                              act


                                             i'
                                             Act


                                                 ?

              Figure 9.3 Lawson's model for command and control.
(From J. Lawson, 'A Unified Theory of Command and Control', 41st Military Operations
Research Symposium, 1978.)




• Process: The process-function places together and extracts data in
  order to give the commander information concerning the actual
  situation.
• Compare: The compare-function matches the current situation in
  the surrounding world with the desired — that is, the commander's
  desired — situation.
• Decide: The decide-function chooses from the repertoire of possible
  alternatives for action in order to influence the situation towards
  that which is sought.
• Act: The act-function transforms the chosen decision into action.

   The similarity between Lawson's model and the classical decision
cycle, taught by military schools for generations of officer cadets, is
            GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



obvious. This is defined by the following steps which can be iterated
several times if necessary:

• Collect information
• Evaluation (of threats/resources)
• Alternatives of action
• Analysis of the alternatives of action
• Choice of alternative for action
• Resource allocation
• Action
• Result analysis

   Today, with the constantly increasing demand for rapid decisions,
the decision cycle has been "modernized" and is now called the
OODA Loop. The acronym stands for observation, orientation, decision,
action, and was introduced by the American colonel Boyd (Coram
2002). See Figure 9.4.
   The circle or loop should be followed to the left as fast as possible
and preferably faster than the enemy on the battle field, in order to
get critical advantages. The most restraining factor today is fusion of




           4
           i



                Figure 9.4 The rapid decision OODA Loop.
                     DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                  417


       Observation          Orientation         Decision       Action




         Figure 9.5 A more elaborate examination of the OODA Loop.



the enormous amount of data, often available also for lower level
commanders. A successful fusion creates a clear conception and
transforms the loop into a "decision gepard".
   A more elaborate examination of the OODA Loop is found in
Figure 9.5. Note how orientation shapes observation, shapes decision,
shapes action, and, in turn, is shaped by the feedback and other
phenomena coming into our senses or observation window. The entire
loop is an ongoing many-sided implicit cross-referencing process of
projection, empathy, correlation, and rejection.
   One of the advantages of the model is that it describes a complex,
iterative and dynamic process in a simple manner. It has an obvious
similarity with the basic cybernetic control cycle (see p. 90) where the
regulating function compares a real value (is value) with a desired
value (should value). From this comparison the regulated entity is
then adjusted.
   Another standard model for presenting in this context is the
generalized information system model by H. Yovits and R. Ernst
from 1967. This model includes the influence of the environment, a
distinction not made by Lawson's model which places the command/
control process outside of the environment of the actual system. The
Yovits/Ernst model is presented in Figure 9.6.
   The demands on the supporting functions provided by a C3I system
can be analyzed with a starting point in the Yovits/Ernst model.
418          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



            Environment                                                Environment


                  i
                      I
             Information         Infor-                    Courses
                                                                            J1
              aquisition         mation      Decision      of action
                  and                        making                     Execution
            dissemination                     (DM)                         (E)
                 (AD)
                 i
                                                               Observable
                                                                actions



                          Data            Transformation
                                                (T)


              Figure 9.6 The generalized information system model.
(From H. Yovits and R. Ernst, Electronic Handbook of Information, Thomson, Washington
DC, 1967.)



INFORMATION ACQUISITION AND DISSEMINATION        is the function which
provides necessary information for decision makers at various levels,
building the basis for decisions. To be fit for use, the information has
to fulfil certain quality demands:

• Actuality: The information has to be timely; however, this does
  not imply that all kinds of information have to be current. A
  geographical information system managing a fleet of distribution
  vehicles has to be updated several times per minute, whereas the
  internal account of the fleet must be updated within twenty-four
  hours. In turn, the store value of the enterprise has to be updated
  once a month.
• Validity and correctness: It is important that the system's delivery
  of information to the decision maker is what is demanded and
  needed. Too much information can lead to a critical part of it being
  drowned in the general 'noise'. Too little information implies that
  decisions are made on uncertain grounds. The information must
  also be correct. One problem which must be solved is to make the
  system select and reject incorrect data and estimate the uncertainty
  of what is presented.
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                419


• Coherence: To have the system work efficiently, common
  information has to be coherent, that is, it must be interpreted in the
  same way by all users. This requires a common formation of
  concepts, where all involved agree upon the significance. Moreover,
  the form of the information exchange must build upon a standard.
• Availability: It must be possible to arrive at the information
  (physical availability) and it must be presented in a way that is
  comprehensible for the user (cognitive availability). The physical
  availability can be improved by distributing the system and making
  the subsystems autonomous (locally needed data should be stored
  locally). Cognitive availability can be improved if the actual user
  may determine what kind of data should be presented, and how.

   Disregarding the specified quality demands, good information
always has to comply with the general (classical) scientific demands of

• validity
• reliability
• precision
• relevans

   DECISION-MAKING seems to an ever-increasing extent to be more
complex, and the available time for decision decreases in step with
the growing velocity of changes in the environment. The person who
can reduce his decision time without renouncing the quality of the
decision will be one step ahead of his competitors. With scarce
resources, the importance of intelligent distribution and good
management will then be more pronounced. This is true no matter if
the struggle is fought in the battlefield or in the realm of the business
world.
   When improving the decision process, the following must be kept
in mind regarding C3I systems:

• By use of expert systems as part of a C3I system, knowledge can be
  accumulated and be available for decision makers on all levels.
• Simulation improves the possibility to predict the effects of different
  alternatives of action. New alternatives of action can be tested,
420       GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



  which are normally not possible to execute in reality due to the
  risks involved. A commander can simulate unconventional methods
  and break established rules without jeopardizing human lives and
  costly equipment. This possibility stimulates creativity.
• Complex decisions can be divided into manageable parts and be
  distributed among subordinates. Delegation and decentralization
  are enhanced.
• The firm establishing of orders is enhanced if drafts can be
  distributed to decision makers at all levels and viewpoints can be
  gathered.
• The risk of under optimization concerning one's own decisions
  decreases when overview and holistic judgement become possible.

   EXECUTING implies that decisions already taken are transformed
into action and that arrangements made are followed up. A well-
designed C3I system has the following advantages:

• Decisions can be more rapidly distributed to executing subordinate
  units. Improved transmission safety enhances the delivery of correct
  orders.
• In the important phase of execution, the system bridges over
  individual differences and adapts to the various needs of disparate
  commanders.

   TRANSFORMATION is the necessary feedback process vital for all
real time information systems.

• Instant feedback via the system improves the communication
  process and the immediate study of the consequences of orders
  given. As a result, better decisions are made.
• The system enhances learning by experience through its logging
  facilities. The steps in the decision process are documented and the
  idea behind the decision becomes visible.

   The aim of the C3I system is to support the creation of the
"optimum decision". Nearly always this has to be done with the
shortest possible time at one's disposal, under great uncertainty
and in a chaotic environment. Complexity, dynamics, and lots of
interacting elements is a rule instead of an exception.
                     DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS               421


   The success of an C3I system is always correlated to the very
presentation of the problem taking place at the interface. This will
influence the interpretation of the situation and therefore the decision-
maker's actions. In order to give the optimal presentation, the
following criterion has to be observed:

• Data has to be put in its context. A single figure has no meaning if
  not associated to something intelligibly. It is dependent of the
  relation to other data and to the wider reference frame and the
  expectations of the observer.
• Changes and events have to be emphasized. Sudden occurrences must
  be emphasized in order to show the dynamics of what happens. It
  must be obvious when an operationally important process takes
  place (e.g when a limit is approaching).
• Contrasts must be emphasized. The actual status of the system must
  be possible to compare with normal system function. By contrasts,
  a meaning is generated. Anomalies should be possible to discover.

    In the struggle of the commercial market or in the military battle
field, the aim of a C3I system is to create advantages in order to win.
    Among them, the following are the most important:

• Information advantage. To catch information regarding the
  competitor/enemy in due time in order to use it against him.
• Command and control advantage. To act/attack more rapid and more
  precisely than the competitor/enemy. More rapid communication
  between different hierarchical levels and shorter decision time.
• Adjustment advantage. To use fantasy, flexibility, and improvization
  capacity better than the competitor/enemy and act accordingly.

   The connection between the existing environment and the
difficulties of decision-making is shown in Figure 9.7. It is evident
that the problems existing in the right and lowest part of the matrix
is most dependent of a good decision support.
   When a C3I system is implemented in an organization, inevitable
effect of both first and second order will arise. First order effect
                     GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                            SIMPLE                                  COMPLEX




         •     Few factors and component                 Many factors and components

         •    Similar factors and components             Different factors and components

         •    Unchangeable factors and components        Unchangeable factors and components




                             A W     i \
 o                                \ i
 <
                                     i        ^ 1
     •       Few factors and components             •   Many factors and components

     •       Similar factors and components         •   Different factors and components

     •       Factors and components changing        •   Factors and components changing



Figure 9.7 The connection between environment and the difficulties of decision-
making.




originate from the very handling of the hardware. Second order effects
will influence individuals, groups, and the whole organization.
   Sometimes the system is used in an unpredictable way, not
intended when it was created, which may produce both positive and
negative consequences. Some systems will not even be used; they are
boycotted for different reasons by those intended to use them. To
know in advance how the system will influence the organization is
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS               423


very difficult. It may not be analyzed in isolation, only together with
the user and his milieu.




Some psychological aspects of decision-making

In the preceding pages some structural and technical points of
decision-making have been discussed. The importance of the
psychological factors involved cannot, however, be neglected. One of
these is the creative element which more or less influences all steps
of the process. Regarding creativity -per se, a wise man knows that
pessimists underestimate human genius and creativity, while optimists
underestimate human greed and aggressiveness.
   The creative process itself usually proceeds through the following
stages.
• Saturation — the familiarization with the problem and all activities
  and ideas associated with it.
• Deliberation — the challenging, rearranging and illustrating of ideas
  from a variety of perspectives.
• Incubation — the disengagement of conscious effort, allowing the
  subconscious mind to work.
• Illumination — the sudden advent of a bright idea as a potential
  solution to the problem.
• Verification — the clarification, reframing, and presentation of this
  idea in order to obtain other people's viewpoints.

    In order to expand the amount of alternatives available, a number
of methods enhancing creative group thinking have been developed.
The objective of brainstorming is to free group members from self-
criticism, criticism of others, and inhibition when generating ideas.
Group members are permitted to present ideas as rapidly as they
occur, without criticism. Freewheeling and wild ideas are welcomed;
quantity is wanted and the greater the number of ideas, the greater
the probability of a really good one. Combinations and improvement
of already existing ideas are also encouraged.
424        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   An equivalent to brainstorming is brainwriting. It has the same
premises as brainstorming, but the exchange of ideas is done on an
entirely written basis. By this means, the over-influence of verbally
dominant persons in group meetings is neutralized. Brainwriting is
especially well suited in a framework of computer conferencing.
   Another popular method is synectics (from the Greek 'fitting
together'). This technique postulates that creativity exists in every
person and that emotional and non-rational factors are as important
as the intellectual and rational. It uses an ongoing shift between a
rational analysis of the existing problem and the search for non-
rational analogies. The more unlikely the analogy the better;
improbable analogies will increase the probability that the problem
solution has not been thought of before. Often synectics permits
persons of wholly different backgrounds to communicate better than
by brainstorming. The method is also generally better for dealing
with more complex and technical problems.
   Good decision makers who apparently take exactly the right
decision at exactly the right time are often asked how they do it.
Their answer is remarkably often that they quite simply were lucky.
Why some people seem to be more lucky than others has been the
interest of the American scientist James Austin (1978). He presents
four general levels of chance in the following hierarchy:

1. Chance happens
2. Chance favors those in motion
3. Chance favors the prepared mind
4. Chance favors the individualized action

   The fact that blind, lucky chance happens, is something which can
occur for everybody according to plain, statistical randomness. Austin
states that this kind of chance is less prevalent than is normally
believed. Most lucky chances belong to the higher three levels met by
skilled managers or scientists.
   Chance of the second level is a kind of luck which is a consequence
of sheer curiosity and a will to experiment and investigate. The third
level demands a special kind of personal properties and background
conditions of knowledge and experience. To observe, remember and
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                425


create new combinations often invites new chances in a way which
is difficult for the particular individual to explain.
   The fourth level is dependent on the special individual. A certain
combination of interests, lifestyles, and lines of thought involve a
predisposition to unique insights and innovations — what we call
good luck.
   Man as a decision maker has some typical shortcomings. He has
a certain tendency to interpret data in favour of himself. Deep-seated
models of thought are not readily changed as we do not want to
confront new circumstances that were not in accordance with our
expectations. Man left alone with himself looks for confirming
data, avoiding that kind of information challenging notions that he
already has. All this taken together therefore tells us that much is
obvious — but only for ourselves.
   Perhaps mankind's shortcomings are most visible when it comes
to the estimation of probabilities in a decision process. The following
subjective treatment of probabilities is well-known:

• A tendency to overestimate the occurrence of events with low
  probability and underestimate those with high probability.
• A tendency to believe that an event just occurred cannot occur
  again for a very long time.
• A tendency to believe that an event which has not occurred for a
  while is more probable to occur in the near future.
• A tendency to overestimate the true probability of events which
  are positive and underestimate those which are negative.
• A tendency to believe that events with certain similarities are equally
  probable even if their probabilities are very different.

   It can generally also be said that individuals are more likely to
pay attention to immediate consequences than they are to future,
distantly occuring effects.
   In the study of behavior it is well-known that individual behavior,
group behaviour and organizational behavior all suffer from various
pathologies that involve unwise assumptions. Individual pathologies
breed into behavior of groups and group pathologies breed into the
organization. Here it makes sense to cite the philosopher Friedrich
426        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Nietzsche who says that "Madness is rare in individuals, but common
in parties, groups, and organizations".
   An individual forming part of a team of decision makers often
runs the risk of submitting to groupthink. In such cases his own
apprehensions are suppressed in favour of the collective opinion
which often embraces a distorted view of reality. Self-censuring
emerge. As this is difficult to be aware of, it can be called a cognitive
deficiency — often the root cause of a disastrous decision. Some persons
prefer to call it folie a deux — the well-known psychotic disturbance
which implies that related or connected people are affected by
the same misconception which thereafter is systematically further
developed. A victim of cognitive defects has repeatedly in history
been the messenger who lost his head after presenting the bad news.
Organizations have their own versions of groupthink and people
contravening it are often victims of ostracism.
   The most significant pathologies in a team of decision makers are
clan-think, group-think and spread-think. Clan-think exists in a
situation were all persons in a group believes the same thing, and
that same thing is completely wrong. A good example is the belief in
creationism which states that the world was created by God about
4000 years BC.
   Symptoms of group-think has been categorized by Janis (1972) in
the following way:

Type A: Overestimates of the group regarding power and morality
1. An illusion of invulnerability, which creates excessive optimism
   and encourages taking extreme risks.
2. An unquestioned belief in the group's inherent morality, inclining
   the members to ignore the ethical or moral consequences of their
   decisions.
Type B: Closed-mindness
3. Collective efforts to rationalize an order to discount warnings or
   other information that might lead the members to reconsider their
   assumptions before they recommit themselves to their past policy
   decisions.
4. Stereotyped views of enemy leaders as too evil, weak or stupid to
   counter the risky attempts to defeat their purposes.
                    DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                427


Type C: Pressures toward uniformity
5. Self-censorship of deviation from apparent group consensus,
   thereby minimizing the importance of any self-doubt.
6. Shared illusion of unanimity partially resulting from self-censorship
   and partially from the false assumption that silence means consent.
7. Direct pressure for loyalty on members expressing arguments
   counter to the prevailing view.
8. The emergence of 'mindguards' who protect the group from
   adverse information.

   Spread-think is the reverse of clan-think. It refers to a situation
where every member of a group assesses the relative importance of
a certain problem but have quite different ideas than the other
members regarding the solution.
   Apart from group-think foibles in decision-making, a number of
more articulated pathologies exist. Five such pathologies have been
discussed by D. Dbrner (1980) according to the following:

• Thematic wandering implying that the decision maker gives up
  one goal for another, sometimes several times one after another.
  Most often the reason is the lack of a general impression.
• Encapsulation which is the opposite of thematic wandering. Here
  the decision maker concentrates on one goal, being apparently
  incapable of seeing other alternatives.
• Refusal to make decisions originating in decision agony. This can
  have many psychological reasons.
• Inconvenient delegation where the decision maker lacks the ability
  to correctly distribute the subtasks to his assistants.
• Laying the blame on somebody else when the decision goes wrong.

   These pathologies can be divided into two groups. One group
includes the first two items and emanates from the inability to define
suitable goals. The other group consists of the last three items and is
characterized by the inability to learn from experience.
    A special devastating organizational pathology in critical situations
is the unwillingness of top managers to accept high-quality studies
428        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



emanating from lower levels. The problem regards false autocratic
behavior founded in the self-apprehension of the individual. Such
top-level arrogance and non-receptivity is very difficult to come to
terms with. It is often associated with the unwillingness to discuss
" undiscussables".




The future of managerial decision support

It is very difficult to provide relevant predictions in such a dynamic
field of computer technology as decision support systems. The
small examination of the past made here may, however, give some
reasonable conclusions for the future.
    The users of today's systems differ substantially from the past
and are no longer the hard-core computer scientists of yesterday. In
the corporate world the use of computers is now a matter of course
and has become an integral part of the scene. User-friendliness
has been made a reality by systems which are neither difficult
to learn nor complicated to utilize. Middle level decision makers
will take advantage of this, personally gathering both internal and
external information from the system, in order to make themselves
independent of subordinates.
    This augmented control of the business environment and the
possibility to use new 'last minute information', will give decision
makers better conditions for prompt and substantiated decisions. The
prerequisites for direct management and control will be considerably
improved.
    Another major trend will be the integration of the different kinds
of systems. DSS, EIS and ES will all be integrated into each other in
one all-purpose EIS system (Everybody's Information System!) which
implies that personnel at many levels will use it.
    On the other hand it is still difficult to imagine that top-level
executives should have any major benefit from the system. From the
beginning, decision support systems were intended to be a computer-
supported tool for the highest level decision. It was, however, soon
                      DECISION-MAKING AND DECISION AIDS                   429



realized that this category of users would never accept a place in
front of a computer screen. Decision makers at the strategic level
have always obtained the information they demanded and they will
continue to get it delivered from their subordinates.
   To apply the rulebook is something which the computer today
tackles successfully and even a robot can learn from experience. But
the best decision support will continue to be what is particularly
human, namely good intuition, good guesses and a certain feeling
rather than slavishly applied rules. Decision-making is a compromise
between our conscious thought processes and nonconscious intuition.
No doubt this will also be true in the coming century.




Review questions and problems
1. Describe the real difference between normative and descriptive praxeology.
2. Why is 'good intuition' extra valuable when making decisions under strict
   uncertainty?
3. What does it imply to dissolve a problem? Has redefinition something to
   do with dissolution?
4. Present your own examples of structured, semi-structured and
   unstructured problems in all of the three decision levels.
5. How can a general-purpose computer without specialized software be
   used as a decision aid?
6. What is the main difference between civil and military decison support
   systems?
7. Justify why you should perhaps prefer brainwriting instead of
   brainstorming at your company's creativity meeting.

                                     *
                              10
                      Informatics

• Electronic networks
• Fibre optics, communication and navigation satellites, cellular
  radio
• Internet
• Virtual reality
• Cyberspace and cyberpunk

'The success of any system can only be measured in terms of the
satisfaction of the user/ (K. Samuelson 1977)



S   ince the late 1960s, computer science has been an important topic
    of study in all major universities around the world. This subject
has its origin in the pure technological areas of computer engineering
('computer science'), computer mathematics ('computing science')
and numerical analysis, etc. Informatics, with its roots in computer
science is a concatenation of the words information and technology.
Enjoying features of both, it sits between science and technology and
has a broad interface to neighbouring areas such as those shown in
Figure 10.1.
   As an area of design, informatics concerns the overarching
construction of information technology, IT, adapted to various user
areas. The domain includes supporting methodology and techniques
for the analysis, development and management of information
systems. As such, it covers the whole spectrum from social science to
mathematics. In a sense, informatics has more in common with other


                                 430
                                  INFORMATICS                              431




        Figure 10.1 Informatics and its intersection with related areas.



sciences of design (e.g. architecture) than with its formal origin.
Design concerns the shape, the ergonomics and the final user-
friendliness of the actual system. Here, technology alone cannot be
allowed to decide; the final result must be what customers and users
want. For example, the needs of a general user will be widely
different from those of a computer scientist working in academia.
    Thus political, social, cultural, ecological and especially psycho-
logical considerations must be taken into account. A typical problem
that involves informatics relates to transportation in medical care.
Should the patient be transported to the practitioner, or should the
practitioner be transported to the patient? This question can be solved
by tele-medicine.
    As an applied systems science concerned with user requirements,
informatics must necessarily put concrete and pragmatic knowledge
before general theories. Therefore, values and preferences are
thoroughly dealt with, being the basis for human technological needs.
Questions regarding threats to human integrity are a priority concern
in informatics.
    The most characteristic feature of informatics is, however, how
often and crucially the area changes its focus. While social philo-
sophers speculate about the consequences of a certain information
technology, the development has already moved in another direction.
432        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



By tinkering, users discover new areas of use, something not intended
by the designers. No doubt, the use of modern IT will transform our
present society just as thoroughly as the industrial revolution changed
the society of its time. This transformation towards an IT-based
knowledge society has been called 'The Third Wave' (Toffler 1980).
   In such a revolution, some specific circumstances must be observed.
One is the difference between ordinary mail and electronic mail,
E-mail (including Fax). With ordinary mail you try to reach a place,
while by the use of E-mail you try to reach a person. Another is a
growing need, not for more, but for less information — delivered,
however, with an absolute freedom of choice.
   In order to make the vast sphere of informatics presentable in a
book such as this, the area discussed here is restricted to some major
parts of tele-informatics, an area of great current interest. Tele-
informatics includes knowledge about electronic transference systems
for data and information of all kinds. French-speaking countries have
coined the name telematique, while Scandinavian countries use the
name telematik.
   The international background of today's informatics is an ongoing
intense period of development where three global multimillion
dollar industrial sectors are just now merging. These are the telecom-
munications industry, the electronics industry and the media/
entertainment industry. The integration exists on two planes, on the
one hand by merger and acquisition and on the other by technological
integration of voice, picture, data and information.
    One of the main reasons behind the technological integration is
digital compression, making possible vastly more 'traffic' on the
existing tele- and data-communication networks. Simultaneously, the
networks are being rebuilt and augmented into something described
as the 'electronic highway'.




Electronic networks

The modern world of today consists, to a great extent, of an
artificial milieu created by human beings and structured into large
                                INFORMATICS                            433


technological systems. The global telecommunications network
belongs to one of the most complex of these systems, even if one only
considers the physical network with its telephones, exchanges, optical
fibre cables, satellites, etc. If, as well, other parts of the system, such
as development laboratories, institutes of technology and general
technological knowledge are included, this system takes on gigantic
dimensions. Despite its magnitude, it holds together and forms a
working entity with an impressive level of reliability in service. This
reliability in turn, may to a great extent be ascribed to 'self-healing
qualities' with online, automatic fault isolation and call rerouting.
    One of the most interesting properties of electronic networks (apart
from the fact that they work so well!) is that they are constantly
undergoing change. They are modified by different phenomena, such
as technical development, investment, changed legislation, merging
of carriers, implementation of new services and connection of new
users. The system thus develops according to its own logic, a logic
which is itself subject to change and thus changes the whole system
yet again. Like many other big technological systems, the electronic
network is therefore characterized by an interplay or combination of
change and stability. Significant for all communication networks is
that as their value increases, the more users it has. This is called
Metcalfe's law, after the Internet pioneer Bob Metcalfe. The law tells
us that the value of the network for the individual user increases
with the square of the number of users.
    Another interesting feature of the modern electronic network is
that it neutralizes the age-old debate regarding centralization versus
decentralization. All the capacity of extreme centralization and extreme
decentralization can exist simultaneously in the same network. With
regards to this quality, the modern electronic network parallels
the human brain, which must be considered both centralized and
 decentralized at the same time.
    Networks consist of links connecting the numerous nodes. Links
 are of various kinds, from simple copper wires to transmitting
 and receiving satellites. The nodes are exchanges, today mainly
computerized and often both processing and storing the flow
 between the links. Distinctions can be made between the following
434         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



networks:

1. Information networks
2. Communication networks
3. Computer networks
4. Relational networks
5. Hybrid networks (of 1, 2, 3, 4)

    Information networks are characterized by nodes which are data-
bases, while communication networks connect information processors
(human beings or computers). The communication system enjoys a
development which is relatively independent of the information
system that it supports.
    Two basic styles of network exist: the hierarchical in which one node
or exchange is designated to manage the other, and the peer-to-peer,
where every node manages itself. In the second case, all devices are
of an equal status and there is no hierarchy for communication. With
the combined intelligence of all nodes in the network, a peer-to-peer
configuration is able to cooperate and automatically to determine the
best routes and also reroute around problems. This capability is the
result of a continuous sensing, feedback, feedforward and adjustment
among all subsystems communicating within the network.
    Each kind of network has its own morphology and evolutionary
pattern with a different appearance of nodes and links. Complexity,
reliability, vulnerability and dependability vary according to the type
of network. Evolutionary growth, rather than planned development,
is a characteristic property of nearly all networks and has been studied
by several communication researchers, among others, Satnuelson
(1977). The growth is subject to the needs of its users and is largely
independent of existing technology.
    The various stages of this growth can be considered a life-cycle
with the steps shown in Figure 10.2. The stages are:

1st stage     Differentiated loci exist randomly distributed within all
              dimensions of a medium
2nd stage     Formation of interconnections by 'Brownian' motion
3rd stage     Choices are being made; the dynamic is no longer
              Brownian
                                     INFORMATICS                                    435


                                                      •:
                      (a)




              Figure 10.2 Life-cycle of a telecommunication network.
(Reprinted with permission from K. Samuelson et al., Information Systems and Nehvorks, North-
Holland, 1977.)




4th stage       Limiting the alternatives
5th stage       Limiting the number of connections and the emergence
                of decision bias
6th stage       Increasing structure and differentiation of structure
7th stage       System fragmentation prior to renewal
436          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                   information Networks                  Communication Networks
                                                 Stage
                    Evolutionary Growth                    Orderly expansion



                                                         O          o           o


              Star as centralized growth kerne                Point-to-point chaining




                Spider (mixed-star-tree) with
                 articulations spreading out             Multiconnected meshwork




                  Fork or claw directed into
                       specific areas                    Multidrop dendritic linkage




                                                             Distributed concentrators




                 Wheel, loop and cycle by
                 short-cut or anastomosis




               Decentralized hybrid formation
                                                         Composite grid with nodes
              and coordinated knowledge web




Figure 10.3 Comparison between information and communication network growth.
(Reprinted with permission from K. Samuelson et ah, Information Systems and Networks, North-
Holland, 1977.)


   Figure 10.3 shows evolutionary growth and orderly expansion in
an information network as compared with that in a communication
network. Note that there are only six-stages, as the initial networks
already exists.
                               INFORMATICS                            437


   No matter how the architecture is designed, all electronic networks
function according to one of the following methods:

• fixed connection point to point via a subscribed link;
• circuit switching physical linking on demand (e.g. telephone line);
• packet switching logical connection is established via the nodes of
  commercial carriers which relays the communication content,
  consisting of small electronic message modules or packages.

  The advantages of networks may be seen in many applications.
Some of those that exist on a world-wide basis are:

— Personal communication (telephone, fax)
— Information retrieval (knowledge databases)
— Meteorological information (weather forecasts)
— Geological information (earthquakes, etc.)
— Electronic mail (message storage and forwarding)
— Sale of tickets (air-carrier tickets, etc.)
— Electronic banking (all kinds of commissions)
— Tele-medicine (exchange of patient data, etc.)
— Tele-conferencing
— Police information (INTERPOL)
— Financial information (REUTERS)
— Customs information




Fibre optics, communication and navigation satellites,
cellular radio

Modern networks are composed of different channels, of which the
three mentioned in the above heading seem to have the greatest
potential. Being the least 'glamorous',yjfrre optics have already brought
about a silent revolutionary change in the global communication
system. The invention of fibre optics in fact neutralized the emerging
'copper crisis' during the beginning of the 1970s. Copper was then
considered a serious global shortage problem and the diminishing
438        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



reserves were important parameters in Forrester's World simulations
(see p. 43).
   Optical fibres were first commercially available in 1970 and are
tiny strands of pure glass no wider than a human hair. This strand
can simultaneously carry thousands of digitized telephone calls or
their equivalents. Many strands can be joined together into a cable
which is only one-sixth of the diameter of a conventional copper
cable. Information travels along the strands in the form of extremely
fast light pulses zigzagging inside the cladding of the strand. These
pulses travel at a higher frequency than electric current and are
generated by laser diodes, pulsing at a rate of many million per
second. Technically, the process is called PCM or pulse code
modulation, which implies that a quantified analogue signal is
transmitted in digitally coded form by means of light pulses (see the
sampling theorem on page 250). At the receiving end, the light is
converted back to an analogue signal.
   Compared with ordinary copper cables, optical fibres have a
number of advantages, including the following:

• Higher capacity and speed.
• Cheap to produce (raw material is sand).
• Light and easy to handle (takes little space in crowded underground
  ducts).
• Need few repeaters to amplify the light pulses.
• Free of electrical interference.
• Practically impossible to tap.

   From a relatively slow start the progress of installing fibre cables
is now accelerating. Several transatlantic submarine optic cables
requiring repeater stations only every 150 km have already been laid.
These cables compete with satellite links and it is expected that their
cost-efficiency will soon surpass that of a corresponding satellite
system covering the same distance.
   Communication satellites are another technology that has made
possible the telecommunications revolution. Such satellites have a
geosynchronous orbit 36000 km above the equator which makes them
appear to be stationary when viewed from earth.
                              INFORMATICS                         439


    Something which the world seems both to need and like is
terrestrial cellular radio telephony. The widespread use of mobile
phones has already revolutionized the global communication pattern.
Cellular radio works by dividing city areas and counties into
transmission zones called cells. In every cell there is a low-powered
transmitter with a range adapted exactly to the cell. This means that
transmitters in cells not adjacent to each other can share the same
frequency; a kind of frequency reuse.
    More than ten years ago, a global telephony system called IRIDIUM
consisting of hundreds of satellites orbiting the Earth, was planned.
Their handsets were not intended to be used in cities but in remote
places where cellphones should not work. Today it is up and running
although its consortium declared itself bankrupt in autumn 1999.
One of the reasons was that we now have well built out systems like
GSM (Global System for Mobile telephony) that enable cellphones
used in one country to work in another. The need for a system like
IRIDIUM with its high charges is not so urgent as it was a decade
ago. From a military point of view, however, the system seems very
attractive and US military has already bought substantial amounts of
handsets. This system should be a resistant substitute of conventional
cellular telephony supplying the military with (besides telephony):
fax, data communication, staff locating, and position fixing.
    Another satellite system, originally developed by the US military
for navigation of cruise missiles, is the GPS (Global Positioning
System). Although there exists similar systems, for example the
Russian GLONASS, GPS has set a common standard and is used by
the world society. The system which covers the whole world consists
of 24 low flying satellites (from which 3 is in reserve) in six orbits
with a circulation period of 12 hours. Depending on the sophistication
of the receiving equipment, a position can be defined with an accuracy
between fifty metres to a few centimetres. Today, the receivers are
mass-produced and used, for example, by berry pickers to register
 the coordinates of the place where wild strawberries grow in the
 forest.

                                   *
440        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Internet

When examining electronic networks, the Internet is a good example
as it is one of the biggest and most spectacular. It is possible to
compare the development of the Internet with earlier, radical
infrastructural changes caused for example by the arrival of the
railway or the motor car. Viewed in this way, the Internet is a logical
continuation of a development that began with the wire telegraph
and continued with the telephone. As a hybrid network, it exhibits
all the phenomena associated with both orderly expansion and
evolutionary growth.
    The Internet grew out of a project initiated by the American
Advanced Research Project Agency — ARPA, in the 1960s. This
agency was subordinate to the US Department of Defense and its
mission was to create a big network for communication between
military research computers. The network acquired the name
ARPANET and soon came to include many universities pursuing
military research. The location of its main node became Washington
DC.
    The original concept was to make the network resistant to a nuclear
war. One or several nodes could be destroyed without devastating
consequences for the network as a whole, thanks to its distributed
character. The big innovation was that data transmission was based
on 'packet switching'. This technique divides the information content
of a message into small electronic packages of equal length, each
equipped with an address tag. Each package could be routed on
different ways in the network, a very practical feature in the case of
bottlenecks or breakdowns.
    As more and more universities from all parts of the world were
connected to the network, its character changed to that of an
international university communications facility. The network soon
became a conglomerate consisting of the different nations' own
networks and was taken over by the American National Science
Foundation under the name of the Internet. It can now be characterized
 as a 'network of networks'. For experts in the area, the term for all
integrated networks of the world is the World Net or The Web. The
                               INFORMATICS                            441


Internet, however, must be regarded as the core of this phenomenon
with its more than thirty thousand individual networks.
   The Internet is today an example of natural, 'anarchistic' growth
from below, where the wish to connect was the only main shaping
factor. There is no board of directors or central command authority
for the network; from several points of view it manages itself. It can
thus be characterized as unhierarchic, uncentralized and unplanned.
In spite of this, some kind of Invincible Hand exerts a certain control
without authority. But everywhere the Internet arises, rebels also
arise to resist human control and realize their individuality. After
the modest start at the end of the 1960s, the Internet has exploded
and is now the backbone of global data communication with its more
than 1 billion computer users, about 10-15 per cent of humanity. In
Sweden, for example, each third person daily uses Internet and more
than 70 per cent of the population can access it.
    In the last ten to fifteen years, Internet has been transformed
from a matter of a few specialists to a weekday medium (in the
rich world). In a way, it is possible to speak of two different Internet;
one "idealistic" and one "commercial". Both are breaking up the
geographically determined conditions we have been borned into. Now
we can chose what we want to see, read, listen to and who we want
to speak with. We can communicate to people without the need to
share home district, working place or language. Of course, problems
are created when common past or frames of reference are broken. On
the other hand, it creates a certain liberation from collective identities
not of our own choice. This gives the possibility to a selfchosen spirit
of community: political, religious, professional, etc. All is within our
own choice.
    In the commercial Internet we can select between a limited number
of pre-produced alternatives. It is an international shopping centre in
combination with a multimedia entertainment store delivering
 diversion to mainly passive consumers.
    Unfortunately, the main part of the Internet have been conquerd
by heavy commercial interests with the help of politician unable
to let things alone — copyrights, software patents, and an enormous
 advertising apparatus.
442        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   However, the romantic dream of an "alternative", non-hierarchical
and non-commercial free Internet is by no means broken. Commercial
interests have contributed to put the Internet within reach of many.
Its technology has been more user-friendly, relatively cheap and
spread throughout the world. An example is the phenomenon of
"Internet-cafes" spread over the whole world.
   The excess profits of music and film companies are undermined
by file-exchange computer programs like Kazaa. A dominant giant
such as Microsoft is challenged by free operating system like Linux.
With e-mail, home-pages and discussion-groups global networks are
created out of control of states and big business.
   From a technical point of view, the Internet is a digital highway
with a capacity of 34 Mbits per second on its main links. It is a typical
peer-to-peer network where the local branches have a capacity of
2 Mbits or below. More and more telephone companies are now
offering what is called broad-band subscriptions with a capacity of
10 Mbits or more. As 11 Mbits is considered to be the maximum
information input potential of human beings this will allow the
transmission of high quality video via Internet.
    Typical for the capacity-explosion of digital networks are the main
Swedish university communication links performance, as presented
below.

1989    64 Kbits/s
1992    2 Mbit/s
1994    34 Mbit/s
1997    155 Mbit/s
2002    20 Gbit/s

   In a global network of such dimensions, certain problems emerge
out of necessity. These include questions about the kind of information
that may be distributed, and the 'human information rights' of the
participants. For example, a special group has been founded to protect
human rights in the electronic world called the Electronics Frontier
Foundation (EFF). Politicians and lawyers are continually trying to
figure out whether to govern or police the network and if so how.
Authorities speak about legally responsible publishers for bulletin
                              INFORMATICS                           443


boards, censorship to prevent the distribution of pornography, and
the prohibition of information encryption.
    Cryptography on the Internet is a problem area of its own. Much
of the information transmitted on the network must be considered
attractive for various reasons. Business information, stolen records,
military secrets, passwords and private mail are constantly available
for those capable of reading it. Probably there are no safe systems on
the Internet and computer security experts state that at least one
million passwords are stolen every year.
    The need for electronic privacy therefore has prompted a growing
use of cryptography. In United States, the official attitude to this
trend is said to be positive — on condition that the authorities hold
a key to a 'trapdoor' in every system. This is the idea behind the
criticized Clipper system which holds the official standard for
information encryption. Other countries, such as France, have a still
stricter attitude towards cryptography; there, all cryptography should
be licensed, a legitimate reason for its use established and copy of the
key delivered to the authorities.
    The fact that many new digital technologies like cellular telephones
are untappable lay behind the new US Digital Telephony Act. This
law states that telephone companies must use communication software
which permits the authorities to tap and read the bit-stream. A cause
celebre is, however, that the Clipper has been partially cracked by a
scientist from Bell Laboratories in New Jersey.
    The business world, together with the majority of other users of
the Internet, are rather cool vis-a-vis all attempts to share codes and
keys with 'Big Brother'. The idea in itself makes secrecy a corrupted
concept and many have turned to what is called public key codes or
PKC. In contrast to classical codes this has two keys. One of them,
the public key, is given to the person who wants to send information
to you and is used for encoding. The other is an unrelated 'private'
code key used by the receiver to decode the message. It resides in the
personal computer where it is less likely to be stolen. If someone get
hold of the public code nothing can be done with it. Neither the
message nor the public code itself tells anything about the private
 part. (Consequently, some people distribute their public code key on
 the network.)
444        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



    The use of codes in itself indicates that certain information is kept
secret for other persons. There are now on the Internet more discreet
methods which even hide the fact that something is hidden. They
may be characterized as methods of 'hidden meaning'. Hiding
messages in innocent text and pictures has long been a technique
used; doing it in the relevant digital bit-stream is both easy, cheap
and undetectable. Within the millions of bytes representing everything
from sound files, high resolution pictures, private letters or financial
transactions, every kind of secret information can be hidden. Even
cryptographic experts admit that such hidden messages rarely leave
enough of a pattern to be detected and decoded.
    Serviceable and widely available encryption algorithms are the
prerequisite for something which can be called digital signatures. This
is a piece of code which has its origin from a certain person or rather
his personal computer. If such a signature can be considered entirely
trustworthy it can be used to confirm and acknowledge all kinds of
transactions in a network. Such hidden transactions could easily be
the backbone of an alternative economy unrestricted by governments
and a nightmare for assessment authorities.
    It is, however, doubtful if it ever will be possible to regulate the
Internet, because what is forbidden in the US will be allowed in
Finland, and so on. Also for purely technical reasons, it is at present
impossible to censor the network, since it is constructed to work
around blockages and censorship by its self-repairing qualities.
    Of course, there is a real danger that the Internet may be threatened
by the very qualities that supported its growth. It is influenced from
all sides; veteran users try to protect it, governments want to control
it and pornographers try to exploit the freedom of it. The greatest
current threat seems to be the commercial interests which strive to
make money on it. If they were to grow too strong they could cause
a sudden collapse of the Internet — one of the most promising cultural
phenomena of the 1990s.
    The earliest applications on the network have been electronic mail
(E-mail) and computer conferencing. Classified as electronic mail is
everything which is not ordinary mail ('snail mail') such as telefax,
videotext, searching in external databases, conferencing, etc. The use
                              INFORMATICS                          445


of E-mail is in fact much more rapid than the use of an ordinary fax
device. In addition, an E-mail is safer from wire-tapping during
transmission and quite private in contrast to the fax message which
can be read in public at the receiving end. The need for E-mail is one
of the major reasons for the growth of the Internet.
   Although E-mail is still one of the most used applications,
practically everything which can be transformed to an electronic bit-
stream can be communicated via the Internet. Political debate, literary
criticism, stock market tips and matchmaking are some examples.
Archives, libraries and databases are available around the clock, and
very often without fee. Today, a researcher can publish a report on
the Internet and receive an immediate response instead of waiting
several months.
    Many academic institutions around the world have their papers
and publications stored in databases retrievable for both researchers
and the general public. The latest highlight is that Encyclopedia
Britannica has found its way on to the Internet. Some 44 million words
and many thousand of pictures are here stored in a database.
    Free electronic magazine subscriptions are common on the Internet.
One example is the Internet gazette Refractions which contains news
about various electronic forums. There are already more than 3000
forums for different discussion topics.
    Some of the main areas of information accessible on the Internet
include:

• Scientific data, for example, star catalogues, earthquake danger
  zones, research papers, etc.
• Sound and pictures. Internet users digitize pieces of music or
  pictures and share with others. Today, short digitized moving video
  sequences are to be found on several databases. Several radio
  stations has also established themselves on Internet with daily
  transmissions.
• Electronic newspapers, magazines, books and various kind of fact
  files. Project Gutenberg in the USA and project Runeberg in Sweden
  have digitized several hundreds books which are available free of
  charge as the copyright has expired.
446        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Software. Normally this is what is called shareware or other kinds
  of programs which can be distributed free.
• Internet trading, including banking. More and more companies are
  introducing themselves with homepages and by use of credit card
  numbers it is easy to buy for example books from bookstores. Private
  bank transactions are relatively easy to manage on Internet althought
  it requires a small encryption device attatched to the computer.

    A main criticism of the Internet has been that network services
were complicated to use especially when transferring files between
universities and enterprises. FTP, or file transfer protocol, has been
used to do this for many years. Its user interface is rather primitive,
and bears a certain resemblance to earlier DOS versions. To improve
matters for the operator and to facilitate the use of the network,
simple graphical interfaces has been introduced. Instead of cryptic
file and catalogue names, longer explanations of documents and
archives are given in a graphical environment. With these modern
interfaces and their hyper-menu system the user has no need to know
on what computer his information is stored. By choosing a certain
menu it is possible to navigate throughout the network. Some of
the menus connect directly to the requested information which is
presented as text on the screen.
    The predominat way of accessing information on the Internet is
today by use of World Wide Web or WWW addresses. This is a further
development of old interfaces with graphics, pictures and hypertext.
Hypertext implies that specially indicated words or phrases in a
text are equipped with links to new information quantities. These
links crisscross the network in all directions. Today it is common
to use Internet as a work of reference — to do a Net Search. Specially
designed software called search engines are easily accessible on the
Web for immediate use.
    In 1984, there were about 1000 WWW servers, most of them at
academic institutions. Since then the development can be highlighted
by the following rate of growth:

1989   About 150000 computers
1991   More than 1000000 computers
                              INFORMATICS                           447


1993   About 2000000 computers, about 6000 servers
1995   Internet consists of about 25000 different networks with
       6000000 connected computers. 50000000 persons are
       considered to use the net. More than 100000 servers were in
       action
1996   Internet-connected computers were about 13000000
1997   1000000 web-servers were in action
1999   The number of servers has exceeded 5000000

   Today almost all well-known computer enterprises are storing
their drivers and reference articles on Internet servers. Another
interesting field of application involving WWW servers is the
connection of indicators. Some research institutes in US have
coupled their Geiger-counters to the network, thus making continuing
registration of radiation available everywhere.
   All this makes the Internet more of an intellectual working tool
than a communication medium. The refinements of the network have
grown more and more and have become increasingly user-friendly.
Anyone can now sit at his desk and help himself to the accumulated
knowledge of the world. The Gutenberg art of printing created
the foundation of the modern nation state. The printed word was the
glue which joined together the different parts of a nation. In the
same way, the international networks are on their way to creating a
world-wide community.
    Although the base of users is constantly broadening, the majority
of them are university graduates and persons in private employment
who have access to the Internet via their job. It is still expensive for
a private person to connect via a modem and a personal computer at
home.
    Many communication enthusiasts now speak of the Internet and
its users as the modern 'network society' existing in 'cyberspace'
and populated by 'cyber-citizens' following the 'netiquette'. A special
kind of 'net-culture' has emerged where researchers, technicians and
students exchange ideas and information, often in the form of
computerized conferences.
448        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The net-culture is based upon a sort of anarchic ethic, embraced
by the students and 'hackers' who took part of the early build-up of
the network. Among its implicit basic rules are the following:

• All information should be free.
• All access to computers should be unlimited and total.
• Promote decentralization and mistrust authority.

   Much of the information residing in the Internet is in fact free.
Accounted as free information must also be all those computer
programs which are possible to download for personal use. Many of
them enhance access to various parts of the network and may be
regarded as its self-organizing agents.
   Based on the written word and the English alphabet extended
with various punctuation marks and computer characters, the writing
style has become a special part of the net-culture. Certain acronyms
and signs are commonly used to express frequent expressions and
emotions. Some examples are given in the list below. (If the head is
turned sideways the signs expressing emotions are quite striking!).

Acronyms                                       Emotions
FAQ    Frequently asked question               :-)   I am smiling
IMO    In my opinion                           ;-)   I am winking
IMHO    In my humble opinion                   > ( ' I am frowning
LOL     Laughing out loud                      H I am wearing a toupee
MOTOS Member of the opposite sex               =H I am a cyberpunk
MOTS   Member of the same sex                  :-D I am laughing
RTFL    Rolling on the floor laughing          :-X My lips are sealed
RTFM    Read the... manual!                    @:-) I am wearing a turban

Warning! Do not type in capital letters. (IT IS LIKE SHOUTING!).

   The small constellations in the right-hand column are called
'smileys' or 'emoticons'. They are used to express the body language
and feelings existing in an oral conversation but which are lost in the
E-mail system.
   Being a two-way medium, the Internet must be considered a many-
to-many facility. As such, it has dramatically changed the social rules
                              INFORMATICS                          449


as to who may talk to whom and who may listen. In fact, it is, today,
easy to contact politicians and those in power. Most networkers are
aware that they have direct access to the computer screen of America's
president, at least in theory if not in practice. The White House now
receives about 4000 E-mail messages a week, stored, handled and
filtered by a special group of aides. How many of these messages
really reach the eyes of the President is an open question. Probably
not more than the fingers on one hand as a certain filter technique
has been developed to avoid total information input overload. Filters
for ordinary networkers who believe that their lives will be both
saner and better if they can avoid reading messages from certain
detestable individuals — called bozo filters — are common.
   Many enthusiasts (including former US Vice President Al Gore)
have stated that the new network technology will change society
completely. The changes are going to be as radical as when the
industrial revolution superseded the peasant culture. We may perhaps
be about to enter a new democracy like that of the old Athens. But
changes of this kind are often revolutionary, beyond parliament. From
that point of view, a vice president cannot influence the development
very much.
   However, even as we speculate about a future network society,
the old division between information consumers and producers is
already loosening up. Today, anybody can be a producer or a publicist
and have at his disposal a mass medium in the network. Historically,
distribution has always been the problem, but with modern networks
this is no longer the case.
   Thirty years ago, nobody had a feeling that the computer, which
was then the controlling instrument of 'Big Brother', would be a tool
for freedom and democracy. Thanks to the networks we now have
the whole world within reach of our index finger. Thirty years
ago, the only persons with the world within reach of an index finger
were the American and Soviet presidents and then in a very
devastating sense.

                                  *
450        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Virtual reality

In the same way that a telephone is a tool to facilitate conversation
over long distances, the technology of virtual reality, or VR, is
primarily a facilitator of a total remote communication experience. A
higher, more effective level of communication is now possible by the
amalgamation of imaging and computing power. This is something
which has opened up the possibility for shared expertise and
experience in a way which was impossible to imagine only a few
years ago.
    Behind the concept of VR lies the fact that human brains work
considerably better through sight, sound, touch and smell instead of
just with text and numbers. Of course, there are different levels of
experience involved when just looking at a picture of an aquarium,
looking at a real aquarium or putting on scuba gear and swimming
in it.
    Besides better shared real events, VR has made possible virtual
experiences that are impossible or too dangerous in real life. It may
even extend the boundaries of our senses beyond what we have
experienced earlier when the user takes an active, participatory role
in a world created by the computer. The French author Marcel Proust
once said that 'the real voyage of discovery consists not in seeking
new landscapes but in having new eyes.' In our time those new eyes
are located inside the VR helmet experiencing this phenomenon called
virtualization.
    Among the qualities of the VR is the absence of all physical
limitations belonging to the real world. Gravity, speed limits and
other phenomena dependent on the laws of nature can be disregarded
in the virtual world. Virtual things can be examined from every
possible angle and be enlarged or reduced to a degree only dependent
on the speed and power of the computer being used and the quality
of the model. Basically, VR is nothing more than a three-dimensional
computer simulation where the executor is situated inside the image.
From this position he can change the direction of view and observe
new parts of the simulated surroundings. He can also twist, turn,
and move objects which are part of the image.
                               INFORMATICS                           451


   To create a Virtual World, it is necessary to have at one's disposal
a very powerful computer and a large database attached to a high
capacity communication system. The computer records the move-
ments of the user, calculates the consequences and presents new
scenes of the VR which is displayed in the helmet. The computer
must have sufficient memory to accommodate a whole virtual world
and be so powerful that it can represent this world in two stereo-
graphic scenes. Furthermore, the calculations have to be updated so
frequently that the user has no impressions of a disjointed world.
   Another key component is the helmet which has two purposes. It
registers in what direction the wearer looks and it presents the VR.
To do this, it has sensors which report the movements to the computer
and two small monitor screens, one for each eye. Together the screens
present a three-dimensional scene of the virtual surroundings. The
combined effects of the presented scenes, a built-in stereophonic audio
system and the sensitivity for head movements, create the necessary
conditions for the user to merge with the virtual world. The fact that
the helmet screens off reality facilitates the process. The third key-
component is a three-dimensional pointing device which is used to
highlight details and to influence the VR. This is also a steering device
with which to transport oneself.
   VR has a rapidly expanding area of applications within various
fields, some of which will be mentioned here. Telepresence, which can
be described as the projection of a human mind to a remote site, has
many industrial and military applications. Telepresence is often
combined with the remote control of robotic devices, then called
telemanipulation.
    Imagine a robot working inside a damaged nuclear plant which is
emitting strong radiation. It is manipulated by an operator from a
place hundreds of miles away. The robot is equipped with TV cameras,
microphones and various sensors for radiation, temperature, moisture,
etc. and is continuously transmitting information back to the operator.
The operator is wearing a helmet provided with a complete audio/
video system and tracking devices. Equipped with this helmet and
using data-gloves and a steering device, together with adequate feed-
back arrangements, it is possible for the operator to feel as if he is in
452        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



the place of the robot. By turning his head, the operator simultaneously
turns the robot's 'head' and gets a new perspective of the interior
inside his helmet. The data-glove in turn commands the robot's arm
and receives a sensory virtualization of the manipulated object. The
operator is now interacting with the remote environment, the system
being the medium.
   Today, commercial aircraft and car manufacturers routinely use
VR environments for designing and developing their new models.
The new technique is an extension of the old computer-aided
design or CAD where three-dimensional drawings are created on a
computer screen. Without use of a pencil, the drawings are then
manipulated, updated and stored in a database. The whole concept
can then be analyzed and even tested in a simulated destruction
without actually having been built, something called computer-aided
engineering or CAE. By this means, the need for developing scale-
models has been dramatically reduced, as has the need for building
and testing working systems as prototypes. Architectural design
appears to be especially well-suited to merge with VR technology.
Here, a technique called 'walk-through' has been developed which
facilitates cooperation between clients, designers and subcontractors.
By access to the virtual construction, the coming design can be
inspected from inside and any proposals for alterations can be put
forward immediately. Of course, all this takes place before any actual
construction has begun.
   Walk-throughs of quite another kind can be used in VR applications
for network maintenance. In a virtual electronic landscape that visual-
izes the nodes and links of a communication network, maintenance
personnel can move around and investigate the switches. Problems
can be discovered, data-flows optimized and new connections esta-
blished before congestion arises. Visualizations that illustrate different
properties and flows of the network can be expressed via the width
of the links, their colour and excitation. See Figure 10.4.
   Applications of VR in the medical area are already numerous.
Telemanipulated microsurgery has been particularly successful
where a specialist performs an operation by being virtually inside
the patient's body.
                                INFORMATICS                           453




        Figure 10.4 Virtual maintenance of a communication network.


   Finally, the world of entertainment has to be mentioned. Many
video entertainment centres already exist which have different kind
of VR simulators. Here, it is possible to experience the working
environment of a jet-fighter pilot, a submarine commander or a racing
driver. Also arcade games are offered where the participants look
into periscopelike devices which give three-dimensional images. In
many of these games it is possible to create personalities in animated
characters according to one's own wishes. These virtual egos are
then put into action as part of various adventures.




Cyberspace and cyberpunk

In 1984, a novel was published by the American author William
Gibson. Its title was Neuromancer and Gibson was soon considered
a promising representative of 'New Journalism'. This trend was
a carefree, conscious mixture of facts from the latest technological
and biological achievements and dystrophic prophesies regarding
social development. Here the world was recognized as a wornout,
rotten, dirtied and overpopulated area, controlled by multinational
enterprises and housing dubious underground techno-cultures. The
text consisted of several newfangled ideas such as:
454        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



"The sky above the port was the Colour of television, tuned to a dead
channel.'
                                     or
'It was hot, uncommonly hot, beastly hot... the air was mortally still
and the high cloudy sky had a leaden, glowering look, as if it wanted
to rain but had forgotten the trick of it.'

   Gibson's world is populated by ordinary people, more or less
resembling ourselves. However, they can choose their appearance by
plastic surgery and bodily protheses. Everything can be bought for
money, even length of life. A new dimension was born when Gibson
introduced cyberspace, a mental room formed by all the interconnected
computer systems of the earth. It is a non-place where information is
transformed to an artificial computer landscape. Here the users can
connect themselves and move freely in a virtual space covering the
whole planet. By the introduction of cyberspace a third, alternative
world, created from a synthesis of the real world and the dream
world was born. Cyberspace elevates a technology which calls in
question the very concept of reality. There, all attempts to establish
concepts like representation, master, copy etc. become meaningless
as the very world of imagination threats to engulf a reality which it
aims to represent.
   Cyberspace soon replaced outer space as a main area of interest.
Its heroes became the future generation of data-hackers (called
'cowboys' by Gibson). These connect to the virtual world through an
interface linked directly to the brain via a small contact behind the
ear. The software loaded in the brain was described as wetware by
Gibson.
   The cyberspace is described as an icy abstract emptiness, integrated
with a red glowing check pattern called the matrix. In the matrix, the
databases of the world are visualized like huge building blocks. The
visitors of the matrix travel through this space, looking for and
surveying different kinds of visualized data. For them the virtual
world is more real than the existing physical room surrounding them
and endlessly more attractive.
                                  INFORMATICS                                455


   Gibson seems to have hooked on to the technical development at
exactly the right moment. Many computer applications seen as dreams
only a few years ago, like VR, have now been realized, at any rate in
the laboratories. The information flow was already organizing itself
into that more coherent structure we now see today (multiple-lane
information freeways, international databases, etc.). Cyberspace is
unimaginable without the Internet.
   During the following years something curious happened. Like a
cultural virus, a trend called cyberpunk slipped out of the pages of
Gibson's novels (and others). A mixture of high-tech, subcultures,
street attitudes, and digital communication left the realm of the
science fiction ghetto and moved out into real life. From the beginning
the term had an appropriate sound. Many cultural wizards began to
call themselves cyberpunkers — from computer hackers to designers
and techno-musicians. Some scientists missed the very point
concerning Gibson's criticism of the new technology and the social
transformations caused by the computer. They considered Gibson as
a prophet and product developer.
   The attraction of cyberpunk seems to be the invalidation of the
old Cartesian dualism. In cyberspace, the limits between reality and
dream have been dissolved. Here, man and machine have merged
into one unit, into both mind and body. The virtual world is regarded
as the liberation of human senses. It is a return to the close
communication of the old community. Formerly, people spoke to
each other from window to window; today they connect to the
computer network, the final result of which is the 'virtual city'.

                                       *


Review questions and problems
1. No general scientific theories can be associated with the area of Informatics.
   Give an explanation why.
2. How is it possible to speak of self-healing qualities in an electronic
   network?
456         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



3. Try to explain the similarities between the establishment of new
   social contacts after a move to a new town and the development of a
   telecommunications network.
4. Should it be possible to park a geostationary communication satellite in
   a polar-orbiting plane?
5. What was the main design idea behind the origin of the Internet?
6. Give some examples of main problems existing in the Internet from
   a) the authorities' point of view
   b) the private individual's point of view
7. How can the Internet be said to promote personal freedom in the world?
8. Why has cyberspace replaced the outer space as an area of interest today?

                                       *
                              11
            Some of the Systems
              Methodologies
• Large-scale, soft and intertwined problems
• Systems design
• Breakthrough thinking
• Systems analysis
• Systems engineering
• GLS simulation
• Method versus problem

'To find the problem is the same thing as finding the solution/
(Rittel and Webber 1974)



S   ystems science has assumed as its primary responsibility the
    task of handling real world, large-scale, intertwined problems of
complex systems. It is applied with the assumption that these
problems are of a certain similarity, regardless of the system they
have originated from. The systemic view therefore includes a special
attention to the threat of technological 'fixes' and pervasive side-
effects of the far more common mega-technology which is invading
society. Also, the emergent properties, possessed by the system but
not by its parts, are extensively involved.
   In this category of problems — relating to the social, behavioural
and organizational fields — the traditional scientific methods have
proved to have substantial shortcomings. Moreover, these methods


                                 457
458        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



also seem to pose new complications for the problems to which
they are applied. These methods thus have to be replaced or be
complemented by new ones, capable of handling the soft variables
such as values, motivation and sentiments that are an integral
part of all social systems. It is not possible any more to solve our
most pressing problems with just common sense and a working
knowledge of some computerized tools. It is quite necessary with
a formal training in handling and solving complex and crucial
problem situations.
   As approaches to large-scale problem solving, the methods
presented here may be considered as a family of coherent methods
when dealing with systems problems. All of them emphasize the
interactions and interrelations between the diverse parts of problems.
This is in contrast to the fragmented approaches that are so often
taken when eliminating symptoms of social and organizational ills.
Systems methodologies are generally systematic, in the sense that
they are composed of rational and well-ordered steps, taking into
account the range of probable alternatives or perspectives. The users
can follow a path which may force them to confront difficult but
important issues and permits someone else to examine the way in
which the method has been applied.
   The systematic approach ensures that solutions can be planned,
designed, evaluated and implemented. In this context, the operational
definition of 'methodology' has to be compared with the terms
'technique' and 'philosophy' according to the following commonly
used definitions.

— Philosophy  : a non-specific and broad guideline for action.
— Technique   : a specific programme of action, producing a
                standard result.
— Methodology : more precise than a philosophy but lacking the
                precision of a technique.

   A methodology can be used for two purposes: either to bring a
system into being (systems design) or to refine an already existing
system. If the latter is done without distinguishing between beneficial
                    SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES               459


as opposed to harmful transformations for human beings, it is called
systems improvement by van Gigch (1978). He correctly points out that
the operation of a crime syndicate can naturally be improved. Systems
improvement does not question the function, purpose, structure, or
process of interfacing problems. It is often done for the wrong reasons
and the solution can be worse than the problems that it was intended
to cure.
   Different systems methodologies all have some typical steps of
cybernetic thinking when used in problem solving. These steps can
be presented as follows:

1. plannify what the system should do
2. register what the system has done
3. work out the difference between 1 and 2
4. explain the causes of the difference 1-2
5. control to minimize the difference

    Finally, the best approach is not always to propose a certain
solution to a specified problem. It may be better to recommend a new
organization or a new learning system, which will be able to learn
itself and solve its own problem. Here, a design activity will be
necessary to enable the possibility to assess and chose between
alternative future states.

                                   *


Large-scale, soft and intertwined problems

Planners and problem solvers dealing with large-scale societal
problems have long been aware that their situations are quite different
from those of ordinary scientists and engineers. Classical methods of
science and engineering have little if any relevance in their work.
They are no longer surprised to find that their solutions often induce
problems of greater severity than those that they were intended to
solve. By nature, social systems are interconnected networks where
output from one part becomes input to another, thereby obscuring
460        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



the determination of where the real problem is situated and how to
intervene. It is also said that social systems have no goals to be
achieved, rather they have relations to be maintained.
   A main determinant for the complexity of large-scale systems is
the ever-increasing rate of change in modern society. This in itself
adds to the complexity of all problems, which in turn implies more
time for their solution. Russell Ackoff (1981) says the following about
rate of change: 'The more the rate of change increases, the more
the problems that face us change and the shorter is the life of the
solutions we find to them. Therefore, by the time we find solutions
to many of the problems that face us, usually the most important
ones, the problems have so changed that our solutions to them are no
longer relevant or effective; they are stillborn.'
   An excellent examination regarding the nature of social problems
has been performed by H. Rittel and M. Webber (1974). Their main
thesis is that social problems (which they call 'wicked problems') are
never solved. At best they are only resolved — over and over again.
The following main statements are adopted from their work.

• There is no definitive formulation of a wicked problem
  The formulation of a wicked problem is the problem! Finding the
  problem is the same thing as finding the solution.
• Wicked problems have no stopping rule
  The problem solver terminates the work for reasons external to the
  problem. He runs out of time, money or patience.
• Solutions to wicked problems are not true or false, but good or
  bad
  Many parties have equal rights to judge the solutions.
• There is no immediate nor ultimate test of a solution to a wicked
  problem
  Consequences of the solution may yield utterly undesirable
  repercussions which outweigh the intended advantages. The full
  consequences cannot be appraised until the waves of repercussions
  have completely disappeared.
                    SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES                461



• Every solution to a wicked problem is a one-shot operation with
  no opportunity to learn by trial and error
  Every implemented solution is consequential. Large public works
  are effectively irreversible; you cannot build a freeway to see how
  it works and then easily correct it afterwards. The effects of an
  experimental curriculum will follow the pupils into their adult lives.
• Wicked problems do not have a defined set of potential solutions,
  nor is there a well-described set of permissible operations to use
  There are no criteria which enable one to prove that all solutions
  have been identified and considered. Which of the solutions should
  be pursued is only a matter of opinion.
• Every wicked problem is essentially unique
  There are no classes of wicked problems such that principles of
  solutions can be developed to fit all members of the class. Every
  situation is likely to be one of a kind.
• Every wicked problem can be considered to be a symptom of
  another problem
  Problems can be described as discrepancies between the state of
  affairs as it is and the state as it ought to be. Removal of the cause
  poses another problem of which the original problem is a symptom.
  The higher the level of a problem's formulation, the broader and
  more general it becomes and the more difficult it becomes to do
  something about it. The level at which a problem is settled depends
  upon the problem-solver and cannot be determined on logical
  grounds. However, one should not try to cure symptoms; one should
  try to settle the problem at as high a level as possible.
• A wicked problem can be explained in numerous ways. The choice
  of explanation determines the nature of the problem's resolution
  Crimes in the street can be explained by not enough police, by
  too many criminals, by inadequate laws, cultural deprivation, too
  many guns, etc. Everybody picks the explanation which fits his
  intentions best. What comprises problem-solution for one is
  problem-generation for another.

                                   #
462           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



                   Policy making
                   or preplanning                       Evaluation                      Action-implementation
                                                    -                  _   .   f .
                                            T   1


                                Search                  Evaluation
             Problem              of                         of                      Choice
            definition - •   alternatives               alternatives                 process • • Implementation
             i i                 t i                         a


                                                         Decision
                                                         models
                               Goals                                                                   "
                                                                                                    Outputs
                                and
                             objectives
                                 j
                                     k
                                                         t ..
                                                          Criteria
                                                                                                      and
                                                                                                    results

                                                            and
                    j   i                                altributes


                                                            1
                                                        Evaluation
                                                                                                       v
                                                                                                  Satisfaction
              Needs                                         of                                     of needs
                                                         results



                        Figure 11.1 The three phases of systems design.
(Reprinted with permission from J.P. van Gigch, Applied General Systems Theory, Harper &
Row, 2nd Ed., 1978.)




Systems design

One of the best existing reports on systems design is made by
J.P. van Gigch (1978). He defines the method as a series of ongoing,
cybernetic and fluid design functions. It begins with a question
regarding the purpose for the existence of the system and emphasizes
the problems in relation to superordinate systems. The search for an
alternative design is generally taken beyond the boundaries of the
system in question.
   This soft system methodology involves ten steps divided into three
distinct phases: policy-making/preplanning, evaluation and action
implementation. It is listed here without the extensive comments
belonging to each step as presented in van Gigch's book, Applied
General Systems Theory. A summarizing block diagram is also presented
in Figure 11.1.
                   SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES             463


First phase: Policy Making or Preplanning

Step 1: Problem definition
        A. The recipients or clients whose needs are to be met
        B. The needs to be met
        C. The scope, the extent to which needs will be satisfied
        D. The agents involved. All those influenced by the project,
           considering their interests
        E. Evaluation of the agent's world-views according to Step 2
        F. The methods. Short and general descriptions of methods
           which will be used to solve the problem
        G. The system's boundaries. These should be defined,
           together with assumptions or constraints affecting the
           solution or its implementation
        H. An enumeration of available resources compared to
           resources needed
        I. A disclaimer to restrict hopes that systems design will
           provide a solution to everyone's problems

Step 2: Understanding the world-views of clients and planners
        A. Premises
        B. Assumptions
        C. Values
        D. Cognitive style

Step 3: Goal setting
        A. Needs and wants
        B. Expectations and aspiration levels
        C. Substitutions, tradeoffs and priorities
        D. The morality of systems design (ethical issues)

Step 4: Search for and generation of alternatives
        A. Programme alternatives and agents relationships
        B. Determination of outcomes
        C. Consensus
464        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Second phase: Evaluation

 Step 5: Identification of outputs, attributes, criteria, measurement
         scales and models
        A. Identification of outputs
        B. Identification of attributes and criteria
        C. Determination of measurement scale
        D. Choice of measurement models
        E. Determination of the availability of data

 Step 6: Evaluation of alternatives
        A. Use of models

        B. Measurement of the output of soft systems

 Step 7: Choice of alternative

Third phase: Action Implementation

 Step 8: Implementation
         A. Optimizing, suboptimizing, compromising
         B. Legitimizing and consensus

         C. Experts and expertise

 Step 9: Control of systems

Step 10: Evaluation of outputs, auditing and reappraisal



Breakthrough thinking

A new variation of soft systems methodology has been developed by
Gerald Nadler and Shozo Hibino. It was introduced in their book
Breakthrough Thinking (1990) and is a total, holistic approach to problem
solving. The authors state that it combines the best of the visionary
and the pragmatic approaches to problem solving and problem
                    SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES                465


prevention. Their concept of the environment in which they have to
implement their thinking is free from most illusions. The following
quotation from the book gives a good example.

  'You want to get started with Breakthrough Thinking. I don't
  give a damn what book you read. All I know or care about is
  that the billing department overtime is up, costs are high, quality
  is low, and our mailings are always late. Don't waste my time
  with fancy theories. I want you to go out there and get the facts
  on that department. Gather all the information. I want to
  subdivide this problem into its component parts and analyze
  the data you come up with. That's the only way that I can make
  an informed decision.'

   Their starting point is that people and organizations need an
understanding of the purposes, not the problems, in order to move
ahead and be successful. Furthermore, it is even necessary to ask
what the purposes are of those purposes. Profit, for example, is only
a measure how well a company fulfils a purpose; profit is not the
company's mission.
   The backbone of the methodology is the seven principles of
breakthrough thinking. These should be applied in a coordinated
and holistic manner, that is, all the principles should be used simul-
taneousely rather than consecutively. Furthermore, each principle
recurs at a different point in the problem-solving effort. The principles
and their application have been summarized from the book in the
following arrangement.

   The uniqueness principle: Whatever the apparent similarities, each
problem is unique and requires an approach that deals with its own
contextual needs.

1. No two situations are alike.
2. Each problem is embedded in a unique array of related problems.
3. The solution to a problem in one organization will differ from the
   intended solution to a similar problem in another organization.
466        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



  The purposes principle: Focusing on purposes helps to strip away
non-essential aspects in order to avoid working on the wrong problem.

1. Identify stakeholders from whom you want to learn about needs
   and purposes.
2. Ask questions that expand purposes.
3. Create an array of purposes or intended functions.
4. Set up criteria for selecting the function level.
5. Select the function level.
6. Designate performance measures or objectives for the selected
   purpose.
   The solution-after-next principle (SAN): Innovation can be
stimulated and solutions made more effective by working backwards
from an ideal target solution.

1. Identify regularities to consider in developing a solution.
2. Develop as many ideas as possible about how you might achieve
   your selected purpose or a bigger purpose in your goal hierarchy.
3. Organize your ideas into major alternative solutions or systems.
   Incorporate as many good ideas as you can into each alternative.
   Each major alternative should be able, on its own, to achieve your
   purpose and should contain specific strategies for doing so.
4. Add detail and additional ideas to each alternative as needed to
   ensure its workability and your ability to measure its effectiveness.
5. Select your target solution-after-next by evaluating each major
   alternative.
6. Try to make your target solution-after-next even more ideal.
7. Develop modifications to the solution-after-next to incorporate
   the irregularities. Add the details to arrive at a recommended
   solution.

   The systems principle: Every problem is part of a larger system.
Understanding the elements and dimensions of a system matrix lets
you determine in advance the complexities you must incorporate in
the implementation of the solution (regarding the systems matrix,
see Figure 11.2).
                                                                                   Dimensions
                                         Fundamental: basic    Values:                Measures:              Control:
                                         or physical           goals, motivating      performance            how to eval
                                         characteristics -     beliefs, global        (criteria, merit and   modify elem
                                         what, how, where,     desires, ethics,       worth factors),        system as it
                                         or who                moral matters          objectives (how
                                                                                      much, when, rales.
                                                                                      performance
Elements                                                                              specifications)

Purpose: mission, aim, need, primary
concern, focus

Inputs: people, things, information to
start the sequence

Outputs: desired (achieves purpose)
+ undesired outcomes from sequence

Sequence: steps for processing inputs,
flow, layout, unit operations

Environment: physical and attiludinal,
organization, setting, etc.

Human agents: skills, personnel,
responsibilities, rewards, etc.

Physical catalysts: equipment,
facilities, etc.

Information aids: books, instructions,




                                               F i g u r e 11.2 S y s t e m s matrix of B r e a k t h r o u g h Thi
   (Reprinted with permission, @ 1990 Gerald Nadler and Shozo Hibino, Breakthrough Th
468        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



1. Assume that the system matrix is empty when you start a project.
   Start with the purpose of the system and the project.
2. Think in terms of elements first, then expand each element as
   needed by the dimensions.
3. Transfer any detailing activity from the whole system matrix to
   individual ones for an element, dimension, or cell if the complexity
   of the whole becomes too great.
4. Establish the system matrix as a language of communications in
   networks of like-minded people (meetings, roundtables, etc.).
5. Convert the system matrix into the format used by your orga-
   nization. A strategic business plan used by a company can be
   enhanced by system matrix elements and dimensions.
6. Find causes and relationships.
7. Provide an integrating and coordinating framework to handle the
   many available techniques, tools, and analysis models (cause-effect
   diagram, statistical control, critical success factors, mathematical
   programming, chaos theory, optimization modelling, multi-
   attribute decision analysis, spreadsheets, etc.).
8. Get people to be quality- and productivity-minded in total systems
   terms.

   The limited information collection principle: Knowing too much
about a problem initially can prevent you from seeing some excellent
alternative solutions. This principle serves to focus attention on
information that is particularly useful and relevant for the other
Breakthrough Thinking principles.

 1. Answer questions raised by the development of the solution-
    after-next for the problem.
 2. Use the information and knowledge in the heads of many people
    doing different work.
 3. Ask how an idea or SAN could be made operational.
 4. Ask what you would do with the information if it was available
    in, say, three months.
 5. Have a prepared mind, not an empty head.
 6. Share information with everyone, not just with an elite coterie.
                    SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES                469


 7. Seek needed information from a wide variety of sources.
 8. Study the system matrix of the SAN or recommended solution.
 9. Use models and quantitative techniques.
10. Use computer bibliographies, networks, search routines and
    databases.
11. Decide what information to collect.

   The people design principle: The people who will carry out and
use a solution must work together in developing the solution with
Breakthrough Thinking. The proposed solution should include only
the minimal, critical details, so that the users of the solution can have
some flexibility in applying it.

 1. Try it. Believe in the solution. Talk to people.
 2. Hold an informal team meeting during a lunch gathering, etc.
 3. Set up a one-time meeting with people who might constitute a
    good long-term project team.
 4. Set up a one-time meeting to plan the problem-solving system
    using the Breakthrough Thinking principles.
 5. Allow for the catharsis of finger-pointing, superficial diagnosis,
    turf protection and other defensive routines that people are likely
    to engage in when they first meet on a project.
 6. Get the people you involve to be customer-driven and market-
    oriented through the larger purposes in the array.
 7. Involve different people, depending on whether your purpose is
    to improve an existing system that is in trouble, better a system
    that is in good shape, or create a new product or service.
 8. Include a person or two previously successful at breaking the
    rules.
 9. Include a person or two with a liberal arts bias.
10. Use existing groups. Organizations that have a commitment
    to teamwork are well positioned to change to Breakthrough
    Thinking.
11. Keep the energy level high for the Breakthrough Thinking
    principles, not for initial judging.
12. Seek ways to attain recognition for individuals and groups who
    have made major breakthroughs.
470        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   The betterment timeline principle: A sequence of purpose-directed
solutions is a bridge to a better future.

1. Incorporate the principle in the overall planning process of the
   organization rather than treat betterment activities on a separate
   project-by-project basis.
2. Delegate and decentralize the responsibilities for betterment
   timeline activities.
3. Use preventive maintenance (PM) for all systems or procedures in
   the betterment planning. A scheduling system should regularly
   examine and challenge jobs, units, departments, products, services,
   policies, etc.
4. Calculate a value-of-change to cost-of-change ratio at the time of
   decision whether or not a planned change is worthwhile.




Systems analysis

The main ideas of systems analysis were originally developed by
the RAND Corporation of America. It was created for the study of
interaction between science, technology, and society. Several variations
have been introduced.
   The one presented here is distinctive for the basic concept and has
been adopted from R. Flood and E. Carson (1988). It is a typical hard
systems methodology, consisting of four steps: problem analysis,
generation of alternative solutions, evaluation of alternatives, and
selection of the optimal alternative. Finally, action is taken based on
the selected alternative.

1st step. Problem analysis: Here the problem and its cost are
          defined, thus giving an economic measure to use in
          comparison with alternatives. Two main questions serve as
          guidelines:
          A. What are the limitations of the present system?
          B. What is the cost of operating the present system?
                    SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES              471


  Efficient features of the existing system worth retaining are
observed.

2nd step. Generation of alternative solutions: Alternatives to the
          present system are generated and their main features are
          examined. Two main questions serve as guidelines:
         A. What alternative systems are possible?
         B. What would be the operating costs of the alternative
            systems?

   All factors associated with the choice of an alternative, such as
the pertinent advantages and disadvantages, should be carefully
considered. Comparative economic evaluation between the operating
costs of the alternatives should be performed as well as testing of the
feasibility of trade-off costs within each alternative.

3rd step. Evaluation of the alternatives: In this step, the capital
          costs of introducing a new system or improving the
          present one are assessed. Comparisons between the
          various alternatives, where both operating and capital
          costs are taken into account, are made. Two important
          questions are posed:
          A. What are the capital costs of continuing with the present
             system, and of changing to alternative systems?
          B. What comparisons can be made between the various
             systems, taking all costs into account?

   This step includes comparative capital costing, including inquiries
into factors such as the rate of return obtained on money invested.
Basic principles of capital investment must be considered as inherent
in the following questions: what is a reasonable return on the invest-
ment and over what time period should the investment be considered?
A variety of methods available for calculating the return must thus
be considered, along with their advantages and disadvantages. An
appropriate method of taking inflation into account in connection
with future costs must also be considered.
472        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



4th step. Selection of the optimal alternative: The best alternative is
          now selected, considering not only economic but also
          operational, marketing, environmental and human factors.
          Two important questions should be asked:
          A. What is the most economical solution?
          B. Is the most economical solution the best 'all-round'
             solution?

   In these questions lie a real potential for conflict, particularly
between quantifiable economic factors and those not so readily
quantifiable, such as the quality of human working conditions and
environmental impacts (pollution, etc.). Therefore, the best solution
is not always the most economically efficient one. A right answer is
only right in the limited sense that it reflects the company's objectives
at the time of the decision.




Systems engineering

Systems engineering as a 'hard' methodology has its roots in
NASA and the early space projects of the 1960s. One of its more
generally applicable variations is again presented by Flood and
Carson (1988). It has four main phases: systems analysis, systems
design, implementation and operation. The phase of systems design
in this case belongs to a typically hard systems methodology. It should
therefore not be compared with the same phase in van Gigch's
approach presented earlier in this chapter.

Phase 1: Systems analysis

         A. Recognition and formulation of the problem.
             How did the problem arise?
             Who are those who believe it to be a problem?
             Who decided to implement a planning decision?
             Is the problem the right one?
          SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES              473


  Will it save money?
  Is it better to spend the money elsewhere?

B. Organization of the project — A team composed of:
  A team leader
  Users
  Model builders
  Designers
  Computer programmers
  Mathematicians
  Economists
  Accountants

C. Definition of the system
   Breaking down into subsystems and identifying the
   interactions using flow diagrams representing:
   money
   energy
   materials
   information
   decisions

D. Definition of the wider system
   The role of the system within the wider system of which
   it is a part, depicted in a flow diagram.

E. Definition of the objectives of the wider system
   By use of block diagrams from the system and the wider
   system, sets of objectives regarding the wider system
   can be formulated.

F. Definition of the objectives of the system
   Initially, these are dictated by the needs of the wider
   system. Conflicting objectives should be listed and ranked
   according to their importance. Definitions in economic
474      GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



           terms should be used and the efficiency in reaching the
           objective calculated.

        G. Definition of the overall economic criterion
           This economic criterion should be directly related to the
           objectives. Conflicting objectives could be handled by
           applying a weighting factor to each.

        H. Information and data collection
           Data-gathering for future modelling of the system and
           forecasting of the future environment. Use of statistics.

Phase 2: Systems design

        A. Forecasting
           This should be done regarding potential demands,
           potential activities, and environment for the short,
           medium and long-terms.

        B. Model building and simulation
           Predicting the performance in potential                  operating
           conditions and real life environments.

        C. Optimization
           Identifying the most favourable model performance
           according to the economic criterion chosen for the study.

        D. Control
           The solution is checked by different kinds of control
           loops.

Phase 3: Implementation

        A. Documentation and approval
           A report highlighting the implementation and its critical
           path should be prepared. This should be approved by
           all influenced by the planned change.
                   SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES              475


         B. Construction
            Creation of hardware and software regarding special
            control and optimization systems according to a pre-
            planned schedule. Construction of the main system.

Phase 4: Operation

         A. Initial operation
            Enhancing the cooperation between the systems team
            and the systems users in connection with the delivery of
            the system. Use of adequate documentation and training
            of personnel.

         B. Retrospective appraisal of the project
            Making a report of the whole project. Prospective
            reoptimization of the project.

                                  *


GLS simulation

Finally, a hard systems methodology developed by the author will
be presented (Skyttner 1988). It has two explicit starting points, one
in GLS theory and one in DYNAMO, a computer language developed
by Jay Forrester (see p. 43). The idea is that problems can always
be related to one or more of the main flows of matter, energy, or
information in a living system. When the problem area is identified
it is often found as a consequence of a malfunctioning subsystem.
Then measures are constructed and normal values are established for
the problematic function. The relationships between this function
and other functions or subsystems are then simulated by use of a
DYNAMO program and the model is moved through space and time,
fed by a continuous series of inputs.
    In order to use this idea, a complete working methodology has
been developed. It includes a bottom-up approach which generally
provides good knowledge of functional principles as well as
476        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



more detailed answers. The methodology includes the following
steps:

Selecting the perspective
A. Problem definitions
B. Construction of relevant measures
C. Problem selection
D. System-boundary definition
E. System-level definition
F. Construction of system block diagram
Identifying system processes
A. Identification of essential subsystems
B. Identification of matter/energy, information flows
C. Construction of causal-loops for model subsystem
D. Construction of interaction matrix
E. Construction of schematic description

Converting to DYNAMO model
A. Identification of useful model subsystems
B. Construction of causal-loops for useful model subsystems
C. Construction of schematic charts for model subsystems
D. Construction of DYNAMO flow charts
E. Definition of quantities and processes
G. Converting Steps (D) and (E) to DYNAMO computer language

Running the DYNAMO model
A. Simulating by changing the parameters
B. Verifying the model
C. Validating the model
D. Documentation of the work

   The methodology has, for instance, been used to rationalize the
operation of the Swedish search and rescue (SAR) system at sea. The
main problem was that there was no specific knowledge of what
could be considered to be critical functions or parameters influencing
the overall system efficiency. Examples to illustrate some of the
working steps are taken from this mission.
                    SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES             477


   The overall measures constructed were human survivability,
economical salvage and ecological recovery. The selected problem was to
examine the timer function which was estimated to be critical for the
system.
   The system-boundary was taken to be the geographical area at sea
that was the responsibility of the Swedish SAR system. This also
included certain land-based locations, such as rescue centres, radio
stations, etc. The defined boundary might also be temporarily
augmented or changed through cooperative agreements with other
national systems.
   For practical purposes, the system was defined as belonging to the
organizational level. This does not exclude the possibility that it
sometimes works on the supranational level.
   An extract from the identification of the twenty essential
subsystems is shown in the table below (in principle, this is the
same kind of identification that was done for a supermarket on
page 129).

Matter/energy and information
1. Boundary      A. Responsibility area limit
                 B. Air/water vehicle range limit
                 C. Radio/radar/look-out range limit

2. Reproducer    A. Renewed international agreements
                 B. The need for better systems
                 C. Commercial interests
                 D. Recruiting officers
Matter/energy
3. Ingestor      A. Oil
                 B. Electricity
                 C. Water
                 D. Ventilation
                 E. Food
                 F. Ships, ambulances, aircraft
                 G. Supplies, spare parts
                 H. People
478           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



4. Distributor       A. Aircraft pilots, ship's crew, ambulance drivers,
                        servicemen
                     B. The sea, the air
                     C. Pipelines, ventilation shafts
                     D. Cables

5. Converter         A. Oil converters for climate/motion
                     B. Electricity converter for light, radio, radar, telex
                     C. Water coolers
                     D. Human living conditions
                     E. Food preparation and consumption

   The extract which follows below is from the identification
of matter/energy and information flows between the different
subsystems. The alphanumeric designations represent the various
subsystems with their subdivisions. It is taken from the list above
where for example a flow exists between the oil inlet 3A and the
oil tank 7A (not shown in the above list: the complete list of all
subsystems in a living organism with appropriate numbers is given
on page 123).

Matter/enerjry input         From        To

Fuel                          3A        IK
                              7A        5A
                              5A         9B
                              9B       8D, 8E

Electricity                    3B        7B
                               7B        5B
                               5B        9B
                               9B        8F

Water                         3C         7C
                              7C        5C
                              5C         9B
                              9B       8E, 8F
                    SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES              479


Air                      3D         7D
                         7D         5D
                         5D         9A
                         9A         8F

Food                      3E        7E
                          7E        5E

    Note that three main system flows can always be identified in
living systems, those of matter, energy and information. All flows
are entering the system and are to some extent stored. Inside the
system, information processes regulate them. This is accomplished by
continuously sensing the system's status. After feeding the processes
within the system and simultaneously transforming their own content,
the flows leave the system.
    The list identifying matter/energy and information flows is
transformed into a causal-loop diagram according to Figure 11.3.
    The subsequent step was to construct an interaction matrix where
all essential subsystems with their subsections were contained in the
rows and columns. Listings of the system flows, together with the
causal-loops, were used to indicate negative and positive interaction.
    The schematic description was then made with the main purpose
of enhancing the total understanding of the system. Jointly with
the causal-loops and the interaction matrix, this step completes the
symbolic presentation of the system.
    The conversion to a DYNAMO model was done by transforming
the matrix into Forrester schematics with the help of a special
algorithm (/. Burns 1977). The strategy of this algorithm is to embed
Forrester's simulation methodology in a mathematical framework
which specifies concrete guidelines and rules when a computer
program is written. The use of the algorithm ends up with the
identification of minor subsystems and a classification of quantities
for the Forrester schematics. These data constitute building parameters
for the DYNAMO flow chart. Based on this, quantities and processes
were defined and the DYNAMO computer program was written.
Thanks to the many detailed preceding steps and the ingenious
algorithm by Burns, the computer program was very easy to write.
480        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




          Figure 11.3 Causal-loop diagram for matter/energy flows.



   As a result of the simulation, the general knowledge of functional
principles for the SAR organization was refined. In the system
investigated a three-part M / E process represented the ultimate system
goal — to save human lives. This was done by

— removing persons from the danger area, and
— to make this possible, sometimes doing construction and repair
  work, and
— if necessary giving medical treatment.

   All this was centred around the motor, producer, and storage
functions and was highly time-dependent. The timer function affects
such subsystems as channel and network as a result of current radio
communication conditions (e.g. effects of sun spot cycles, sun flares,
                   SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES              481


metereological phenomena such as thunderstorms, etc.). Also Motor,
Distributor, and Storage are directly timer dependent as a result of
seasonal and diurnal variation, which in turn affects the rescue and
survival time.




Method versus problem

In this chapter, only the main steps of the methodologies were
dealt with. This is because the appropriate substeps often include
the use of sophisticated statistical, mathematical and economic
tools and models, discussion of which is outside the scope of this
book.
   Of the many systems methodologies available, some clearly work
well in certain situations but not in others. Naturally, each has its
strengths and inevitable limitations. As a rough guide on how to
choose the most suitable, the division between hard methodologies
and soft methodologies made by Peter Checkland (1981) is a useful
starting point.
   Soft methodologies are used in the absence of a concrete definition
of ill-structured problems in which objectives and purposes are
themselves often problematic. Such problems mainly exist in
connection with various kinds of social systems and cannot be given
an exact form or be forced into a predetermined structure. They
are multivariate problems to be dissolved rather than solved. Soft
methodologies are characterized by mutual understanding and the
generation of learning. Thus, it takes a more behavioural, humanistic
approach with the aim of guiding intervention or change in human
organisations, allowing inquiry into the problem situation and
encouraging discussion and debate. The role of human emotions is
emphasized. In Figure 11.4, the main interconnected concepts of soft
methodologies are presented. Typical soft system methodologies
presented here are Systems design and Breakthrough thinking.
   Hard methodologies are goal-oriented in the solution of structured
problems where well-defined objectives and constraints exist. They
482          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE




                               Learning J                  _
                               — c              C Creativity




                        •\"            /          r Well-being j

                               I. Perception   \-^-^^


      Figure 11.4 The interconnection of main concepts in soft methodologies.



start with a concrete problem, follows a linear sequential process,
and ends with the problem being solved. The problem is obvious,
determined and can be solved by using the existing knowledge base.
Normally these methods use some kind of means-end analysis.
They work according to the implicit belief that any problem can be
solved by setting objectives and finding optimal satisfying alternatives
directed towards a defined problem solution. Identifying, designing,
and implementing are the main phases of this approach. Systems
analysis, systems engineering, and GLS simulation have been chosen
as examples here.
   Finally, from the plethora of existing systems methodologies the
following are well-known and therefore deserve to be mentioned, even
though they are not considered here, as they are more specialized.

• Checkland's own Soft Systems Methodology, SSM (Checkland 1981)
• Total Systems Intervention, TSI (Flood and Jackson 1991)
• Strategic Assumption Surfacing and Testing, SAST (Mason and
  Mitroff 1981)
• Critical Systems Heuristics, CSH (Ulrich 1983)
• Scenario techniques (von Reibnitz 1988)

   An overall examination of the existing systems methodologies
indicates that most of them are partitioned into about a half a dozen
steps, while some of them distinguish up to ten steps. The steps and
phases are sometimes mixed, both logically and chronologically. Kjell
Samuelson (1976) has compiled a list of 45 logical/chronological steps
                   SOME OF THE SYSTEMS METHODOLOGIES          483


that can be distinguished in various methodologies, although they
sometimes overlap. It has the following form:

 1. Ultimate objectives
 2. Goals statement
 3. Constraints
 4. Needs and requirements
 5. Definition of project or problem
 6. Idea and inception
 7. Conception (or conceiving of solutions)
 8. Conceptual design with functional model
 9. Feasibility study (impact declaration)
10. General systems proposal and masterplan
11. Object system analysis (and description)
12. Observation of existing systems
13. Alternative designs outlined
14. Identifying alternative technologies
15. Preliminaries (survey, analysis, design)
16. Design evaluation
17. Specifications
18. Information system macrostructuring
19. Information study (e.g. precedence analysis)
20. Processing study
21. Details study
22. Decision analysis
23. Data analysis
24. Data construction and microstructuring
25. File structuring
26. Component design
27. Simulation
28. Conversion
29. Pilot system (experiment)
30. Pilot evaluation (empirical testing)
31. Selection of system
32. Implementing (and programming)
33. Installation
484           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



34. Testing
35. Evaluation
36. O p e r a t i o n
37. Training
38. Maintenance
39. O r g a n i z i n g p r o d u c t i o n resources
40. M a n a g e m e n t of p r o d u c t i o n resources
41. P r o d u c t distribution
42. Disposition of w a s t e
43. Result r e p o r t i n g a n d follow-up review
44. Redesign
45. Cessation




R e v i e w questions and problems

1. What is the main difference between Systems design and Systems
   improvement?
2. Discuss why solutions to social problems tend to induce problems which
   are more severe than those which they were intended to solve.
3. Breakthrough thinking as a methodology states that it is necessary to ask
   what the purpose is of an organization's purpose. Does this make sense?
4. The methodologies in this chapter are designed to solve large-scale,
   intertwined problems of complex systems. Does anything prevent their
   application to small organizations?
5. What is the difference between solving a problem compared with
   resolving it?
6. If use of hard systems methodologies is said to produce a defined problem
   solution, what is then the aim of soft systems methodologies?
7. Systems science states that it gives special attention to the dangers of
   technological fixes and mega-science. Is this a justified statement?

                                           *
                                12
    The Future of Systems Theory

• Science of today
• The world we live in
• The need for change
• Systems thinking as alternate and criticized paradigm
• Systems thinking and the academic environment
• How to write the instruction manual

'... one outstandingly important fact regarding Spaceship Earth, and
that is that no instruction book came with it.' (Fuller 1970)



I  n the foregoing chapters, an attempt has been made to present the
   current state of systems theory and some of its applications. To
predict the future of an area which still has not celebrated its fiftieth
anniversary as an unified area of knowledge, is of course extremely
difficult. Any effort to predict the coming fate of systems theory
must however be made from two starting points. One with respect
to the state of science in general where its environment is to be found
and the other with regard to the state of the world we live in where
it should be used. After all, the highest purpose for the intellect is the
search for general principles that would allow us better to understand,
predict and manage the world's problems. We begin by taking a
critical look at the science of today.

                                    *



                                   485
486         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Science of today

In the summary of the scientific development in Chapter 1, it was
possible to see how the search for the general involved studying the
particular. The general has however too often remained limited,
hampered by a sceptical attitude toward holism. Taking ourselves
as the starting point of all thinking we have succeeded in being
unaware of much that is controlled by the surrounding context.
Traditional European individual-centred heritage has held man to be
exceptional and superior, the very owner of nature. The supremacy
of thought and reason, of cause and effect, as a guiding star for the
perfect rational man is still held as an ideal. Apparently, we have a
long-standing fear that rationality will be overwhelmed by chaos
and the spiritual by the sensual.
   The same can be said of dualism or polarity, the traditional Western
way to arrange the world and life in mutually exclusive concepts. We
think in terms of either/or, black and white, good and evil, defining
things by their opposites. In our fractured world-view we still
drastically separate subject from object, mind from body, culture from
nature, values from facts and spirit from matter. With our dualistic,
mechanistic, atomistic, anthropocentric and hierarchical world-view
we have alienated us from the intricate web of life and the cosmos.
   Society still holds specialization as natural, inevitable and desirable,
even though man represents the least specialized creature on earth.
The earlier scientific and technological view of nature as a grand
mechanistic machine with no intrinsic values persists. So do the
traditionally positivistic attitudes based on Frances Bacon's 16th
century ideas on the extraction of maximum benefit from nature.
Today, these ideas includes science itself which too often is regarded
as a main tool for the creation of economical profit instead of the
motor of human quest for knowledge.
   However, the worst thing is that the established scientific
community has such a strong resistance to change, fortified by deeply
rooted private interests. These interests include military-industrial
enterprises, oversized weapon bureaucracies, influential secret weapon
laboratories, universities with miltary research grants, elitist expert
                      THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                 487


groups trying to control the arms race, and of course personal
patents rights. To these can be added a customary resistance to
change from an uninformed general public, from the unions which
oppose the disappearance of jobs and from the politicians who strive
for reelection. Without carrying things too far it is possible to say
that our obsolete academical bureaucracy moves into the 21st
century with 20th century thinking and 19th century institutions.
    To sum up, this mentality continues to encourage business as
usual, that is, control, exploitation and destruction of nature through
scientific 'force'. Short-term profit is permanently gained through
neglect of the second law of thermodynamics. The bill for these
illusory benefits will, however, have to be paid. Some of the
consequences are already clearly visible and have resulted in the
entropy of global pollution and the collapse of nature. (See Catton
1982)
    It is therefore quite understandable that today's science and
technology often give rise to a deep distrust. The most discreditable
to science is, especially in the eyes of the younger generation, its
engagement in military research. Development, production and
stockpiling of the means to kill ever-more people at ever-greater
distances in ever-shorter time promotes a general distrust. The same
distrust exists with regard to civil nuclear science and technology.
Three Mile Island and Chernobyl are by no means forgotten.




The world we live in

History has always witnessed self-destructive individuals and
societies. The dilemma of our generation is that destructive power
has gained such devastating strength. Not so long ago the human
race was small and relatively powerless and its actions could not
significantly affect the grandeur of Nature. Today, human beings
have access to power which threatens their own habitat and existence.
Modern industrial societies are so intertwined that the consequences
of bad decisions, harmful technologies and self-destructive behaviour
will be felt across all traditional boundaries.
488        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Now, at the beginning of the 21st century, man has taken over
many of the control mechanisms of the global system. In fact, today
he is part of the mechanism itself and problems earlier managed by
nature are now a human responsibility. In turn, the problems facing
human societies have increased in complexity and the stakes are set
higher. All too often mistakes cannot be corrected and the defrayal
of errors is impracticable. Very often short-range solutions have
shown themselves to be both risky and highly uneconomical. Also,
the once second-order effects — such as exhaust gases from motor
vehicles — have become primary problems influencing the global
climate.
   We have created for ourselves, in an overpopulated and over-
engineered world, a multitude of systems, existing in a state of
fragile stability rather than natural balance, and demanding constant
maintenance. A real understanding of their interaction and complexity
has shown many of these systems to be both wasteful and dangerous.
   In this situation, concluded as globalization, an economy dependent
on the general continual consumption growth has been the most
important driving force. Supporters of globalization are for maximizing
profit as the engine of world development, while supporters of
sustainability are against misuse and depletion of the earth's natural
resources. The two sides are speaking different languages and those
against something are always fighting an uphill battle.
   Today, instincts to reproduce and consume are enormously
amplified by technology, economics and politics. This force must be
considered the main cause of ecological problems and lack of sustain-
ability. Within the next century, man will face suppression of modern
industrial society by a natural resource shortage, extinction of large
groups of the world population by food shortage, pollution, diseases,
climatological changes, war and social stresses caused by physical
and psychological crowding. But if growth were to stop and heal the
environmental crisis, major economic, financial, social, and military
disasters would threaten human survival in any case.
   Ecological awareness is a good example of systems thinking but
adherents lack the political power to realize their ideas. As long as
                       THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                  489



nuclear reactors are a thousandfold more effective than windmills
and solar panels, such equipment will not change the world for
economical reasons. As long as it is cheaper to dump nuclear waste
in the third world than to process it at home, the NIMBY (not in my
backyard) syndrome will prevail.
   This lack of a comprehensive view is one of the main reasons that
during the past twenty years, we witnessed an increasing number of
ecological, social and technological disasters. From an inventory of
the 20th century's most serious threats to life, the following stand out
in our memory

• A nuclear war would pose the most extreme threat; the possible
  consequences are convincingly analyzed (nuclear winter, etc.). Since
  the Cuba crisis at the brink of such a war in the 1960s, the risk
  seems to have diminished substantially. After the breakdown of
  the Soviet Empire and the dismantling of the cold war, the so
  called 'holocaust clock' in Washington DC has been set back more
  than an hour.
• The ecological catastrophe, of which local overpopulation is the
  major imminent threat, relates reciprocally to most of the other
  problems occurring throughout our environment. A significant
  change in the global climate and a diminishing ozone layer are
  consequences of the activities of the inhabitants of an inequitable
  world, seeking an ever-better life. The same goes for food and
  water pollution and the spread of deadly diseases such as cancer
  and AIDS.
• Social and economical degradation can be illustrated with
  pathological examples from the former communist countries or
  in the Middle East, where there are signs of the devastating
  potential of modern ideological and religious fanaticism. The
  relatively rich and relatively stable Western countries are however
  no exception: bureaucratic paralysis, alienation, criminality and
  political corruption are producing degenerative, even fatal effects.
• Social disasters have by no means come to an end. One typical
  example is the 1992 riot in Los Angeles with many dead and the
  destruction of property running to billions of dollars.
490        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



• Great planning disasters where the building of the Aswan Dam on
  the Nile River is the most spectacular. It is a perfect example of
  the impact of man-made systems on natural systems, initiated by
  political prestige and realized as a demonstration of power. The
  motivation of the dam was a solution of the age-old problem of the
  annual flooding of the Nile. After the conclusion of the project
  several serious new problems arose. In the eastern Mediterranean
  the food chain was broken, thereby severely shrinking the fishing
  industry. Erosion of the Nile delta took place, causing soil salinity
  in upper Egypt. In the absence of annual dryness, the water-borne
  snail parasite Bilharzia grew explosively, initiating an epidemic of
  intestinal disease along the Nile. All these side-effects were never
  considered by the leaders responsible for the project.
• Technological breakdown is the most spectacular threat to modern
  man, sometimes killing thousands of people. Such breakdowns are
  presented by the media as front-page stories but are seldom given
  an adequate background analysis. The strong correlation between
  social degradation and technical disasters is obvious: even first-class
  passengers in the best of existing worlds die when arrogance is the
  managerial lodestar of their Titanic. One example in our memory
  is the exploding spacecraft Challenger spreading its burning
  wreckage off the coast of Florida while being watched by millions
  on television screens around the world.
     In 1989 an Iranian aircraft was gunned down by an apprehensive
  crew aboard an American cruiser in the Persian Gulf. One year
  later a bomb was hidden on board an American aircraft; it exploded
  over Lockerby and more than 500 people lost their lives. A similar
  tragedy, that of the Korean aircraft blown up over the Kuriles by
  an over-zealous Soviet jet-fighter pilot, took the lives of nearly 300
  people.
      Traffic on the seas offers other examples. An English ferry
  departed from a Dutch port with its stern gate open, took in water
  and suddenly sank, taking with it more than 400 passengers. When
  a Swedish passenger ferry was set alight by a pyromaniac while at
  sea, the loss of life exceeded 150. An overloaded passenger ship
  was hit by a storm in Malaysian waters and went to the bottom
                      THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                  491


  with all of the more than 3500 people on board — the world's largest
  peace-time ship disaster.
     Another ferry, the Swedish Estonia, abruptly sank in stormy
  Baltic waters during 1994 with 900 victims who lost their lives.
  According to new sea-safety regulations it had no radio officer on
  board, and its two automatic satellite-operated emergency radio
  beacons were never activated during the catastrophe.
     Being on land can be just as disastrous. One of the most
  horrifying examples is the escape of poisonous gas at a factory in
  Bhopal, where more than 300 persons were gassed to death. In a
  similar accident in New Mexico in 1991 gas in culverts under the
  street exploded, destroying a whole main street and also killing
  several hundred people. Another gas catastrophe occurred in the
  former USSR when a crowded train ran into a cloud of gas leaking
  from a tube running parallel to the railway. A spark from the train
  caused an explosion, which devastated a huge area and killed
  more than 600 persons.
• The Chernobyl disaster, in which a nuclear plant melted down
  with immediate, long-term and still unpredictable consequences,
  represents the great number of still current, and potential, combined,
  ecological, social and technical catastrophes.
• On 11th of September 2001, 3000 persons inside the towers of
  World Trade Center literary took part in the Last Judgement
  when two aircrafts navigated by terrorists smashed into the two
  skyscrapers. After this attack the world left ten years of recovery
  from the finished cold war and seems to have entered an era
  of coming religious bloodshed. At the same time an old and
  devastating weapon was reborn — the suicide bomber.

   After the Chernobyl disaster, some kind of 'distrust movement'
showed itself in the daily press. Don't trust technology and don't
trust those who trust it — especially if it concerns nuclear plants,
super-ferries, jumbojets, or spaceships. Many people express their
private concern that anything whatsoever could strike them at any
time — a fear related to the that of mediaeval man waiting for the
Last Judgement. Others have begin to ask why we are destroying
492        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



mother Gaia in the very attempt to enhance our own condition and
why so many attempts at salvation are suicidal. It would be a great
mistake not to take this concern seriously and not to admit its
justification.




The need for change

Our present world-view is the result of a 400-year-old scientific
project. We have travelled to the moon, split the atom, succeed in
transplantation of hearts and rebuilt genes. But we are not satisfied
with the outcome of the project. Today, most people in our modern
world have less freedom in their lives to practice their own interests
and exploit their personal development than slaves in earlier times.
Their existence are occupied by doing things that they would never
freely have done. We are not very satisfied with the outcome of the
scientific project. Apparently, its methods do not coincide with today's
problems — complexes of interrelated processes on multiple levels —
 which are characterized by a general air of being insoluble.
    Both ordinary people and scientists feel that science — and its
offspring technology — no longer enhance the quality of their lives,
but are in fact systematically reducing it. Even obstinate economists
have begun to realize that national figures of growth only reflect
illusory economical progress. Somehow important qualities like
judgement, sense for proportion, respect and responsibility are
missing. With problems relating to the whole domain of human
knowledge, from philosophy to cellular biology, solutions have to be
based on something more than the old scientific paradigm.
    Positivism, lacking in foresight and comprehensive views, now
gives a diminishing return in area after area from social science to
quantum physics. Already in 1960, the well-known management
scientist Russel Ackoff lamented: 'We must stop acting as though
nature is organized into disciplines in the same way that universities
are.'
    Modern cross-scientific research, which is growing in popularity,
does not change the situation. To place more and more specialized
                         THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                      493


areas side by side under the same thematic roof is inadequate, so
long as the involved disciplines depend upon their own methods
and language.
   After the end of the cold-war era (1945-1990), tendencies towards
disintegration have grown strong in many former communist
communities as well as in some of the Western capitalist societies.
No longer distracted by the cold war, the general impact of
overpopulation, energy shortages, environmental pollution, organized
crime, deforestation, climatological deterioration, civil wars and
global inflation has become visible, giving rise to new pressures on
governments and planners.
   It is likely that the planet will meet serious instabilities in its natural,
social and economic systems over the next fifty years. A collapse
seems even probable when the closely interlinked system parameters
of time, consumption and population are examined and related to
each other (see for example Forrester's World Dynamics, 1971 and
Catton's Overshoot, 1982).
   Accelerated technological innovations are no longer a realistic
solution because the cost of developing new control systems to
control the adverse impact of old ones rises exponentially. Moreover,
systems which have been neglected for a long time have already
been irreversibly changed. The traditional Western business-as-usual
policies will come to an inevitable halt with deteriorating weather
conditions, deforestation, desertification and the extinction of plants,
birds, fish and other animals. Contaminated oceans, seas, rivers, soils
and pertinent health problems with decreasing life expectations will
bring about a very uncertain future.
   To these problems must be added the impact of growing global
unemployment — a phenomenon originating from the combined
effects of overpopulation and automation. This will rapidly increase
the breach between both citizens and countries and create hostile
reactions, especially against the rich western area. A consequence
will be an immigration pressure, already clearly visible in both Europe
and United States. Economists have calculated that, to reduce global
unemployment, there is the need for one milliard new jobs within a
five-year period. This is more than all jobs existing today in the
494        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



industrial countries taken together and a completely unattainable
goal.
   In industry, the international competition increases productivity,
mainly by the use of automation and computerization. This condition
generates growth and profitability but not jobs. People who can keep
their jobs are pressed to an ever increasing extent. If jobs are generated
in the rich Western world, they are soon transported to third world
countries where work is non-unionized and wages much lower. The
exploitation of the third world must go on to keep up with a living
standard of the West, which is inconceivable for us to abandon.
   But unemployment in combination with an ageing population will
give the rich world its share of problems too. Fewer people of working
age had to produce the money for more and more pensioners who
refuse to die early due to their high living standard. This increases
the constant pressure on Western social security services and pension
funds and can only be handled in two ways. One is to reduce security
allowances for the jobless and reduce old age pensions. The other
way is a considerable increase of taxes. Both alternatives will produce
political protests, alienation and frustration and must be considered
a choice between pestilence and cholera by politicians. Evidently,
Western leaders had to prepare their citizens for a slow, but inevitable
lowering of living standards. It is time to abandon the old thinking
that social progress is as inevitable, unstoppable and natural as
technological progress.
   The relation between mankind and the large-scale technological
systems seems to be of a dubious kind, something concluded in
the previous section. The common characteristic of the examples
given was the unpredictable breakdown of these systems. What is
remarkable is that the unpredictability is experienced by those outside
the system more than by those inside it. From the outside it seems
reasonable to think: why should Chernobyl not break down, with its
corrupt management, primitive technical solutions and poorly trained
personnel?
   Those on the inside ultimately responsible for the disasters are as
always technocrats, severely lacking in an imaginative ability to
                       THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                    495


systematize the consequences of malfunctions. New insights into the
design of more sophisticated human systems as well as the redesign
of earlier manual systems are high on the agenda.
    According to Walter Andersson, "The central political problem of
our time is not that people in power do the wrong things, or that
some people have more power than others, or that there is a lack of
clarity and honesty in political dialogue; all of these are real and
serious, but they are only dim reflections of a larger problem, which
is that we literally do not know what we are doing". (From To Govern
Evolution 1987)
    The world to be lived in is also waiting for a better relationship
between man and his environment. From the study of pollution, of
the destruction of natural resources and of the ecological balance,
has evolved an expectation of something new. More and more, the
whole earth is being seen as one and, in a sense, as alive. A view is
emerging where each individual is regarded only as a part of an
organized wholeness greater than himself. Our environment is
becoming a sphere no longer separated from human action, ambitions
and needs.
    Kenneth Boulding says the following with reference to a high-cost
prestigious project such as the building of a huge dam (possibly
Aswan):

   'There are benefits of course, which may be countable, but
   Which have a tendency to fall into the pockets of the rich,
  While the costs are apt to fall upon the shoulders of the poor.
           So cost-benefit analysis is nearly always sure
          To justify the building of a solid concrete fact,
     While the ecologic truth is left behind in the abstract.'
                               (from A Ballad of Ecological Awareness 1973)

   Systems Thinking was established in the pre World War II
optimism, in an era of increasing resources, as an alternative answer
to needs which were then considered pressing. Now, fifty years later,
both needs and answers are more timely than ever. But with
increasing international unemployment and decreasing resources for
both researchers and universities, the situation for a shift of paradigms
496        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



has deteriorated. Today, global problems are seldom associated with
lack of awareness and knowledge — instead they regard questions of
will and political and economical power.




Systems thinking as alternate and criticized paradigm

A basic distinction of science is that it uses observations, measure-
ments and experiments to answer questions associated with problems.
But new and relevant questions must be posed if one is to obtain
new and useful answers. In reality our old world-view has not been
kept up to date to take account of contemporary change.
    All things considered, the great innovations of the 19th and early
20th centuries are responsible for most of our problems — something
that technology itself is currently trying to find solutions for. The
objective, value-free position of traditional science has erroneously
been taken for good science. After two world wars and a trip to the
brink of a nuclear holocaust, humanity has probably learnt that science
does not per se convey a survival advantage. As a realizer of human
interests, science has to be founded on transcendental values that
exist outside itself. A science that cannot address the values, needs
and questioning of modern life and inspire its support, will soon lose
its public justification. (See the System Paradigm, van Gigch 1978)
    The heterogeneous groups of systems scientists are held together
by the predilection for what they see as new ideas, values, and a new
way of thinking. They try to transcend the limits of conventional
science and reveal the order underlying the messiness of nature and
social life. Many of them have a relativistic attitude regarding the
modern world-view with its instruments and procedures (Western
science and technology). Our present world-view is seen as one among
many conceivable, and probably not providing the most desirable
course for humanity.
    Systems thinking imply that science, technology and all their
institutions must serve man, not man to serve them. It will prove that
the technological imperative — that every technology which can be
                      THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                  497


developed also ought be developed — has long been both obsolete
and harmful. It also tells us that if we decide on an excessive standard
of living we have to choose a low quality of life. If, on the other
hand, we want a better quality of life, we have to give up an excessive
standard of living.
   Systems thinkers know the relation between noosphere and
biosphere — or mind and body or culture and nature. They know
that the biospere is part of the noosphere and if you destroy the
biosphere your destroy the noosphere, but not vice versa.
   Systems scientists see common principles by which systems of all
sizes operate. By use of an overarching terminology and a common
language and area of concepts they try to explain the origin, evolution,
and stability of all systems. For systems in which complexity is
outstanding and too important to be ignored they offer methods for
scientific understanding and treatment. An interdisciplinary science
with a body of comprehensive knowledge, attempting for a universal
application, to be used by collaborating researchers, is seen as the
prime means to overcome the fragmentation of knowledge and the
isolation of specialists.
   As a meta-discipline, systems science will transfer its content from
discipline to discipline and address problems beyond conventional
reductionist boundaries. Generalists, qualified to manage today's
problem better than the specialist, could be fostered. With these
intentions, systems thinking and systems science should not replace
but add, complement and integrate those aspects that seem not to be
adequately treated by traditional science.
   Other researchers state that there are no other ways to solve
human problems than by traditional science. Relativism is said to
lead anywhere and nowhere at all. They see no special systemic rules
and knowledge about systems, their apparent patterns and behaviour
may be both illusory and random. In the real world almost everything
interacts with everything. Neither the elements nor the couplings nor
the boundaries are uniquely definable. Thus human creativity needs
to go for invention more than for discovery. The world needs
concrete, immediate technical solutions of problems like AIDS, cancer
and traffic accidents and not general principles. Also, large-scale
498        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



systems thinking in the shape of social engineering supported by
extensive computerization of the citizen's everyday life has been
erraneousely associated with systems science.
   Taking this last-mentioned fact as a starting point, one of the most
aggressive critics of the systems movement (and also one of the most
zealous) has been Robert Lilienfeld. In his book The Rise of Systems
Theory (1978) he conducts a general attack on its whole spectrum of
ideas and methods. From his critiques the following main points
deserve to be mentioned:

• Systems theory is the latest attempt to create a universal myth
  based on the prestige of science. Earlier myths has been based on
  theology or philosophy.
• Systems thinkers have a special weakness for definitions, con-
  ceptualizations and programmatic statements, all of a vaguely
  benevolent moralizing nature, without concrete or even scientific
  substance. Rather arbitrary normative judgements are built into its
  technical apparatus.
• In the eyes of the 'universality' of systems theory all things are
  systems by virtue of ignoring the specific, the concrete and the
  substantive.
• As a theory, systems philosophy is a mixture of speculation and
  empirical data, neither of them satisfactory. It is an attempt to
  stretch a set of concepts into meta-physics that extends beyond and
  above all substantive areas.
• Systems theory is a theory with applications which have never
  been really tested.
• The systems view of society as an organism appears attractive to
  intellectuals, who will see themselves as the brain and nerve centre
  of the organism, dealing as they do with symbolic and conceptual
  matters.
• Systems theory is not a genuine philosophy and is not a science; it
  is an ideology and must be considered as such. As an ideology it
  promotes meritocracy: freedom to command for those at the top of
  the hierarchy and freedom to obey for those locked into the system.
  Its authoritarian potential seems striking to all but the systems
  theorists themselves.
                       THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                  499


   Lilienfeld does not appear to understand that systems science can
help us to explain why an omnipresent nomenclature is unable to let
people alone. The systems theorist knows that radical intervention in
natural and social systems is a certain way to achieve surprising
effects or to initiate a breakdown. He also knows that the solution of
one problem often creates a new, more serious one. Systems scientists
are not social engineers, but on the other hand they are very capable
of explaining why that discipline also often fails.
   For the serious practitioners of systems science, Lilienfeld's
declaration that the area has ideological overtones makes little sense.
That scientific truth is not entirely objective does not imply that it is
subjective and ideological. To a certain extent, systemic knowledge
must be considered produced, not discovered. This will, however,
not imply that it can be reduced to the social, political, and economic
circumstances where it was originated.
    On the other hand, it is quite obvious that the systems movement
embraces certain ethical dimensions. These were reactivated as a
necessary response when humanity seemed to approach nuclear
extinction during the most intense cold war era.
    Another kind of criticism comes from Ida Hoos who states that
even the systems approach has been obsolete in her book Systems
Analysis in Public Policy—A Critique (1984). Systems Thinking
abstracts and idealizes, replacing the real world with a simpler one.
Its techniques has hitherto worked well, yielding elegant and useful
models. But today, prime concern in science is in areas which are
seen as so complex that they defy this idealization process.
    From her criticism the following arguments are typical.

• The so-called isomorphisms are nothing but tired truisms about
  the universality of mathematics, i.e. 2 + 2 = 4 prevails whether we
  consider soap, chickens, or missiles.
• Superficial analogies may camouflage crucial differences and lead
  to erroneous conclusions.
• Adherence to an alleged irreducibility doctrine renders the
  approach philosophically and methodologically unsound because
  it can impede analytic advances. ... isomorphisms have effected the
  reduction of chemistry to physical principles and life phenomenon
  to molecular biology.
500        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Finally Willian Thompson may be quoted with a sentence from
his book Evil and World Order (1976). "The tongue cannot taste itself,
the mind cannot know itself, and the system cannot model itself."
   Systems Thinking, like other alternatives to conventional positivist
science, has not been unaffected by serious criticism. An example of
renewal may be mentioned. This is "Critical Systems Thinking", based
on social emancipation, critical reflexion, complementarism and ethical
commitment. It is excellent presented by Flood and Jackson in
Critical Systems Thinking: Directed Readings (1991) and Critical Systems
Thinking: Current Research and Practice by Flood and Romm (1996).
Unfortunately, there are no visible signs that this kind of development
has resulted in a more functional attitude in relation to systems
thinking.




Systems thinking and the academic environment

Researchers in systems science work in a sometimes difficult academic
environment. Both the subject matter and the methodologies of these
scientists are often in conflict with the methods and products favoured
by the academy. The methods of traditional academic and scientific
work seldom reflect the properties of systems, and therefore systems
science becomes incompatible with the nature of traditional academic
work and development.
   Systems science is occupied with phenomena that deal with
dynamic processes like self-organization, self-reference and auto-
poieses that are still barely dealt with in the international science
community. Traditional analytic science tends to focus on linear
models with relatively few variables and simple causal connections. It
works with individual subsystems in isolation, while only occasionally
(and frequently inaccurately) extrapolating to more complex systems.
Temporal and physical levels of analysis are abstracted and isolated,
and disciplinary divisions cut off consideration of their interaction.
This inadequacy is reflected in the actual products of academic and
scientific works like papers, lectures, and books, which are the coin
                      THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                  501


in trade for academic workers. Such works, ranging from short
papers to long treatises, nearly always have a linear structure both in
argumentation and presentation while the chosen problem is far
from linear.
    As an university discipline, systems science has never striven for
an educational monopoly, a fact that also probably has contributed
to its decline. It is in the nature of systems science that other areas
can cross its indistinct boundaries and use its methods. Its territory
does not comprise a specific area of empirical reality and its specific
methods are no more specific than the fact that they are used by
other disciplines.
    In the university there is a widespread skepticism about the
soundness of interdisciplinary programs generally and systems
program specifically. Furthermore, the systemic challenge to the
traditional academic world has been taken as a threat against its
existence. The scientific and educational impact of systems theory
has therefore been opposed as an alternative to the old scientific
paradigm.
    The established and well-entrenched academic world seems
to have too much to lose in accepting a new perspective and
therefore regards a new paradigm as a threat. Several of the well-
established and still reductionist academic disciplines of today seem
to have forced relations to systems science. Furthermore, in the eyes
of unsuspecting members of academia, systems science and systems
theory have always been a subset of computer science. This
misconception has often been painstakingly cherished by computer
scientists in order to lay hands upon existing but diminishing funds.
    Without strong external pressure, most department leaders are
negative to stake their precious resources on ventures going beyond
known disciplinary boundaries. A general impression is that resistance
to new theories moving across disciplinary boundaries is stronger
than resistance to them within the disciplines. Another phenomenon
is that highly specialized scientists seldom accept that some general
 theories claim to know their field. They do not like interpretations of
 their findings with which they themselves are not familiar. Some
 even state that further abstract theories can confuse their students in
502        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



their critical attempts to orient themselves in the own disciplinary
track which is hard enough.
    Unfortunately, traditional university and government laboratory
environments have a tendency to freeze into permanent patterns as
their scientists grew older. They tend to view their own field of work
as the center of the world.
    Isolated knowledge generated by a group of specialists in a narrow
field has no value in itself. Only its synthesis with the rest of existing
knowledge gives it a meaning. But as Systems Thinking undermines
the legitimacy of those claiming high status of their disciplines and
building walls around their fields, systems scientists are involved in
an uphill fight. As a result, Systems Thinking has lost much of its
earlier popularity and it is no longer possible to study Systems Science
at Swedish Universities as an independent discipline. Perhaps the
Scandinavian outlook is short-sighted, but a general impression is
that this diminishing popularity is an universal trend.
    At the time of writing, the future of Systems Thinking seems
bleak. Its underlying principles may still be neglected for a number
of years, but the growing amount of international crises will compel
the establishment to resort to all means, including Systems Science.
Necessity will force old thinking and old methods to be balanced by
new ones taken from all human knowledge areas including music,
art and philosophy. Furthermore, convergence of previously separate
scientific disciplines and fields of engineering cannot take place
without the emergence of new kinds of scholars who understand
multiple fields in depth and can work to integrate them. Only
through recognizing their connections with each other can all the
sciences progress. Finally, from the four hundred year long history of
Western science we may learn that main paradigm shifts are a
question of centuries rather than decades.

                                      #

How to write the instruction manual

Buckminster Fuller (1970) was one of the first proponents for an
operating manual for Spaceship Earth. His own life and work was an
                       THE FUTURE OF SYSTEMS THEORY                   503


attempt to contribute to this symbolic idea which can be followed in
his books. This concept does not deal with gradually increasing
improvements of the present situation. Instead it deals with a total
disengagement from old notions and traditions in order to create
new opportunities.
   In reality, our old world-view has not been kept up to date to take
account of contemporary change. Our society with all its institutions
can no longer function effectively in a too often used reactive mode.
It must transform itself into a predictive and anticipatory mode, that is,
to pull the future into the present. The metaphor of Spaceship Earth,
however, fulfils the need for an up-to-date model of our world. A
spaceship is a closed system with well-defined and discernible rules
for the survival of its crew. Stores and waste irrevocably set the
limits for the ship and its living system. Those skilful in science and
technology seem no more adept to navigate the ship than practitioners
of other knowledge areas.
   Regarding possible methods it will say that old methods
must now be balanced by the use of new methods, taken from
all human knowledge areas including music, art and philosophy.
The results should be compiled when complementing each other —
if incompatible, further methods and more analysis should be
pursued.
    The manual will state that global sustainability is possible only if
humanity accepts six fundamental transitions:

1. A demographic transition to stable world population.
2. A technological transition to halt the environmental impact.
3. An economical transition where real cost for goods and services
   including environmental costs, are charged.
4. A social transition for sharing of wealth and opportunities for poor
   families to stop non-destructive work.
5. An institutional transition to supranational cooperation in order to
   solve global problems.
6. An informational transition to a world in which education, scientific
   research and global monitoring allows most people to understand
   the nature of global problems.
504         GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



   Unfortunately, this manual does not yet exist and it is doubtful
whether it will be written in the future. It is, however, the belief of
the author that some of the ideas presented in this book should well
qualify for inclusion in the manual because "there can be no rest, for
once Man has taken the first step down the path of knowledge and
understanding, he must take all those that follow. The alternative is
to do nothing, to live with the insects in the dust. The choice is
simple — it is the whole universe, or nothing" (Evans 1980).

                                       *

Review questions and problems
1. The European cultural tradition has held man as owner of nature while
   other cultures see man as a part of it. What has caused this difference in
   rules of conduct?
2. Why does cross-scientific research not cooperate in the unification of
   science?
3. Give some examples of second-order effects produced by modern
   technology which have now become first-order problems.
4. Give an example of a great planning disaster planned and implemented
   by engineers and opposed by a large local population.
5. What is the main difference between the old scientific paradigm and the
   systems paradigm?
6. Which of the seven main points containing Lilienfeld's criticisms of systems
   theory can be considered the most serious?
7. What should be the main reason for the diminishing popularity of systems
   theory?
                          References

Ackoff, R. (1960). Systems, Organizations and Interdisciplinary Research,
   General Systems Yearbook.
Ackoff, R. (1970). A Concept of Corporate Planning, John Wiley,
   New York.
Ackoff, R. (1971). 'Towards a System of Systems Concepts', Management
   Science, Vol. 17, No. 11.
Ackoff, R. (1972). "The Systems Revolution', Long Range Planning, 7,
   2-20.
Ackoff, R. (1981). Creating the Corporate Future, John Wiley, New York.
Alley, B. & Bender, M. (1998). Greenland Ice Cores — Frozen in Time,
   Scientific American, February 1998.
Anderson, W. (1987). To Govern Evolution, Harcourt, New York.
Ashby, R. (1964). An Introduction to Cybernetics, Chapman & Hall,
   London.
Asimov, I. (1968). I Robot, Grafton Books, London.
Aulin, A. & Ahmavaara, A. (1979). "The Law of Requisite Hierarchy',
   Kybernetes, No. 8.
Austin, J. (1978). Chance and Creativity: The Lucky Art of Novelty,
    Columbia UP, New York.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an Ecology of Mind, Ballantine, New York.
Beer, S. (1972). Brain of the Firm, Penguin Press, London.
Beer, S. (1979). The Heart of Enterprise, John Wiley, New York.
Bergstrom, M. (1990). Hjarnans Resurser, Seminarium Forlag AB,
   Jonkoping.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1955). 'General Systems Theory', Main Currents in
    Modern Thought, Vol. 71, No. 75.
von Bertalanffy, L. (1967). Robots, Men and Minds, Publisher,
    New York.
Bidgoli, H. (1989). Decision Support Systems, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Bolonkin, A. (1999). "The Twenty-first Century: The Advent of the Non-
    biological Civilization and the Future of the Human Race', Kybernetes,
    Vol. 28, No. 3.

                                   505
506        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Boulding, K. (1956). 'General Systems Theory — The Skeleton of Science',
   Management Science, No. 2.
Boulding, K. (1964). 'General Systems as a Point of View' in
   A. Mesarovic's, Views on General Systems Theory, John Wiley,
   New York.
Boulding, K. (1973). A Ballad of Ecological Awareness. The War Industry,
   Transaction Books, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
Boulding, K. (1978). Ecodynamics, Sage Publications, London.
Boulding, K. (1985). The World as a Total System, Sage Publications,
   London.
Bowler, D. (1981). General Systems Thinking, North Holland, New York.
Burns, J. (1977). 'Converting Signed Digraphs to Forrester Schematics',
   IEEE, Vol. SMC-7, No. 10.
Campbell, N. (1953). What is Science? Dover Publications, New York.
Catton, W. (1982). Overshoot, University of Illinois Press, London.
Checkland, P. (1981). Systems Thinking, Systems Practice, John Wiley &
   Sons, Chichester.
Cherry, C. (1966). On Human Communication, MIT Press, London.
Churchman, W. (1979). The Design of Inquiring Systems: Basic Concepts
   of Systems and Organizations, Basic Books, New York.
Cook, N. (1980). Stability and Flexibility. An Analysis of Natural Systems,
   Pergamon Press, New York.
Coram, R. (2002). Boyd: The Fighter Pilot Who Changed the Art of War,
   Little Brown & Company, ISBN 0316881465.
Davis, S. & Lawrence, P. (1977). Matrix, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
   Massachusetts.
Dawkins, R. (1989). The Selfish Gene, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Deutsch, K. (1966). The Nerves of Government, The Free Press,
   New York.
Dorner, D. (1980). 'On the Problems People Have in Dealing with
   Complexity', Simulation and Games, No. 1.
Dreyfus, H. & Dreyfus, S. (1986). Mind Over Machine, Basil Blackwell,
   New York.
Edelman, G. (1991) in M. Benedikt's, Cyberspace, MIT Press, Cambridge,
   Massachusetts.
                               REFERENCES                            507


Einstein, A. (1921). Geometrie und Erfahrung, Sitzungsberichte der
   Preussichen Akademie der Wissenschaft Verlag der Akademie
   der Wissenschaften, Berlin.
Evans, C. (1980). The Micro Millennium, Viking Press, New York.
Fivaz, R. (1989). L'ordre et la volupte, Presses Polytechniques Romandes,
   Lausanne.
Flood, R. & Carson, E. (1988). Dealing with Complexity, Plenum Press,
   New York.
Flood, R. & Jackson, M. (1991). Creative Problem Solving, John Wiley,
   New York.
Flood, R. & Jackson, M. (1991). Critical Systems Thinking: Directed
   Readings, John Wiley, Chichester.
Flood, R. & Romm, N. (1996). Critical Systems Thinking: Current Research
   and Practice, Plenum, New York.
Forrester, J.W. (1969). Urban Dynamics, MIT Press, Cambridge,
   Massachusetts.
Forrester, J.W. (1971). World Dynamics, Wright Allen, Cambridge,
   Massachusetts.
Freud, S. (1961). The Interpretation of Dreams, Wiley, New York.
Fuller, B. (1970). Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth, Carbondale III,
   Southern 111. University Press, New York.
Fuller, B. (1992). Cosmography, Macmillan, New York.
van Gigch, J. (1978). Applied General Systems Theory, 2nd edition, Harper
    & Row, New York.
van Gigch, J. (1991). System Design Modeling and Meta-modeling,
   Plenum, New York.
von Glaserfeld, E. (1987). 'The Construction of Knowledge: Contributions
    to Conceptual Semantics' Intersystems Seaside, California.
Greiner, L. (1972). Evolution and Revolution as Organizations Grow,
    Harvard Business Review, July-August.
Hillis, D. (1985). The Connection Machine, MIT Press, Cambridge,
    Massachusetts.
Hitchins, D. (1992). Putting Systems to Work, John Wiley, New York.
Holling, C. (1977). New Directions in Futures Research, eds. H. Linstone
    and A. Simmonds, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
508        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Janis, I.L. (1972). Victims of Groupthink, Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Jantsch, E. (1980). The Self-Organizing Universe, Pergamon New York.
Jaques, E. (1976). A General Theory of Bureaucracy, Ashgate, Burlington,
    USA.
de Jardin, T. (1947). The Phenomenon of Man, Harper & Row,
    New York.
Jaynes, J. (1982). The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the
    Bicameral Mind, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, Massachusetts.
Jordan, J. (1968). Themes in Speculative Psychology, Tavistock
    Publications, London.
Katz, D. & Kahn, L. (1966). The Social Psychology of Organizations, John
    Wiley, London.
Kelly, K. (1994). Out of Control, Addison Wesley, New York.
Kerr, M. & Bowen, M. (1988). Family Evaluation, W.W. Norton &
    Company, New York.
Kirchner, J.W. (1991). The Gaia Hypothesis: Are They Testable? Are They
    Useful? in S. Schneider's, Scientists on Gaia, Cambridge, MIT Press,
    New York.
Klir, G. (1985). Architecture of Systems Problem-Solving, Plenum,
    New York.
Klir, G. (1991). Facets of Systems Science, Plenum, New York.
Koestler, A. (1967). The Ghost in the Machine, Arkana, London.
Kroenke, D. (1989). Management Information Systems, McGraw-Hill,
    New York.
Langefors, B. (1993). Theoretical Analysis of Information Systems,
    Studentlitt, Lund.
Langton, C. (1989). Artificial Life, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the
    Science of Complexity, Vol. 6, Addison-Wesley, Redwood City.
Laszlo, E. (1972). Introduction to Systems Philosophy, Harper & Row,
    New York.
Laszlo, E. (1972). The World System, George Braziller Inc., New York.
Libet, B. (1985). 'Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of
    Conscious Will in Voluntary Action', Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
    No. 8.
Lilienfeld, R. (1978). The Rise of Systems Theory, John Wiley, New York.
                                REFERENCES                            509


Litterer, J. (1969). Organizations: Systems, Control and Adaption, John
    Wiley, New York.
Lovelock, J. (1988). The Ages of Gaia, Norton & Co., New York (reissued
    OUP, Oxford 1995).
Lovelock, J. (1979). Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth, Oxford University
    Press, Oxford (reissued 1995).
MacKay, D. (1969). Information, Mechanism and Meaning, MIT Press,
    London.
MacLean, P. (1973). A Triune Concept of the Brain and Behavior,
    University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and Personality, Harper Collins,
    New York.
Mason, R. & Mitroff, I. (1981). Challenging Strategic Planning
    Assumptions, John Wiley, New York.
Maturana, H. & Varela, V. (1992). The Tree of Knowledge, Shambala,
    London.
Miller, J. (1956). The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two,
    Psychology Review, 63(2), 81-97.
Miller, J. (1978). Living Systems, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Miller, J. (1990). 'Introduction: The Nature of Living Systems', Behavioral
    Science, Vol. 35, No. 3, La Jolla, California.
Morgan, G. (1986). Images of Organization, Sage, London.
Moss, C. (1988). Elephant Memories, Legenda, New York.
Nadler, G. & Hibino, S. (1990). Breakthrough Thinking, Prima Publishing
    Rocklin, California.
Namilov, V. (1981). Faces of Science, iSi Press, Philadelphia.
Norretranders, T. (1993). Mark Varlden, Bonnier Alba, Stockholm.
Payne, R. (1971). 'Song of Humpback Whales', Science, Vol. 173, August,
    p. 585.
Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Routledge & Kegan,
    London.
Powers, W.T. (1973). Behavior: The Control of Perception, Aldine de
    Gruyter, Hawthorne, New York.
Pribram, K. (1969). 'Languages of the Brain, The Neurophysiology of
    Remembering', Scientific American, January.
510        GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



von Reibnitz, U. (1988). Scenario Techniques, McGraw-Hill, Hamburg.
Rittel, H. & Webber, M. (1974). 'Dilemmas in General Theory of
    Planning', Systems and Management Annual 1974, Petrocelli,
    New York.
Rucker, R. (1982). Software, Penguin Books, London.
Rumelhart, D. (1986). Parallel Distributed Processing, A Bradford Book,
    MIT Press, London.
Salk, J.E. (1983). Anatomy of Reality, Greenwood Publishing Group
    Inc., Westport, Connecticut.
Samuelson, K. (1977). General Information Systems Theory in Design,
    Modelling and Development, Institutional Paper, Informatics and
    Systems Science, Stockholm University.
Samuelson, K., Borko, H. & Amey, G. (1977). Information Systems and
    Networks, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Schleicher, A. (1888). Die Deutsche Sprache, Cotta, Stuttgart.
Schneider, S. & Boston, P. (1993). Scientists on Gaia, MIT Press, London.
Schumacher, E. (1973). Small is Beautiful, Harper & Row, New York.
Schumacher, E. (1978). A Guide for the Perplexed, Abacus, London.
Shannon, C. & Weaver, W. (1964). The Mathematical Theory of Communi-
    cation, University of Illinois Press, Urbana, USA.
Simon, H. (1969). The Sciences of the Artificial, MIT Press, London.
Simon, H. (1976). Administrative Behavior, The Free Press, New York.
Skyttner, L. & Fagrell, F. (1988). 'Minimizing Human, Economic and
    Ecological Losses at Sea' TRITA IS-5152, Stockholm University.
Skyttner, L. (1993). 'The Distress Signal as a System Function',
    Kybernetes, Vol. 22, No. 3.
Smuts, J. (1973). Holism and Evolution (reprint), Greenwood Press,
    Westport, Connecticut.
Steward, J. (2003). Evolution's Arrow, Chapman Press, London.
Stonier, T. (1990). Information and the Internal Structure of the Universe,
    Springer-Verlag, London.
Tajfel, H. & Fraser, C. (1978). Introduction to Social Psychology, Penguin
    Books, Harmonsworth, United Kingdom.
Taylor, A. (1973) in E. Laszlo's, The World System, Braziller, New York.
Thompson, F. (1951) in G. Cumberlege's, Poems of Francis Thompson,
    Oxford University Press, Oxford.
                               REFERENCES                           511


Toffler, A. (1980). The Third Wave, Collins, London.
Turchin, V.F. (1977). The Phenomenon of Science: A Cybernetic Approach
    to Human Evolution, Columbia University Press.
Tustin, A. (1955). Automatic Control, Simon & Schuster, New York.
Ulrich, W. (1983). Critical Heuristics of Social Planning, Haupt, Berne.
Uris, A. (1986). 101 of the Greatest Ideas in Management, John Wiley,
   New York.
Waldrop, M. (1992). Complexity: The Emerging Science at the Edge of
    Order and Chaos, Simon & Schuster, New York.
Warman, A. (1993). Computer Security within Organizations, Macmillan
   Press, London.
Watt, K. & Craig, P. (1988). 'Surprise, Ecological Stability Theory' in
    C.S. Holling's, The Anatomy of Surprise, John Wiley, New York.
Weawer, W. (1948). 'Science and Complexity', American Scientist,
   Vol. 36, No. 194.
Weinberg, G. (1975). An Introduction to General Systems Thinking, John
    Wiley, New York.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the
   Animal and the Machine, John Wiley, New York.
Wurman, R.S. (1991). Information Anxiety, Pan Books, London.
Zuchov, G. (1979). The Dancing Wu-Li Masters, Bantam Books, Toronto.
                           Name Index
A                                              Broca, P    266
Ackoff, R 41,58, 72,395, 396, 460, 492         Bruno, G      9,11
Adler, A   268                                 Buddha      268
Ahmavaara, A    100                            Buller, R    24
Alley, B 313                                   Burns, J    479
Andersson, W    495
Aristotle  49,140                              C
Ashby, R 57,100, 257                           Caesar     278
Asimov, I   350                                Campbell, N       49
Aulin, A   100                                 Carson, E 470, 472
Austin, J  424                                 Catton, W     487, 493
                                               Chardin de T       110,151-153,155,156,
B                                                183, 268
Bacon, F     486                               Checkland, P       110,175, 481, 482
Barrow, G      22                              Cherry, C     215, 226
Barrow, J     261                              Churchman, W         52, 53, 57
Bateson, G      234                            Clausius, R     20
Baudot      253                                Coakley, T     413
Beer, S 110, 111, 132,137,139,187,             Collings, J    27
  203, 257, 392                                Comte, A     19, 33
Bender, M      313                             Conway, H       341, 342, 345
Bergstrom, M        286                        Cook, N     110,170-173, 203
Bertalanffy, L 39, 53, 56                      Copernicus, N       9
Bidgoli, H     406                             Coram, R 416
Bohr, N     24, 29, 32, 410                    Craig    102
Bolonkin, A      348, 349, 351                 Csikszentmihalyi       335
Boltzmann, L       20
Boulding, K 39, 47, 51, 57, 79,110,        D
  111, 166, 495                            Damasio, A    267
Bowen, M       110,192,194,196             Darwin, C   19, 298, 382
Bowler, D      51, 52                      Davis, S 373
Boyd, G      416                           Dawkins, R    263
Boyle, R     114                           Descartes, R 10
Brahe, T     9                             Deutsch, K   87
Bremerman        231                       Deway, J 390
Brillouin, L     22                        Dorner, D   427




                                         513
514           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Dresher    393                             Hegel, F    49
Dreyfus, H    334                          Heisenberg, W     24, 29,109
Dreyfus, S 334                             Hibino, S 464
                                           Hillis, D   345
E                                          Hitchins, D    58,103
Edelman, G      283                        Holling, C    397
Einstein, A    23-25, 27, 29, 32, 33,      Hoos, I 499
   109,110, 231, 234                       Hutton, J    140
Elliot, T   276
Ernst, R 417                               J
Etzioni, A    365                          Jackson, M     105, 482
Evans, C     504                           Janis, I 426
                                           Jantsch   285
F                                          Jaques, E 110,197, 198, 201-203
Fayol, H    362, 363                       Jaynes, J   174, 270, 271
Fivaz, R 55, 268                           Johnsson, S 308
Fleming     202                            Jordan, J 110, 178-180
Flood     393                              Jung, C    268
Flood, R 105, 470, 472, 482, 507
Forrester, J 43, 475, 493                  K
Fraser, C    214                           Kahn, L 63
Freud, S 32,192, 269, 270                  Kant, I    28
Fuller, B 31, 485, 502                     Kasparov, G       328
                                           Katz, D     63
G                                          Kelly, K    152
Galenos     7                              Kelvin, W      20
Galilei, G    9,10,11, 27                  Kepler, J    9,192
Gibson, W      453-455                     Kerr, M     192
Gigch van, J 44, 54, 459, 462, 496         Kirchner, J     152
Glaserfeld von, E    57                    Klir, G    58,110,162-164
Godel, K     104,105                       Knox, R     28
Goete, W     50                            Koestler, A     67
Golding, W      140                        Kroenke, D       406
Gore, A    449                             Ktesibios     75
Grainer, L 381                             Kurtzweil, R 350
Gutenberg      447
                                           L
H                                          La Mettrie  13
Haldane, J 3                               Langefors, B 229
Hartley, R  250                            Langton, C   340, 343-345
Hartston, W   328                          Laplace, P  13
                                   NAME INDEX                             515


Laszlo, E    110,165-167                 P
Lawrence, P      373                     Paracelsus     140
Lawson, J 414, 415, 417                  Payne, R 216
Libet, B 272-293                         Picasso, P    32
Lilienfeld, R 498, 499, 504              Planck, M     24, 29, 32
Linne, K von      116                    Plato    257
Linstone, H     74                       Pope, A    27, 56
Litterer, J  53                          Popper, K     262
Lovelock, J    110,140,141,143,144,      Powers, W      110,185-189
   147,150, 257                          Pribram, C     289
                                         Proust, M     32, 450
M                                        Ptolemy     6
MacKay, D      226                       Pythagoras      20,48
MacLean, P      270, 283
Margulis, L     140                      R
Marx, K     265                          Reagan     370
Maslow, A      381, 389                  Rittel, H   457, 460
Mason      482                           Romm, N      507
Maturana, H      60                      Rothstein, J 141
Maxwell, J 20, 82, 233                   Rucker, R 268
Mayo, E 360                              Rumelhart, D      282
Metcalfe, B 433
Miller, J 61,100,104,110, 111, 118,      S
  120,123,147, 212, 257, 381             Salk, J    110,180-185
Minsky, M      327                       Samuelson, K 430, 434, 482
Mitroff    482                           Saussure de, F 50
Morgan, G      387                       Scheffler, J 23
Morris Jr, R 347                         Schelling,    297
Morse, S 253, 244, 245                   Schleicher, A     190
Moss, C     216                          Schonberg      32
                                         Schumacher, E 261, 263
N                                        Searle, J 322
Nadler, G   464                          Selznick, P    365
Namilov, V 110,189,190,192, 203          Shannon, C 207, 211, 219, 221-226,
Newton, I 13,18, 21, 23, 27, 32, 33,        230, 254
  192                                    Simon, H      357, 397
Nietsche, F 428                          Skyttner, L 212, 475
Norretranders, T 236                     Smith, A     353
                                         Smuts, J 50
O                                        Spinoza     50
Ohm, G     114                           Steele, M    46
516          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



Steward, J 299, 300
Stonier, T   231
                                          w
                                          Waldrop, M      302
Szent-Gyorgi     256                      Warman, A      346
Szilard    231                            Watson, L     279
                                          Watt, J   83
T                                         Watt, K    102
Tajfel, H    214                          Weaver, W      207, 230
Taylor, A     110,156,158                 Webber, M      457, 460
Taylor, F    358, 359                     Weber, M      363
Thompson, F       12                      Weinberg, G      36, 42, 48, 97,100
Thompson, W        500                    Weinberg, S 261
Tipler, F    261                          Weintraub, J     327
Toffler, A    432                         Weiss, P    57
Turchin, V     70                         Weizenbaum, J       319
Turing, A     326                         Wertheimer, M       50
Tustin     107                            Wiener, N 45,75
                                          Wilde, O     4
U                                         Wurman, R       204
Updike, J   26
Uris, A   367                             Y
                                          y Gasset, O 294
V                                         Yovits, H  417
van Valen    103
Varela, V   60                             Z
Vaucanson de J   341                       Zuchov, G    37
Vernandsky, V    153
Voltaire, F 4
                               Subject Index
A                                         bifurcation      302
activator       91                        big bang      27
ad hoc organization          374          biodiversity      149
adaptability        70                    biogenesis      154
adjustment processes          125         bionics    46
aggregate        58                       biosphere      142
alchemy        6                          boundary       129
algorithm        395                      box-
algorithmic complexity          45           black    78
alienation        365                        gray    79
allopoietic       60                         white     79
amplifier       133                       brain plasticity     282
analogies        39                       brainstorming       423
analogue        98                        brainwriting       424
analogue communication            211     Broca's area      266
analysis       34,42                      buffering     80
anasynthesis         42                   bureaucracy       363
anti-normativism          19              butterfly effect     74
anticipatory        81
antropic principle        261                 C
archetypes         269                        C3I    46
artefact      44                              capta     275
artificial life     339, 340                  causality     14
associative memory           291              centralization   67,369
associator        124,257                     centrifugal regulator   83
astrology        6                            channel-
astronomy          9,23                          continous    250
atmosphere          143                          discrete   250
attenuator        134                         channels of-
autonomy          35                             communication       223
autopoiesis        60                            observation     223
axiom       92                                Chess test   328
                                              Chinese Room       322
6                                             Clan-think     426
basic control cycle   90                      clepsydra    75
behaviourists     321                         clockwork     14,112


                                        517
518            GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



code-     252                               death     94
   alpha     128                            decider     91,125
   beta    128                              decoder      124
   gamma       128                          delay     90
cognitive deficiency       426              demon-
cognitive dissonance        189, 391           Laplace's     13
command & control          413                 Maxwell's      20,233
communication         211                   descision-
comparator       91                            matrix     402
complementarity principle         24           tree    402
complexification       153                  design     43
complexity                                  designer     52, 91
   algorithmic      45                      detectability     209
   computational        328,401             detector     91
component        78                         deterioration      94
computational ethology         340          determinism       14, 18
computer virus        346-348               deterministic chaos      74
consciousness-                              differentiation     54
   self   267                               digital compression      432
   omni      268                            discriminator      91
constructivism       57                     disorder     20
contingency theory        366               distorsion     223
control     77                              distributor     123
control theory      185                     drill down      410
controller     90                           dualism      10
convergence       153                       dynamic equilibrium        93
converter      123
cosmological principle        27            E
cosmology       28                          Economic Man       314
counter-measure team         99             effektor   91
creationism      426                        eidetic memory      274
cryptography        206                     element    66
cue     208                                 embodiment      324
cybernetics      75                         emergence     40
cyberpunk       455                         emergent properties     69
cyberspace      454                         emergents     127
cyclic    68                                empathy      55,266
                                            empirical referents    51
D                                           empiricism     12,42
damping    223                              encoder     125
Daysiworld   144                            endogenous      67
                                        SUBJECT INDEX                             519


entropy-     20, 71, 233                        gaming      42, 99
   information       247                        General Systems Theory       40
   maximum         247                          genogram       194
   minimum         247                          gentle degradation      283
   relative    247                              geogenesis      154
environment        63                           geophysiology       140
epiphenomenon          258                      geosphere      143
equifinality     71, 101                        gestalt psychology      50
equilibrium       76                            gnome      6
Eros     269                                    goal-setter    91
error tolerances      257                       greenhouse civilization     148
Esperanto      338                              groupthink      426
evolution      94
evolutionary paradigm        55                 H
exformation       236                           hard feedback      384
existential levels     262
                                                Hawtorne-effect       361
exogenous       67
                                                hemisphere      171
expansionism        34
                                                heterarchy     65
extruder      124
                                                heteropoietic     60
                                                heuristics    332,395
F
                                                hierarchy     54
feedback-
                                                holism     50
   extrinsic    87
                                                holistic   38
   first order    86
                                                hologram      289
   higher order      86
                                                holon     67
   intrinsic    87
                                                homeokinesis       93
   negative     83
   positive    84                               homeokinetic plateau       93
   second order      86                         homeostasis      93
feedforward       81                            Homo Economicus          397
fictionalism     57                             Homo Habilis       265
fin de siecle    20                             homomorphism          40
finalistic theory     153                       hydrosphere      143
flow      335                                   hypothesis     96
framework       112
frontesterion     392                           I
functional organization      360, 371           idealism     28
functionalism      320                          indeterminism      21
                                                infological equation   229
G                                               infology     206
Gaia   140                                      informability     209
game theory      391                            informatics     44,430
520           GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



information-                               Libido     269
   descriptive     228                     linguistics    206
   input overload      128                 listening typewriter    338
   input underload      129                localizability   209
   metrical     228                        logic bomb      347
   physics     231
   science    206                          M
   selective    228                        machine age      13
   structural    228                       macrohierarchy       166
   system     75,135,192, 206, 208, 235,   macroorganism        189
      323, 379, 387, 392, 417, 428         macroscope      35
   theory     205                          man-made       59
ingestor     123                           management cybernetics      46, 352
input     78                               mapping      330
intelligence-                              marker     124
   amplifier     319                       matrix-design      372
   spectrum      276                       meaning     205, 207, 212, 219, 230
interactive mode       212                 meme      263
interface     65                           memory      125
internal transducer       124              mentefact     61
Internet     440                           message-
intersubjectivity     16                     external     210
intrasubjectivity     16                     internal    210
invincible hand       353                    meta     210
isomorphism        39                      messes     36
iteration     303                          meta-
                                             communication        209
J                                            discipline     41, 497
jamming      211                             theory     56
                                           metabolism      60, 119
L                                          methodologies-
laboratory     15                            hard     481
lag     90                                   soft    481
law of laws      39                        microhierarchy      166
law-                                       microscope      35
   first of thermodynamics  20             mnemonics       234
   second of thermodynamics    20          model-     90
   third of thermodynamics   20               analogue    90
level                                         conceptual    91
   pragmatic      219                         descriptive   91
   semantic     219                           explanatory    91
   syntactic    219                           iconic   90
                                SUBJECT INDEX



model-                                  order    51
 mathematical        91                 organizational recursion
 predictive       91                    organized-complexity     71
 prescriptive       91                  organized-simplicity   72
  symbolic      90                      output    78
 verbal      91                         output transducer    125
modelling      43
monerans      118                       P
monism      18                          packet switching         440
morality     265                        panpsychism         259
Morse code      244, 245, 253           paradigm-      96
multifinality     54                      renaissance        8
multilateral structure    69              scientific     18
                                          scholastic      5
N                                       parallel processing        329
natural channels       213              pattern recognition        338
negentropy       21                     phase transition        303
neocortex      285                      pheromones        128
neural nets      329                    physiology       186
neural network        330               planning loop        81
neurocybernetics       132              Platonic bodies        6
neurodynamics         287               point of Omega          154
neutrality     15                       positivism     19
noise-                                  potentiality     289
   black     252                        praxeology-       390
   pragmatic       251                    descriptive       391
   semantic      251                      normative        391
   syntactic     251                    Prisoner's Dilemma          393
   transmission      251                producer      123
   white     251                        program      77
nominalism        19                    prostheses      122
non-intervention       15               protistans     118
non-locality      26                    psychogenesis        147
n oogenetics      116
hoosphere       153                     Q
norm     9                              quantization   158
                                        quantum-
O                                         mechanics    25
objectivity  15                           theory    24
OODA-loop      416, 417
operations research   38                R
optimizing    395                       rationalism      12
522            GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



receptor     91                             sign     207
recursion      133                          signal     208
redesign      43                            signalling-
reductionism       14                          deceptive      210
redundancy-                                    false    210
   pragmatic      249                          supplementary         210
   semantic      249                        simulation       41
   syntactic     248                        single-directed mode          212
reference signal      188                   singularity      27
reference standard       91                 soft feedback       384
regression      129                         somnambulism           270
relational universals      52               space-
relativity    23                               abstract     64
repeatibility     16                           cognitive      64
repetitionality     17                         existential     64
replication     60
                                               perceptual       64
representative substitutions      207
                                               pragmatic       64
reproducer       123
                                            spectral effect      25
requisite variety      133, 135
                                            speech recognition          336
robotics     325, 339
                                            stability    70
                                            standard model          27
S
                                            static properties       34
salamander       6
                                            steady-state      76
sampling theorem         250
                                            stenography        252
satellite    35
                                            structuralism       50
satisficing     393
schemata       283                          structure     57, 69
science of complexity        44             structure-functionalism         365
scientific-                                 sublimation       269
   management         358                   superbrain       351
   Method       17                          superdeterminism           14
   paradigm       18                        Superego       269
   revolution      9                        superorganism         379
scientism      22                           supporter       124
self-organization       294                 sylf     6
self-reference      137                     symbiosis       143
self-transcendence       325                symbol      208
semiotics      206                          synaesthesia       281
sensor      83                              synectics      424
sensory deprivation         129             synergetic      69
servo      83                               synthesis      34
sexual system        116                    syntropic      31
                                   SUBJECT INDEX                                   523


system(s)-     56                          system(s)-
  abstract      62                           paradigm       54
  age     36                                 pathology      127
  Analysis       42                          philosophy       40
  approach        42                         purposive      178
  closed      63                             quantal      170
  closed-loop        80                      science     3, 41
  complex        106                         simulative      74
  conceptual        61                       static    73
  concrete       59                          stochastic     74
  continous        73                        sub     66
  creodic      115                            supra     66
  decomposable           72                  supranational       121
  Design       43                            taxonomy       178
   designed abstract         175              thinking     34
   designed physical         175             transcendental       113
   deterministic       74                     typology     176
   dynamic        73                          unperceivable      62
   Dynamics        43                         viable    132
   Engineering        43
   expert     332
   general control        89
                                           taxonomy      40
   goal-changing         73
                                           technological imperative     340, 496
   goal-maintaining         72
                                           telemanipulation      451
   goal-seeking        73
                                           telematik    432
   human activity         175
                                           teleology    6, 40
   improvement          44
                                           teleonomic     56
   information        339
                                           telepresence     451
   irrational      73
                                           telescope    35
   isolated     63
                                           temporal     68
   knowledge         339
                                           test-
   life cycle     94
                                              Duck    341
   meta     163
                                              HAL     341
   multigoal-seeking    73                 Thanatos     269
   natural     59                          theorem     96
   near-decomposable     72                theory of relativity-
   non-living     59                          general    23
   non-simulative    74                       special   23
   null    73                              thermodynamics        20
   open     62                             throughput      78, 119
   open-loop      80                       time bomb      347
   organic     59                          timer    124
524          GENERAL SYSTEMS THEORY: PROBLEMS, PERSPECTIVES, PRACTICE



transcendental     105, 110               veto function    273
transducer     124                        virtual    41
transfactual    17                        virtual organization       377
transformation     78                     virtual reality  450
translating telephone     337             virtualization   450
transmitter    115
trapdoor     347                          W
triangling    194                         wetware     454
Trojan horse     347                      witchcraft    6
Turing test    326                        working studies      359
                                          world view      96
U                                         worm      346
ultra-stable  70
uncertainty principle    24               Z
undine     6                              zeno effect   26

V
value function    287
variety   133
    Systems theorists see common principles
    in the structure and operation of systems
    of all kinds and sizes. They promote an
    interdisciplinary science adapted for a
    universal application with a common
    language and area of concepts. In order to
    solve problems, make recommendations
    and predict the future, they use theories,     Key Features
    models and concepts from the vast area of
    general systems theory. This approach is       •   No similar books on the market; an ideal
    chosen as a means to overcome the                  course book for beginners and more advanced
    fragmentation o f knowledge and the                students
    isolation of the specialist but also to find
    new approaches to problems created by          •   Usable as a reference manual with its
    earlier 'solution of problems.'                    comprehensive name and topic indexes and
                                                       lists of systems theories

    This revised and updated second edition of
                                                   •   Well suited for more specialized education of
    General Systems Theory - Ideas and
                                                       army officers, architects, city planners and
    Applications includes new systems theories
                                                       even philosophers (systems philosophy) due
    and a new chapter on self-organization             to its overarching content
    and evolution. The book summarizes most
    of the fields of systems theory and its
    application systems science in one volume.
    It provides a quick and readable reference
    guide for future learning containing both
    general theories and practical applications
    w i t h o u t t h e use o f complicated
    mathematics.




           r'or beginners, the book is an easy introduction                         for others,
                useful overview, supplemented with many interesting and thouglu provoking
               mal commentaries by the author."

                                                                  Bingham     University-SUNY



          "It is impossible not to be impressed by the author's enthusiasm      and crusading
          spirit in stressing the need for the systems approach."

                                                                             KYBERNETES
                                      I he International Journal of Systems and Cybernetics




World Scientific                                                              ISBN 981-256-389-X

www.worldscientific.com
5871 he
