        "",,, "",,'

S II
II

           ;:= 11111111 III

                             111 111"11 1
                              1 t I 1I 1I 1I 1 I I

111.il III 11,1111111,
   General
   System
   Theory

Foundations, Development, Applications

 by Ludwig von Bertalanffy

                      University of Alberta
                       Edmonton} Canada

                   GEORGE BRAZILLER
                             New York
Copyright © 1968 by Ludwig von Bertalanffy
All rights in this book are reserved.

For information address the publisher,
George Brazilier, Inc.
One Park Avenue
New York, N.Y. 10016

Third Printing, February 1972
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 68-25176
Printed in the United States of America
   MANIBUS Nicolai de Cusa Cardinalis, Gottfriedi Guglielmi
Leibnitii, Joannis Wolfgangi de Goethe Aldique Huxleyi,
necnon de BertalanfJy Pauli, S.j., antecessm-is, cosmographi
         Foreword

   The present volume appears to demand some introductory
notes clarifying its scope, content, and method of presentation.

   There is a large number of texts, monographs, symposia, etc.,
devoted to "systems" and "systems theory", "Systems Science," or
one of its many synonyms, is rapidly becoming part of the estab-
lished university curriculum. This is predominantly a develop-
ment in engineering science in the broad sense, necessitated by
the complexity of "systems" in modern technology, man-machine
relations, programming and similar considerations which were
not felt in yesteryear's technology but which have become im-
perative in the complex technological and social structures of
the modern world. Systems theory, in this sense, is preeminently
a mathematical field, offering partly novel and highly sophisti-
cated techniques, closely linked with computer science, and
essenti2.11y determined by the requirement to cope with a new
sort of problem that has been appearing.

   What may be obscured in these developments~important
as they are-is the fact that systems theory is a broad view which
far transcends technological problems and demands, a reorienta-
tion that has become necessary in science in general and in the
gamut of disciplines from physics and biology to the behavioral
and social sciences and to philosophy. It is operative, with vary-
ing degrees of success and exactitude, in various realms, and
heralds a new world view of considerable impact. The student
in "systems science" receives a technical training which makes
systems theory-originally intended to overcome current over-
.~pecialization-illto another of the hundreds of academic special-
ties. Moreover, systems science, centered in computer technology,
cybernetics, automation and systems engineering. appears to

                                            vii
make the systems idea another-and indeed the ultimate-
technique to shape man and society ever more into the "mega-
machine" which Mumford (1967) has so impressively described
in its advance through history.

   The present book hopes to make a contribution in both respects
implied in the above: offering to the student of systems science
a broadened perspective, and to the general reader a panoramic
view of a development which is indubitably characteristic of and
important in the present world. While fully realizing his limita-
tions and shortcomings, the author feels entitled to do so because
he was among the first to introduce general system theory, which
is now becoming an important field of research and application.

   As Simon (1965) correctly remarked, an introduction into a
rapidly developing field largely consists in its conceptual his-
tory. It may not be inappropriate, therefore, that the present
work consists of studies written over a period of some thirty
years. The book thus presents systems theory not as a rigid
doctrine (which at present it is not) but rather in its becoming
and in the development of its ideas which, hopefully, can serve
as a basis for further study and investigation.

   In order to serve the purpose, these studies were arranged in
logical rather than chronological order and were carefully edited.
Editing was limited, however, to elimination of repetitions, minor
stylistic improvements and some suitable rearrangements. Inten-
tionally, no changes in content were made from hindsight gained
at a later time. Repetitions could not be completely avoided
because similar ideas sometimes appeared in different contexts;
but it is hoped they were kept at a tolerable level. They may
even be not undesirable to the student seeking the general idea
or its application in a specific field.

   The original sources are indicated in the list of Acknowledg-
ments. For evaluation of the material presented and reasons
of priority which will become apparent, some major data may
be summarized as follows. Chapter 5 (1940) introduced the
"theory of the organism as open system." Together with Burton's
(1939) work, this was the original statement of the concept which
gained increasing importance and application. This publication
remained almost unknown among British and American scien-
tists and is therefore reproduced in its entirety, although much
can be added, as is partly reviewed in Chapters 7 (1964) and 6
(1967). Similarly, the first announcement of general system theory

                                            viii
(HH5) is reproduced as Chapter 3, abridged and somewhaf're-
arranged, but otherwise true to the originaL The Appendix (re-
view of an address presented in 1947) is reproduced as an early
HI alement long before systems theory and cognate terms and fields
appeared academically or in technology. A review in nontechnical
1<llIguage (1956) serves as Chapter 2; Chapters I and 4 try to
hring the story up to date.

   The author wishes to extend his thanks to many persons and
IIg'cncies that facilitated the work here presented. Thanks are due
1.0 Dr. George Brantl, editor at George Braziller, Inc., for having
suggested the publication and for his valuable editorial assistance
iII presenting the book to its advantage. The permissions of
editors and publishers where the essays were first published, as
indicated in the source list, are gratefully acknowledged. So is
the assistance of various agencies, the National Research Council
and National Cancer Institute of Canada, the Canada Council,
Ihe University of Alberta General Research Committee and
olhers, which sponsored part of the work here reported by re-
search grants and other support. The author's secretary, Mrs.
Elizabeth Grundau, took care of the manuscript in its various
phases, assisted in bibliographic and library work, and provided
translations of the chapters originally published in German, thus
far exceeding secretarial routine. Last but not least, my wife,
Maria von Bertalanffy, has to be thanked for her untiring help
and criticism when these essays were written. Without the en-
couragement of colleagues, too numerous to mention, the writer,
in the face of obstructions and obstacles, would hardly have per-
severed in the task of introducing and developing general sys-
tem theory.

                                                                               L.v.B.

University of Alberta
Edmonton (Canada)
March 1968

                                             ix
Acknowledgments

Most of the chapters in this volume have previously appeared,
Hometimes in modified form. The publication history is given
here for each chapter. The author wishes to thank the original
publishers of the articles for permission to include them in
this volume:

Chapter I: Written for this volume. (1967).

Chapter 2: "General System Theory," in Main Currents in Modern
               Thought, Volume II, #4, March 1955, pp. 75-83. Reprinted
               in General Systems, I (1956) 1-10; R. W. Taylor (ed.) ,
               Life, Language, Law: Essays in Honor of A. F. Bentley,
               Yellow Springs (Ohio), Antioch Press, 1957, pp. 58-78;

           J. D. Singer (ed.) , Human Behavior and International

               Politics, Chicago, Rand McNally & Co., 1965, pp. 20-31;

            N. J. Demerath III and R. A. Peterson (eds.), System,

               Change, and Confiict, Glencoe (Ill.), Free Press, 1967. Ad-
               ditions were taken from "Allgemeine Systemtheorie. Wege
               zu einer neuen Mathesis universalis," Deutsche Universi-
               tiitszeitung, 5/6 (1957) 8-12. Also in Italian, "La Teoria
               generale dei Sistemi," La Voce dell' America, 18-G and 2-H
                (1956-57), and French, "Histoire et methodes de la theorie
               generale des systemes," Atomes, 21 (1966) 100-104.

Chapter 3: Condensed from "Zu einer allgemeinen Systemlehre,"

Deutsche Zeitschrift fur Philosophie, 18, No. 3/4 (1945);

"An Outline of General System Theory," British Journal

of the Philosophy of Science. 1 (1950) 139-164; "Zu einer

allgemeinen Systemlehre." Biologia Generalis, 19 (1949)

114-129.      .

          xi
Chapter 4: "General System Theory. A Critical Review." General Sys·
                terns, 7 (1962), 1-20. Reprinted in W. Buckley (ed.) ,
               Modern Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist,
                Chicago, Aldine Publishing Co., 1968, pp. 11-30.

Chapter 5: "Der Organismus als physikalisches System betrachtet," Die
               Naturwissenschaften, 28 (1940) 521-531.

Chapter 6: "Das Modell des offenen Systems," Nova Acta Leopoldina,
                 (1969).

Chapter 7: "Basic Concepts in Quantitative Biology of Metabolism,"
               Helgoliinder Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen, 9
                (First International Symposium on Quantitative Biology of
                Metabolism) (1964) 5-37.

Chapter 8: Substance of lectures presented at the University of Western
                Ontario (London), University of California Medical School
                (San Francisco), University of Alberta (Edmonton, Cal-
                gary), etc., 1961-64.

Chapter 9: "General System Theory and Psychiatry," from Chapter 43
               of The American Handbook of Psychiatry, Vol. 3, edited by
                Silvano Arieti, © 1966 by Basic Books, Inc., Publishers,
                New York.

Chapter 10: "An Essay on the Relativity of Categories," Philosophy of

               Science, 22 (1955) 243-263. Reprinted in General Systems,
                7 (1962) 71-83.

Appendix "Vom Sinn und der Einheit der Naturwissenschaften. Aus
               einem Vortrag von Prof. Dr. Ludwig von Bertalanffy," Der
               Student (Wien), 2, No.7/8 (1947) 10-11.

                                             xii
                                              ..

Contents

Foreword ................. .                                    Vll

Acknowledgments                                                 xi

Introduction .........              .................           3

Systems Everywhere......                        ..............  3

On the History of Systems Theory............................ 10

Trends in Systems Theory ...................................... 17

2 The Meaning of General System Theory .,.                      30

The Quest for a General System Theory .                         30

Aims of General System Theory ......                 .............. 36

Closed and Open Systems: Limitations of

Conventional Physics " ......... ........... ............       39

Information and Entropy .. ...... .................................. 41

Causality and Teleology. ................................... 44

What Is Organization? ............................. .................. 46

General System Theory and the Unity of Science .... 48

General System Theory in Education: The

Production of Scientific Generalists.... .............. 49

Science and Society, ........................... ..             51

The Ultimate Precept: Man as the Individual ... 52

3 Some System Concepts in Elementary Mathematical

Consideration ............................................................. . 54

The System Concept ............................................... .. 54

Growth .............. ............... .. .............................. . 60

Competition ....              ........ ............ ............................. . 63

Wholeness, Sum, Mechanization, Centralization ... . 66

Finality ........................................................................... . 75

Types of Finality............ ......... ...................... . 77

Isomorphism in Science ................... ..                   80

The Unity of Science ...................... ..                  86

                              xiii
4 Advances in General System Theory ............ .        87

Approaches and Aims in Systems Science .. .               87

Methods in General Systems Research ..... .               94

Advances of General System Theory ..... .                 99

5 The Organism Considered as Physical System ............. . 120

The Organism as Open System .................. .          120

C...eneral Characteristics of Open

Chemical Systems .............. , ............... 124

Equifinality .................... .. ..................... . 131

Biological Applications             ... ,..................... . 134

6 The Model of Open System ........ . ...".. "... .. 139

The Living Machine and Its Limitations ....               139

Some Characteristics of Open Systems ....". 141

Open Systems in Biology ..                                145

Open Systems and Cybernetics                              149

Unsolved Problems ...                                     151

Conclusion ..                                             153

7 Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology .... ,...... "....... 155

Open Systems and Steady States . , . " .............. 156

Feedback and Homeostasis ..........                       160

Allometry and the Surface Rule                            163

Theory of Animal Growth ............ "......... ,.... ,...... 171

Summary                ....... ,., .... ,......................... ,.,", .... ,.. 184

8 The System Concept in the Sciences of Man."" .. " 186

The Organismic Revolution.".,.""",, .. , .... , 186

The Image of Man in Contemporary Thought                  188

System-Theoretical Re-orientation ... """ .... "...... ,, .... 192

Systems in the Social Sciences .. . ... "... "... ".....  194

A System-Theoretical Concept of History ."."".. 197

The Future in System-Theoretical Aspect "." ... ". 203

9 General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry .. 205

The Quandary of Modern Psychology .... " ........ 205

System Concepts in Psychopathology ..                     208

Conclusion ...... "..            ............... ".. "................. 220

10 The Relativity of Categories                           222

The Whorfian Hypothesis , .. " ..                         222

The Biological Relativity of Categories ".... ,...... ,...... 227

                       xiv
The Cultural Relativity of Categories ...................... 232
The Perspectivistic View ............................................ 239
Notes ................................................................................ 248

\ppendix: The Meaning and Unity of Science.                                   251

{eferences .................................................................  254

ill)l;gestions for Further Reading ....................................... 275

,ndex ........................................................................................ 279

X11
  1 Introduction

Systems Everywhere
   If someone were to analyze current notions and fashionable

catchwords, he would find "systems" high on the list. The con-
cept has pervaded all fields of science and penetrated into popular
thinking, jargon and mass media. Systems thinking plays a domi-
nant role in a wide range of fields from industrial enterprise
and armaments to esoteric topics of pure science. Innumerable
publications, conferences, symposia and courses are devoted to it.
Professions and jobs have appeared in recent years which, un-
known a short while ago, go under names such as systems design,
systems analysis, systems engineering and others. They are the
very nucleus of a new technology and technocracy; their practi-
tioners are the "new utopians" of our time (Boguslaw, 1965) who
-in contrast to the classic breed whose ideas remained between
the covers of books-are at work creating a New World, brave or
otherwise.

   The roots of this development are complex. One aspect is
the development from power engineering-that is, release of large
amounts of energy as in steam or electric machines-to control
engineering, which directs processes by low-power devices and
has led to computers and automation. Self-controlling machines
have appeared, from the humble domestic thermostat to the self·
steering missiles of World War II to the immensely improved
missiles of today. Technology has been led to think not in terms
4  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

of single machines but in those of "systems." A steam engine,
automobile, or radio receiver was within the competence of the
engineer trained in the respective specialty. But when it comes to
ballistic missiles or space vehicles, they have to be assembled from
components originating in heterogeneous technologies, mechan-
ical, electronic, chemical, etc.; relations of man and machine
come into play; and innumerable financial, economic, social and
political problems are thrown into the bargain. Again, air or
even automobile traffic are not just a matter of the number of
vehicles in operation, but are systems to be planned or arranged.
So innumerable problems are arising in production, commerce,
and armaments.

   Thus, a "systems approach" became necessary. A certain ob·
jective is given; to find ways and means for its realization requires
the systems specialist (or team of specialists) to consicler alterna-
tive solutions and to choose those promising optimization at
maximum efficiency and minimal cost in a tremendously complex
network of interactions. This requires elaborate techniques and
computers for solving problems far transcending the capacity of
an individual mathematician. Both the "hardware" of computers,
automation and cybernation, and the "software" of systems science
represent a new technology. It has been called the Second Indus-
trial Revolution and has developed only in the past few decades.

   These developments have not been limited to the industrial-
military complex. Politicians frequently ask for application of
the "systems approach" to pressing problems such as air and
water pollution, traffic congestion, urban blight, juvenile de-
linquency and organized crime, city planning (Wolfe, 1967),
etc., designating this a "revolutionary new concept" (Carter, 1966;
Boffey, 1967). A Canadian Premier (Manning, 1967) writes the
systems approach into his political platform saying that

   an interrelationship exists between all elements and con-
   stituents of society. The essential factors in public problems,
   issues, policies, and programs must always be considered and
   evaluated as interdependent components of a total system.

   These developments would be merely another of the many
facets of change in our contemporary technological society were
it not for a significant factor apt to be overlooked in the highly
sophisticated and necessarily specialized techniques of computer
science, systems engineering and related fields. This is not only
I ntraduction

" tendency in technology to make things bigger and better (or
IIltcrnatively, more profitable, destructive, or bDth). It is a change
In basic categories of thought of which the cDmplexities of modern
technology are only one-and pDssibly not the most important-
manifestatiDn. In 'One way or another, we are forced to deal with
mmplexities, with "wholes" or "systems," in all fields of knowl-
edge. This implies a basic re-orientatiDn in scientific thinking.

   An attempt tD summarize the impact of "systems" would not
he feasible and would pre-empt the considerations of this book.
A few examples, more or less arbitrarily chosen, must suffice to
outline the nature of the problem and cDnsequent re-orientation.
The reader shDuld excuse an egocentric touch in the qUDtations,
in view of the fact that the purpose of this book is to present
the authDr's viewpoint rather than a neutral review 'Of the field.

   In physics, it is well-known that in the enormous strides it
made in the past few decades, it also generated new prDblems-
or pDssibly a new kind of prDblem-perhaps most evident to
the laymen in the indefinite number 'Of SDme hundreds 'Of elemen-
tary particles for which at present physics can offer little rhyme
or reason. In the words of a noted representative (de-Shalit, 1966),
the further development 'Of nuclear physics "requires much ex-
perimental work, as well as the development of additional power-
ful methods for the handling 'Of systems with many, but not
infinitely many, particles." The same quest was expressed by A.
Szent-Gyorgyi (1964), the great physiolDgist, in a whimsical way:

      [When I joined the Institute fDr Advanced Study in Prince-
   ton] I did this in the hope that by rubbing elbows with those
   great atomic physicists and mathematicians I wDuld learn
   something abDut living matters. But as soon as I revealed that
   in any living system there are more than two electrons, the
   physicists would not speak to me. With all their computers
   they could nDt say what the third electron might do. The
   remarkable thing is that it knows exactly what to dD. So that
   little electron knDws something that all the wise men of Prince-
   tDn dDn't, and this can only be something very simple.

   And Bernal (1957), SDme years ago, fDrmulated the still-unsolved
prDblems thus:

     No one who knows what the difficulties are nov; believes that
  the crisis of physics is likely to be resolved by any simple trick
6  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   or modification of eXlstmg theories. Something radical is
   needed, and it will have to go far wider than physics. A new
   world outlook is being forged, but much experience and argu-
   ment will be needed before it can take a definitive form. It
   must be coherent, it must include and illuminate the new
   knowledge of fundamental particles and their complex fields,
   it must resolve the paradoxes of wave and particle, it must
   make the world inside the atom and the wide spaces of the
   universe equally intelligible. It must have a different dimen-
   sion from all previous world views, and include in itself an
   explanation of development and the origin of new things. In
   this it will fall naturally in line with the converging tendencies
   of the biological and social sciences in which a regular pattern
   blends with their evolutionary history.

   The triumph in recent years of molecular biology, the "break-
ing" of the genetic code, the consequent achievements in genetics,
evolution, medicine, cell physiology and many other fields, has
become common knowledge. But in spite of-or just because of-
the deepened insight attained by "molecular" biology, the neces-
sity of "organismic" biology has become apparent, as this writer
had advocated for some 40 years. The concern of biology is not
only at the physico-chemical or molecular level but at the higher
levels of living organization as well. As we shall discuss later
(p. 12), the demand has been posed with renewed strength in
consideration of recent facts and knowledge; but hardly an argu-
ment not previously discussed (von Bertalanffy, I 928a, 1932,
1949a, 1960) has been added.

   Again, the basic conception in psychology used to be the
"robot model." Behavior was to be explained by the mechanistic
stimulus-response (S-R) scheme; conditioning, according to the
pattern of animal experiment, appeared as the foundation of
human behavior; "meaning" was to be replaced by conditioned
response; specificity of human behavior to be denied, etc. Gestalt
psychology first made an inroad into the mechanistic scheme
some 50 years ago. More recently, many attempts toward a more
satisfactory "image of man" have been made and the system
concept is gaining in importance (Chapter 8); Piaget, for ex-
ample, "expressly related his conceptions to the general system
theory of Bertalanffy" (Hahn, 1967).
Introduction  7

  Perhaps even more than psychology, psychiatry has taken up
the systems viewpoint (e.g. Menninger. 1963; von Bertalanffy,
1966; Grinker, 1967; Gray et aI., in press). To quote from Grinker:

   Of the so-called global theories the one initially stated and
defined by Bertalanffy in 1947 under the title of "general sys-
tems theory" has taken hold.... Since then he has refined,
modified and applied his concepts, established a society for
general systems theory and published a General Systems Year-
book. Many social scientists but only a handful of psychiatrists
studied, understood or applied systems theory. Suddenly, under
the leadership of Dr. William Gray of Boston, a threshold was
reached so that at the 122nd annual meeting of the American
Psychiatric Association in 1966 two sessions were held at which
this theory was discussed and regular meetings for psychiatrists
were ensured for future participation in a development of this
"Unified Theory of Human Behavior." If there be a third
revolution (i.e. after the psychoanalytic and behavioristic), it is
in the development of a general theory (p. ix).

  A report of a recent meeting (American Psychiatric Association,
1967) draws a vivid picture:

   When a room holding 1,500 people is so jammed that
hundreds stand through an entire morning session, the subject
must be one in which the audience is keenly interested. This
was the situation at the symposium on the use of a general
systems theory in psychiatry which took place at the Detroit
meeting" of the American Psychiatric Association (Damude,
1967).

   The same in the social sciences. From the broad spectrum,
widespread confusion and contradictions of contemporary socio-
logical theories (Sorokin, 1928, 1966), one secure conclusion
emerges: that social phenomena must be considered as "systems"
-difficult and at present unsettled as the definition of socio-
cultural entities may be. There is

a revolutionary scientific perspective (stemming) from the
General Systems Research movement and (with a) wealth of
principles, ideas and insights that have already brought a
higher degree of scientific order and understanding to many
8  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   areas of biology, psychology and some physical sciences....
   Modern systems research can provide the basis of a framework
   more capable of doing justice to the complexities and dynamic
   properties of the socio-cultural system (Buckley, 1967).

   The course of events in our times suggests a similar conception
in history, including the consideration that, after all, history is
sociology in the making or in "longitudinal" study. It is the
same socio-cultural entities which sociology investigates in their
present state and history in their becoming.

   Earlier periods of history may have consoled themselves by
blaming atrocities and stupidities on bad kings, wicked dictators,
ignorance, superstition, material want and related factors. Con-
sequently, history was of the "who-did-what" kind-"idiographic,"
as it was technically known. Thus the Thirty-Years War was a
consequence of religious superstition and the rivalries of German
princes; Napoleon overturned Europe because of his unbridled
ambition; the Second World War could be blamed on the
wickedness of Hitler and the warlike proclivity of the Germans.

  We have lost this intellectual comfort. In a state of democracy,
universal education and general affluence, these previous excuses
for human atrocity fail miserably. Contemplating contemporary
history in the making, it is difficult to ascribe its irrationality and
bestiality solely to individuals (unless we grant them a super-
human-or subhuman-capacity for malice and stupidity). Rather,
we seem to be victims of "historical forces"-whatever this may
mean. Events seem to involve more than just individual decisions
and actions and to be determined more by socio-cultural "sys-
tems," be these prejudices, ideologies, pressure groups, social
trends, growth and decay of civilizations, or what not. We know
precisely and scientifically what the effects of pollution, waste of
natural resources, the population explosion, the armaments race,
etc., are going to be. We are told so every day by countless critics
citing irrefutable arguments. But neither national leaders nor
society as a whole seems to be able to do anything about it. If
we do not want a theistic explanation-Quem Deus perdere vult
dementat-we seem to follow some tragic historical necessity.

  'While realizing the vagueness of such concepts as civilization
and the shortcomings of "grand theories" like those of Spengler
and Toynbee, the question of regularities or laws of socio-cultural
systems makes sense though this does not necessarily mean his-
Introduction  9

torical inevitability according to Sir Isaiah Berlin. An historical
panorama like McNeill's The Rise of the West (1963), which in-
dicates his anti-Spenglerian position even in the title, nevertheless
is a story of historical systems. Such a conception penetrates into
seemingly outlying fields so that the view of the "process-school
of archaeology" is said to be "borrowed from Ludwig von
Bertalanffy's framework for the developing embryo, where systems
trigger behavior at critical junctures and, once they have done
so, cannot return to their original pattern" (Flannery, 1967).

   While sociology (and presumably history) deals with informal
organizations, another recent development is the theory of formal
organizations, that is, structures planfully instituted, such as
those of an army, bureaucracy, business enterprise, etc. This
theory is "framed in a philosophy which accepts the premise
that the only meaningful way to study organization is to study
it as a system," systems analysis treating "organization as a system
of mutually dependent variables"; therefore "modern organiza-
tion theory leads almost inevitably into a discussion of general
system theory" (Scott, 1963). In the words of a practitioner of
operational research,

      In the last two decades we have witnessed the emergence of
   the "system" as a key concept in scientific research. Systems, of
   course, have been studied for centuries, but something new
   has been added.... The tendency to study systems as an entity
   rather than as a conglomeration of parts is consistent with
   the tendency in contemporary science no longer to isolate
   phenomena in narrowly confined contexts, but rather to open
   interactions for examination and to examine larger and larger
   slices of nature. Under the banner of systems research (and
   its many synonyms) we have also witnessed a convergence of
   many more specialized contemporary scientific developments.
   . . . These research pursuits and many others are being inter-
   woven into a cooperative research effort involving an ever-
   widening spectrum of scientific and engineering disciplines.
   We are participating in what is probably the most compre-
  hensive effort to attain a synthesis of scientific knowledge yet
   made (Ackoff, 1959).

   In this way, the circle closes and we come back to those de-
velopments in contemporary technological society with which we
started. What emerges from these considerations-however sketchy
10  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

and superficial-is that in the gamut of modern sciences and life
new conceptualizations, new ideas and categories are required,
and that these, in one way or another, are centered about the
concept of "system." To quote, for a change, from a Soviet author:

  The elaboration of specific methods for the investigation of
systems is a general trend of present scientific knowledge, just
as for 19th century science the primary concentration of at-
tention to the elaboration of elementary forms and processes
in nature was characteristic (Lewada, in Hahn, 1967, p. 185).

   The dangers of this new development, alas, are obvious and
have often been stated. The new cybernetic world, according to
the psychotherapist Ruesch (1967) is not concerned with people
but with "systems"; man becomes replaceable and expendable.
To the new utopians of systems engineering, to use a phrase of
Boguslaw (1965), it is the "human element" which is precisely the
unreliable component of their creations. It either has to be
eliminated altogether and replaced by the hardware of computers,
self-regulating machinery and the like, or it has to be made as
reliable as possible, that is, mechanized, conformist, controlled
and standardized. In somewhat harsher terms, man in the Big
System is to be-and to a large extent has become-a moron,
button-pusher or learned idiot, that is, highly trained in some
narrow specialization but otherwise a mere part of the machine.
This conforms to a well-known systems principle, that of pro'-
gressive mechanization-the individual becoming ever more a
cogwheel dominated by a few privileged leaders, mediocrities and
mystifiers who pursue their private interests under a smokescreen
of ideologies (Sorokin, 1966, pp. 558ff).

   Whether we envisage the positive expansion of knowledge and
beneficent control of environment and society, or see in the
systems movement the arrival of Brave New World and 1984-it
deserves intensive study, and we have to come to terms with it.

On the History of Systems Theory

   As we have seen, there is a consensus in all major fields-
from subatomic physics to history-that a re-orientation of science
is due. Developments in modern technology parallel this trend.

   So far as can be ascertained, the idea of a "general system
III lroduction  ĄII

I ht~()ry" was first introduced by the present author prior to cy-
hrrnetics, systems engineering and the emergence of related fields.
The story of how he was led to this notion is briefly told else-
where in this book (pp. 89ft), but some amplification appears to
he in order in view of recent discussions.

   As with every new idea in science and elsewhere, the systems
C'OlIcept has a long history. Although the term "system" itself
was not emphasized, the history of this concept includes many il-
ItIHtrious names. As "natural philosophy," we may trace it back
10 Leibniz; to Nicholas of Cusa with his coincidence of opposites;
to the mystic medicine of Paracelsus; to Vico's and ibn-Kaldun's
vision of history as a sequence of cultural entities or "systems";
10 the dialectic of Marx and Hegel, to mention but a few names
l'!'Om a rich panoply of thinkers. The literary gourmet may re-
IlIcmber Nicholas of Cusa's De ludo globi (1463; d. von Ber-
talanfly, 1928b) and Hermann Hesse's Glasperlenspiel, both of
I hcm seeing the working of the world reflected in a cleverly
designed, abstract game.

   There had been a few preliminary works in the field of general
Nystem theory. Kohler's "physical gestalten" (1924) pointed in this
direction but did not deal with the problem in full generality,
restricting its treatment to gestalten in physics (and biological
and psychological phenomena presumably interpretable on this
hasis). In a later publication (1927), Kohler raised the postulate
of a system theory, intended to elaborate the most general
properties of inorganic compared to organic systems; to a degree,
this demand was met by the theory of open systems. Lotka's
classic (1925) came closest to the objective, and we are indebted
to him for basic formulations. Lotka indeed dealt with a general
mncept of systems (not, like Kohler's, restricted to systems of
physics). Being a statistician, however, with his interest lying
in population problems rather than in biological problems of
the individual organism, Lotka, somewhat strangely, conceived
communities as systems, while regarding the individual organism
as a sum of cells.

   Nevertheless, the necessity and feasibility of a systems approach
hecame apparent only recently. Its necessity resulted from the
fact that the mechanistic scheme of isolable causal trains and
meristic treatment had proved insufficient to deal with theoretical
problems, especially in the biosocial sciences, and with the prac-
12  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

tical problems posed by modern technology. Its feasibility resulted
from various new developments-theoretical, epistemological,
mathematical, etc.-which, although still in their beginnings, made
it progressively realizable.

   The present author, in the early 20's, became puzzled about
obvious lacunae in the research and theory of biology. The then
prevalent mechanistic approach just mentioned appeared to
neglect or actively deny just what is essential in the phenomena
of life. He advocated an organismic conception in biology which
emphasizes consideration of the organism as a whole or system,
and sees the main objective of biological sciences in the discovery
of the principles of organization at its various levels. The author's
first statements go back to 1925-26, while Whitehead's philosophy
of "organic mechanism" was published in 1925. Cannon's work
on homeostasis appeared in 1929 and 1932. The organismic con-
ception had its great precursor in Claude Bernard, but his work
was hardly known outside France; even now it awaits its full
evaluation (cf. Bernal, 1957, p. 960). The simultaneous appear-
ance of similar ideas independently and on different continents
was symptomatic of a new trend which, however, needed time
to become accepted.

   These remarks are prompted by the fact that in recent years
"organismic biology" has been re-emphasized by leading Ameri-
can biologists (Dubos, 1964, 1967; Dobzhansky, 1966; Commoner,
1961) without, however, mentioning the writer's much earlier
work, although this is duly recognized in the literature of Europe
and of the socialist countries (e.g., Ungerer, 1966; Blandino, 1960;
Tribifio, 1946; Kanaev, 1966; Kamaryt, 1961, 1963; Bendmann,
1963,1967; Afanasjew, 1962). It can be definitely stated that recent
discussions (e.g., Nagel, 1961; Hempel, 1965; Beckner, 1959;
Smith, 1966; Schaffner, 1967), although naturally referring to
advances of biology in the past 40 years, have not added any new
viewpoints in comparison to the author's work.

   In philosophy, the writer's education was in the tradition of
neopositivism of the group of Moritz Schlick which later became
known as the Vienna Circle. Obviously, however, his interest in
German mysticism, the historical relativism of Spengler and the
history of art, and similar unorthodox attitudes precluded his
becoming a good positivist. Stronger were his bonds with the
Berlin group of the "Society for Empirical Philosophy" of the
I" Irodut'liotl,

 1\lItO'K, in which the philosopher-physicist Hans Reichenbach, the
JlMy('hulogist A. Herzberg, the engineer Parseval (inventor of
dlrlglhle aircraft) were prominent.

   hI connection with experimental work on metabolism and
I(rtlwlh on the one hand, and an effort to concretize the organ-
1_lIlit program on the other, the theory of open systems was ad-
VIIII(:cd, based on the rather trivial fact that the organism happens
10 he an open system, but no theory existed at the time. The
IIrKI. presentation, which followed some tentative trials, is in-
dlldcd in this volume (Chapter 5). Biophysics thus appeared to
dt'lIland an expansion of conventional physical theory in the
way of generalization of kinetic principles and thermodynamic
Iheory, the latter becoming known, later on, as irreversible
I hcrmodynamics.

   But then, a further generalization became apparent. In many
phenomena in biology and also in the behavioral and social
Hdences, mathematical expressions and models are applicable.
These, obviously, do not pertain to the entities of physics and
chemistry, and in this sense transcend physics as the paragon of
"{''Xact sCience." (Incidentally, a series Abhandlungen zur exakten
lIioiogie, in succession of Schaxel's previous Abhandlungen zur
theoretischen Biologie, was inaugurated by the writer but stopped
during the war.) The structural similarity of such models and
their isomorphism in different fields became apparent; and just
those problems of order, organization, wholeness, teleology, etc.,
appeared central which were programmatically exclude<;l in
mechanistic science. This, then, was the idea of "general system
theory."

   The time was not favorable for such development. Biology
was understood to be identical with laboratory work, and
the writer had already gone out on a limb when publishing
Them'etische Biologie (1932), another field which has only recently
become academically respectable. Nowadays, when there are nu-
merous journals and publications in this discipline and model
building has become a fashionable and generously supported
indoor sport, the resistance to such ideas is hard to imagine.
Affirmation of the concept of general system theory, especially by
the late Professor Otto Potzl, well-known Vienna psychiatrist,
helped the writer to overcome his inhibitions and to issue a state-
ment (reproduced in Chapter 3 of this book). Again, fate in-
14  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

tervened. The paper (in Deutsche Zeitschrift fur Philosophie)
had reached the proof stage, but the issue to carry it was destroyed
in the catastrophe of the last war. After the war, general system
theory was presented in lectures (d. Appendix), amply discussed
with physicists (von Bertalanffy, 1948a) and discussed in lectures
and symposia (e.g., von Bertalanffy et al., 1951).

   The proposal of system theory was received incredulously as
fantastic or presumptuous. Either-it was argued-it was trivial
because the so-called isomorphisms were merely examples of the
truism that mathematics can be applied to all sorts of things, and
it therefore carried no more weight than the "discovery" that

+ 2 2 4 holds true for apples, dollars and galaxies alike; or it

was false and misleading because superficial analogies-as in the
famous simile of society as an "organism"-camoufiage actual
differences and so lead to wrong and even morally objectionable
conclusions. Or, again, it was philosophically and methodologi-
cally unsound because the alleged "irreducibility" of higher levels
to lower ones tended to impede analytical research whose success
was obvious in various fields such as in the reduction of chemistry
to physical principles, or of life phenomena to molecular biology.

   Gradually it was realized that such objections missed the point
of what systems theory stands for, namely, attempting scientific
interpretation and theory where previously there was none, and
higher generality than that in the special sciences. General sys-
tem theory responded to a secret trend in various disciplines. A
letter from K. Boulding, econqmist, dated 1953, well summarized
the situation:

   I seem to have come to much the same conclusion as you
have reached, though approaching it from the direction of
economics and the social sciences rather than from biology-
that there is a body of what I have been calling "general
empirical theory," or "general system theory" in your excellent
terminology, which is of wide applicability in many different
disciplines. I am sure there are many people all over the world
who have come to essentially the same position that we have,
but we are widely scattered and do not know each other, so
difficult is it to cross the boundaries of the disciplines.

   In the first year of the Center for Advanced Study in the Be-
havioral Sciences (Palo Alto), Boulding, the biomathematician
Introduction

A. Rapoport, the physiologist Ralph Gerard and the present
writer found themselves together. The project of a Society for
General System Theory was realized at the Annual Meeting of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science in
1954. The name was later changed into the less pretentious
"Society for General Systems Research," which is now an affiliate
of the AAAS and whose meetings have become a well-attended
fixture of the AAAS conventions. Local groups of the Society
were established at various centers in the United States and
subsequently in Europe. The original program of the Society
needed no revision:

      The Society for General Systems Research was organized in
   1954 to further the development of theoretical systems which
   are applicable to more than one of the traditional departments
   of knowledge. Major functions are to: (1) investigate the
   isomorphy of concepts, laws, and models in various fields, and
   to help in useful transfers from one field to another; (2) en-
   courage the development of adequate theoretical models in
   the fields which lack them; (3) minimize the duplication of
   theoretical effort in different fields; (4) promote the unity of
  science through improving communication among specialists.

  The Society's Yearbooks, General Systems, under the efficient
editorship of A. Rapoport, have since served as its organ. Inten-
tionally General Systems does not follow a rigid policy but rather
provides a place for working papers of different intention as
seems to be appropriate in a field which needs ideas and explora-
tion. A large number of investigations and publications sub-
stantiated the trend in various fields; a journal, Mathematical
Systems Theory, made its appearance.

   Meanwhile another development had taken place. Norbert
Wiener's Cybernetics appeared in 1948, resulting from the then
recent developments of computer technology, information theory,
and self-regulating machines. It was again one of the coincidences
occurring when· ideas are in the aIr that three fundamental con-
tributions appeared at about the same time: Wiener's Cybernetics
(1948), Shannon and Weaver's information theory (1949) and
von Neumann and Morgenstern's game theory (1947). Wiener
carried the cybernetic, feedback and information concepts far
beyond the fields of technology and generalized it in the biological
16  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

and social realms. It is true that cybernetics was not without
precursors. Cannon's concept of homeostasis became a corner-
stone in these considerations. Less well-known, detailed feedback
models of physiological phenomena had been elaborated by the
German physiologist Richard Wagner (1954) in the 1920's, the
Swiss Nobel prize winner W. R. Hess (1941, 1942) and in Erich
von Holst's ReafJerenzprinzip. The enormous popularity of cy-
bernetic.s in science, technology and general publicity is, of
course, due to Wiener and his proclamation of the Second Indus-
trial Revolution.

   The close correspondence of the two movements is well shown
in a programmatic statement of L. Frank introducing a cyber-
netics conference:

   The concepts of purposive behavior and teleology have long
been associated with a mysterious, self-perfecting or goal-seeking
capacity or final cause, usually of superhuman or super-natural
origin. To move forward to the study of events, scientific think-
ing had to reject these beliefs in purpose and these concepts
of teleological operations for a strictly mechanistic and de-
terministic view of nature. This mechanistic conception became
firmly established with the demonstration that the universe
WaS based on the operation of anonymous particles moving at
random, in a disorderly fashion, giving rise, by their multi-
plicity, to order and regularity of a statistical nature, as in
classical physics and gas laws. The unchallenged success of
these concepts and methods in physics and astronomy, and
later in chemistry, gave biology and physiology their major
orientation. This approach to problems of organisms was rein-
forced by the analytical preoccupation of the Western European
culture and languages. The basic assumptions of our traditions
and the persistent implications of the language we use almost
compel us to approach everything we study as composed of
separate, discrete parts or factors which we must try to isolate
and identify as potent causes. Hence, we derive our preoc-
cupation with the study of the relation of two variables. We
are witnessing today a search for new approaches, for new and
more comprehensive concepts and for methods capable of
dealing with the large wholes of organisms and personalities.
The concept of teleological mechanisms, however it may be
Introduction

   expressed in different terms, may be viewed as an attempt to
   escape from these older mechanistic formulations that now
   appear inadequate, and to provide new and more fruitful con-
   ceptions and more effective methodologies for studying self-
   regulating processes, self-orientating systems and organisms, and
   self·directing personalities. Thus, the terms feedback, servo-
   mechanisms, circular systems, and circular processes may be
   viewed as different but equivalent expressions of much the
   same basic conception. (Frank et ai., 1948, condensed).

   A review of the development of cybernetics in teChnology and
science would exceed the scope of this book, and is unnecessary
in view of the extensive literature of the field. However, the
present historical survey is appropriate because certain misunder-
standings and misinterpretations have appeared. Thus Buckley
(1967, p. 36) states that "modern Systems Theory, though seem-
ingly springing de novo out of the last war effort, can be seen
as a culmination of a broad shift in scientific perspective striving
for dominance over the last few centuries." Although the second
part of the sentence is true, the first is not; systems theory did
not "spring out of the last war effort," but goes back much
further and had roots quite different from military hardware
and related technological developments. Neither is there an
"emergence of system theory from recent developments in the
analysis of engineering systems" (Shaw, 1965) except in a special
sense of the word.

   Systems theory also is frequently identified with cybernetics
and control theory. This again is incorrect. Cybernetics, as the
theory of control mechanisms in technology and nature and
founded on the concepts of information and feedback, is but a
part of a general theory of systejIls; cybernetic systems are a
special case, however important, of systems showing self-regulation.

Trends in Systems Theory

   At a time when any novelty, however trivial, is hailed as being
revolutionary, one is weary of using this label for scientific de-
velopments. Miniskirts and long hair being called teenage revo-
lution, and any new styling of automobiles or drug introduced
by the pharmaceutical industry being so announced, the word is
18  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

an advertising slogan hardly fit for serious consideration. It can,
however, be used in a strictly technical sense, i.e., "scientific
revolutions" can be identified by certain diagnostic criteria.

   Following Kuhn (1962), a scientific revolution is defined by the
appearance of new conceptual schemes or "paradigms." These
bring to the fore aspects which previously were not seen or per-
ceived, or even suppressed in "normal" science, i.e., science
generally accepted and practiced at the time. Hence there is a
shift in the problems noticed and investigated and a change of the
rules of scientific practice, comparable to the switch in perceptual
gestalten in psychological experiments, when, e.g., the same
figure may be seen as two faces vs. cup, or as duck vs. rabbit.
Understandably, in such critical phases emphasis is laid on
philosophical analysis which is not felt necessary in periods of
growth of "normal" science. The early versions of a new paradigm
are mostly crude, solve few problems, and solutions given for
individual problems are far from perfect. There is a profusion
and competition of theories, each limited with respect to the
number of problems covered, and elegant solution of those taken
into account. Nevertheless, the new paradigm does cover new
problems, especially those previously rejected as "metaphysical".

   These criteria were derived by Kuhn from a study of the
"classical" revolutions in physics and chemistry, but they are an
excellent description of the changes brought about by organismic
and systems concepts, and elucidate both their merits and limita-
tions. Especially and not surprisingly, systems theory comprises
a number of approaches different in style and aims.

   The system problem is essentially the problem of the limita-
tions of analytical procedures in science. This used to be ex-
pressed by half-metaphysical statements, such as emergent evolu-
tion or "the whole is more than a sum of its parts," but has a
clear operational meaning. "Analytical procedure" means that an
entity investigated be resolved into, and hence can be constituted
or reconstituted from, the parts put together, these procedures
being understood both in their material and conceptual sense.
This is the basic principle of "classical" science, which can be
circumscribed in different ways: resolution into isolable causal
trains, seeking for "atomic" units in the various fields of science,
etc. The progress of science has shown that these principles of
Introduction

classical science-first enunciated by Galileo and Descartes-are
highly successful in a wide realm of phenomena.

   Application of the analytical procedure depends on two condi-
tions. The first is that interactions between "parts" be non-
existent or weak enough to be neglected for certain research pur-
poses. Only under this condition, can the parts be "worked out,"
actually, logically, and mathematically, and then be "put to-
gether." The second condition is that the relations describing the
behavior of parts be linear; only then is the condition of sum-
mativity given, i.e., an equation describing the behavior of the
total is of the same form as the equations describing the behavior
of the parts; partial processes can be superimposed to obtain the
total process, etc.

   These conditions are not fulfilled in the entities called systems,
i.e., consisting of parts "in interaction." The prototype of their
description is a set of simultaneous differential equations (pp.
55ff.), which are nonlinear in the general case. A system or "or-
ganized complexity" (p. 34) may be circumscribed by the existence
of "strong interactions" (Rapoport, 1966) or interactions which
are "nontrivial" (Simon, 1965), i.e., nonlinear. The method-
ological problem of systems theory, therefore, is to provide for
problems which, compared with the analytical-summative ones
of classical science, are of a more general nature.

   As has been said, there are various approaches to deal with
such problems. We intentionally use the somewhat loose ex-
pression "approaches" because they are logically inhomogeneous,
represent different conceptual models, mathematical techniques,
general points of view, etc.; they are, however, in accord in being
"systems theories." Leaving aside approaches in applied systems
research, such as systems engineering, operational research, linear
and nonlinear programming, etc., the more important approaches
are as follows. (For a good survey, d. Drischel, 1968).

  "Classical" system theory applies classical mathematics, i.e.,
calculus. Its aim is to state principles which apply to systems in
general or defined subclasses (e.g., closed and open systems), to
provide techniques for their investigation and description, and
to apply these to concrete cases. Owing to the generality of such
description, it may be stated that certain formal properties will
apply to any entity qua system (or open system, or hierarchical
20                                             GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

system, etc.), even when its particular nature, parts, relations,
etc., are unknown or not investigated. Examples include general-
ized principles of kinetics applicable, e.g., to populations of
molecules or biological entities, i.e., to chemical and ecological
systems; diffusion, such as diffusion equations in physical chem-
istry and in the spread of rumors; application of steady state and
statistical mechanics models to traffic flow (Gazis, 1967); allometric
analysis of biological and social systems.

   Computerization and simulation. Sets of simultaneous differen-
tial equations as a way to "model" or define a system are, if
linear, tiresome to solve even in the case of a few variables; if
nonlinear, they are unsolvable except in special cases (Table 1.1)

                                      Table I.l

    Classification of Mathematical Problems'" and Their Ease of
         Solution by Analytical Methods. After Franks, 1967.

                    linear Equations                  Nonlinear Equations

               One  Several    Many            One    Sc\"1:Ial Many
Equation Equation   Equations
                               Equations Equation Equations Equations

Algebraic Tri~ial   Easy       EssentiaJly Very       Very       Impossible
                               impoSSl'blc difficult  diIIicult

Ordinary Easy       DifIicult  Essentially Very       Impossible Impossible
differential                   impossible diIIkult

Partial DifIicult   Essentially Impossible Impossible Impossible Impossible
differential        impossible

    · Courtesy of E1cctrnnic Associates, Inc.

For this reason, computers have opened a new approach in sys-
tems research; not only by way of facilitation of calculations
which otherwise would exceed available time and energy and by
replacement of mathematical ingenuity by routine procedures,
but also by opening up fields where no mathematical theory or
ways of solution exist. Thus systems far exceeding conventional
mathematics can be computerized; on the other hand, actual
laboratory experiment can be replaced by computer simulation,
the model so developed then to be checked by experimental data.
In such way, for example, B. Hess has calculated the fourteen-
step reaction chain of glycolysis in the cell in a model of more
Introduction

than 100 nonlinear differential equations. Similar analyses are
routine in economics, market research, etc.

  Compartment theory. An aspect of systems which may be
listed separately because of the high sophistication reached in
the field is compartment theory (Rescigno and Segre, 1966), i.e.,
the system consists of subunits with certain boundary conditions
between which transport processes take place. Such compartment
systems may have, e.g., "catenary" or "mammillary" structure
(chain of compartments or a central compartment communicat-
ing with a number of peripheral ones). Understandably, mathe-
matical difficulties become prohibitive in the case of three- or
multicompartment systems. Laplace transforms and introduction
of net and graph theory make analysis possible.

  Set the01Y. The general formal properties of systems, dosed
and open systems, etc., can be axiomatized in terms of set theory
(Mesarovic, 1964; Maccia, 1966). In mathematical elegance this
approach compares favorably with the cruder and more special
formulations of "classical" system theory. The connections of
axiomatized systems theory (or its present beginnings) with actual
systems problems are somewhat tenuous.

  Graph theory. Many systems problems concern structural or
topologic properties of systems, rather than quantitative relations.
Some approaches are available in this respect. Graph theory,
especially the theory of directed graphs (digraphs), elaborates
relational structures by representing them in a topological space.
It has been applied to relational aspects of biology (Rashevsky,
1956, 1960; Rosen, 1960). Mathematically, it is connected with
matrix algebra; modelwise, with compartment theory of systems
containing partly "permeable" subsystems, and from here with
the theory of open systems.

  Net theory, in its turn, is connected with set, graph, compart-
ment, etc., theories and is applied to such systems as nervous
networks (e.g., Rapoport, 1949--50).

  Cybernetics is a theory of control systems based on communica-
tion (transfer of information) between system and environment
and within the system, and control (feedback) of the system's
function in regard to environment. As mentioned and to be dis-
cussed further, the model is of wide application but should not
be identified with "systems theory" in general. In biology and
22  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

other basic sciences, the cybernetic model is apt to describe the
formal structure of regulatory mechanisms, e.g., by block and
flow diagrams. Thus the regulatory structure can be recognized,
even when actual mechanisms remain unknown and undescribed,
and the system is a "black box" defined only by input and out-
put. For similar reasons, the same cybernetic scheme may apply
to hydraulic, electric, physiological, etc., systems. The highly
elaborate and sophisticated theory of servomechanism in tech-
nology has been applied to natural systems only in a limited
extent (d. Bayliss, 1966; Kalmus, 1966; Milsum, 1966).

   Information theory, in the sense of Shannon and ,Veaver
(1949), is based on the concept of information, defined by an
expression isomorphic to negative entropy of thermodynamics.
Hence the expectation that information may be used as measure
of organization (d. p. 42; Quastler, 1955). While information
theory gained importance in communication engineering, its ap-
plications to science have remained rather unconvincing (E.N.
Gilbert, 1966). The relationship between information and or-
ganization, information theory and thermodynamics, remains a
major problem (d. pp. 151ff.).

   Theory of automata (see Minsky, 1967) is the theory of abstract
automata, with input, output, possibly trial-and-error and learn-
ing. A general model is the Turing machine (1936). Expressed in
the simplest way a Turing automaton is an abstract machine
capable of imprinting (or deleting) "I" and "0" marks on a tape
of infinite length. It can be shown that any process of whatever
complexity can be simulated by a machine, if this process can be
expressed in a finite number of logical operations. Whatever is
possible logically (i.e., in an algorithmic symbolism) also can be
construed-in principle, though of course by no means always in
practice-by an automaton, i.e., an algorithmic machine.

   Game theory (von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947) is a
different approach but may be ranged among systems sciences
because it is concerned with the behavior of supposedly "rational"
players to obtain maximal gains and minimal losses by appropri-
ate strategies against the other player (or nature). Hence it con-
cerns essentially a "system" of antagonistic "forces" with speci-
fications.

  Decision theory is a mathematical theory concerned with choices
among alternatives.
Introduction  23

   Queuing theory concerns optimization of arrangements under
conditions of crowding.

   Inhomogeneous and incomplete as it is, confounding models
(e.g., open system, feedback circuit) with mathematical techniques
(e.g., set, graph, game theory), such an enumeration is apt to
show that there is an array of approaches to investigate systems,
including powerful mathematical methods. The point to be reit-
erated is that problems previously not envisaged, not manageable,
or considered as being beyond science or purely philosophical are
progressively explored.

   Naturally, an incongruence between model and reality often
exists. There are highly elaborate and sophisticated mathematical
models, but it remains dubious how they can be applied to the
concrete case; there are fundamental problems for which no
mathematical techniques are available. Disappointment of over-
extended expectations has occurred. Cybernetics, e.g., proved its
impact not only in technology but in basic sciences, yielding
models for concrete phenomena and bringing teleological phe-
nomena-previously tabooed-into the range of scientifically legiti-
mate problems; but it did not yield an all-embracing explanation
or grand "world view," being an extension rather than a replace-
ment of the mechanistic view and machine theory (d. Bronowski,
1964). Information theory, highly developed mathematically,
proved disappointing in psychology and sociology. Game theory
was hopefully applied to war and politics; but one hardly feels
that it has led to an improvement of political decisions and the
state of the world; a failure not unexpected when considering
how little the powers that be resemble the "rational" players of
game theory. Concepts and models of equilibrium, homeostasis,
adjustment, etc., are suitable for the maintenance of systems, but
inadequate for phenomena of change, differentiation, evolution,
negentropy, production of improbable states, creativity, building-
up of tensions, self-realization, emergence, etc.; as indeed Cannon
realized when he acknowledged, beside homeostasis, a "hetero-
stasis" including phenomena of the latter nature. The theory of
open systems applies to a wide range of phenomena in biology
(and technology), but a warning is necessary against its incautious
expansion to fields for which its concepts are not made. Such
limitations and lacunae are only what is to be expected in a
field hardly older than twenty or thirty years. In the last resort,
24  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

disappointment results from making what is a useful model in
certain respects into some metaphysical reality and "nothing-but"
philosophy, as has happened many times in intellectual history.

   The advantages of mathematical models-unambiguity, pos-
sibility of strict deduction, verifiability by observed data-are
well known. This does not mean that models formulated in
ordinary language are to be despised or refused.

   A verbal model is better than no model at all, or a model which,
because it can be formulated mathematically, is forcibly imposed
upon and falsifies reality. Theories of enormous influence such
as psychoanalysis were unmathematical or, like the theory of
selection, their impact far exceeded mathematical constructions
which came only later and cover only partial aspects and a
small fraction of empirical data.

   Mathematics essentially means the existence of an algorithm
which is much more precise than that of ordinary language. His-
tory of science attests that expression in ordinary language often
preceded mathematical formulation, i.e., invention of an algo-
rithm. Examples come easily to mind: the evolution from count-
ing in words to Roman numerals (a semiverbal, clumsy, half-
algorithm) to Arabic notation with position value; equations,
from verbal formulation to rudimentary symbolism handled with
virtuosity (but difficult for us to follow) by Diophantus and
other founders of algebra, to modern notation; theories like
those of Darwin or of economics which only later found a (par-
tial) mathematical formulation. It may be preferable first to have
some nonmathematical model with its shortcomings but express-
ing some previously unnoticed aspect, hoping for future develop-
ment of a suitable algorithm, than to start with premature
mathematical models following known algorithms and, therefore,
possibly restricting the field of vision. Many developments in
molecular biology, theory of selection, cybernetics and other fields
showed the blinding effects of what Kuhn calls "normal" science,
i.e., monolithically accepted conceptual schemes.

   Models in ordinary language therefore have their place in
systems theory. The system idea retains its value even where it
cannot be formulated mathematically, or remains a "guiding
idea" rather than being a mathematical construct. For example,
we may not have satisfactory system concepts in sociology; the
mere insight that social entities are systems rather than sums
III froduction  ~ 25

III' social atoms, or that history consists of systems (however ill
IIrlined) called civilizations obeying principles general to systems,
IlIlplies a reorientation in the fields concerned.

  As can be seen from the above survey, there are, within the

"Ky,~tems approach," mechanistic and organismic trends and
lIIodels, trying to master systems either by "analysis," "linear
(Including circular) causality," "automata," or else by "whole-
uC'ss," "interaction," "dynamics" (or what other words may be
IIs(~d to circumscribe the difference). ''''hile these models are not
lIIulually exclusive and the same phenomena may even be ap-
/,I'OHched by different models (e.g., "cybernetic" or "kinetic" con-
n'pl~; d. Locker, 1964), it can be asked which point of view is the
lIIoregeneral and fundamental one. In general terms, this is a
'Pl(:,~tion to be put to the Turing machine as a general automaton.

  One consideration to the point (not, so far as we have seen,
Ir('ated in automata theory) is the problem of "immense" num-
IlI'rs. The fundamental statement of automata theory is that
happenings that can be defined in a finite number of "words"
('1111 be realized by an automaton (e.g., a formal neural network
nrler McCulloch and Pitts, or a Turing machine) (von Neumann,
I!I[) I). The question lies in the term "finite." The automaton
1'0111, by definition, realize a finite series of events (however large),
hllt not an infinite one. However, what if the number of steps
1t'(lllired is "immense," i.e., not infinite, but for example tran-
HCt'lItiing the number of particles in the universe (estimated to be
or the order 108°) or of events possible in the time span of the
ulJiverse or some of its subunits (according to Elsasser's, 1966,
proposal, a number whose logarithm is a large number)? Such
illlmense numbers appear in many system problems with ex-
ponentials, factorials and other explosively increasing functions.
'I 'hey are encountered in systems even of a moderate number
or components with strong (nonnegligible) interactions (d.
Ashby, 1964). To "map" them in a Turing machine, a tape of
"immense" length would be required, i.e., one exceeding not
only practical but physical limitations.

  Consider, for a simple example, a directed graph of N points
(Rapoport, 1959b). Between each pair an arrow may exist or may
lIot exist (two possibilities). There are therefore 2N(N~1) different
ways to connect N points. If N is only 5, there are over a million
ways to connect the points. With N 20, the number of ways ex-
:.W  GEc-1ERAL SYSTEM THEORY

ceeds the estimated number of atoms in the universe. Similar
problems arise, e.g., with possible connections between neurons
(estimated of the order of 10 billion in the human brain) and
with the genetic code (Repge, 1962). In the code, there is a
minimum of 20 "words" (nucleotide triplets) spelling the twenty
amino acids (actually 64); the code may contain some millions
of units. This gives 201,000,000 possibilities. Supposing the La-
placean spirit is to find out the functional value of every combi-
nation; he would have to make such number of probes, but there
are only 1080 atoms and organisms in the universe. Let us presume
(Repge, 1962) that 1030 cells are present on the earth at a certain
point of time. Further assuming a new cell generation every
minute would give, for an age of the earth of 15 billion years
(1016 minutes), 1046 cells in total. To be sure to obtain a maximum
number, 1020 life-bearing planets may be assumed. Then, in the
whole universe, there certainly would be no more than 1066 living
beings-which is a great number but far from being "immense."
The estimate can be made with different assumptions (e.g., num-
ber of possible proteins or enzymes) but with essentially the
same result.

   Again, according to Hart (1959), human invention can be
conceived as new combinations of previously existing elements.
If so, the opportunity for new inventions will increase roughly
as a function of the number of possible permutations and com-
binations of available elements, which means that its increase
will be a factorial of the number of elements. Then the rate of
acceleration of social change is itself accelerating so that in many
cases not a logarithmic but a log-log acceleration will be found
in cultural change. Hart presents interesting curves showing
that increases in human speed, in killing areas of weapons, in
life expectation, etc., actually followed such expression, i.e., the
rate of cultural growth is not exponential or compound interest,
but is super-acceleration in the way of a log-log curve. In a general
way, limits of automata will appear if regulation in a system is
directed not against one or a limited number of disturbances,
but against "arbitrary" disturbances, i.e., an indefinite number
of situations that could not possibly have been "foreseen"; this is
widely the case in embryonic (e.g., experiments of Driesch) and
neural (e.g., experiments of Lashley) regulations. Regulation here
results from interaction of many components (d. discussion in
Introduction

Jeffries, 1951, pp. 32ff.). This, as von Neumann himself conceded,
seems connected with the "self-restoring" tendencies of organismic
as contrasted to technological systems; expressed in more modern
terms, with their open-system nature which is not provided even
in the abstract model of automaton such as a Turing machine.

   It appears therefore that, as vitalists like Driesch have em-
phasized long ago, the mechanistic conception, even taken in the
modern and generalized form of a Turing automaton, founders
with regulations after "arbitrary" disturbances, and similarly in
happenings where the number of steps required is "immense" in
the sense indicated. Problems of realizability appear even apart
from the paradoxes connected with infinite sets.

   The above considerations pertain particularly to a concept or
complex of concepts which indubitably is fundamental in the
general theory of systems: that of hierarchic order. We presently
"see" the universe as a tremendous hierarchy, from elementary
particles to atomic nuclei, to atoms, molecules, high-molecular
compounds, to the wealth of structures (electron and light-
microscopic) between molecules and cells (Weiss, 1962b), to cells,
organisms and beyond to supra-individual organizations. One
attractive scheme of hierarchic order (there are others) is that of
Boulding (Table 1.2). A simihu hierarchy is found both in "struc-
tures" and in "functions." In the last resort, structure (i.e., order
of parts) and function (order of processes) may be the very same
thing: in the physical world matter dissolves into a play of
energies, and in the biological world structures are the expres"
sion of a flow of processes. At present, the system of physical
laws relates mainly to the realm between atoms and molecules
(and their summation in macrophysics), which obviously is a
slice of a much broader spectrum. Laws of organization and
organizational forces are insufficiently known in the subatomic
and the supermolecular realms. There are inroads into both the
subatomic world (high energy physics) and the supermolecular
(Physics of high molecular compounds); but these are apparently
at the beginnings. This is shown, on the one hand, by the present
confusion of elementary particles, on the other, by the present
la<;k of physical understanding of structures seen under the
electronmicroscope and the lack of a "grammar" of the genetic
code (d. p. 153).

   A general theory of hierarchic order obviously will be a main-
28                                  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

stay of general systems theory. Principles of hierarchic order can
be stated in verbal language (Koestler, 1967; in press); there are
semimathematical ideas (Simon, 1965) connected with matrix
theory, and formulations in terms of mathematical logic (Woodger,
1930-31). In graph theory hierarchic order is expressed by the
"tree," and relational aspects of hierarchies can be represented in
this way. But the problem is much broader and deeper: The
question of hierarchic order is intimately connected with those
of differentiation, evolution, and the measure of organization
which does not seem to be expressed adequately in terms either
of energetics (negative entropy) or of information theory (bits)
(d. pp. 150ff.). In the last resort, as mentioned, hierarchic order
and dynamics may be the very same, as Koestler has nicely ex-
pressed in his simile of "The Tree and the Candle."

   Thus there is an array of system models, more or less progressed
and elaborate. Certain concepts, models and principles of general
systems theory, such as hierarchic order, progressive differentia-
tion, feedback, systems characteristics defined by set and graph
theory, etc., are applicable broadly to material, psychological and
sociocultural systems; others, such as open system defined by the
exchange of matter, are limited to certain subclasses. As practice
in applied systems analysis shows, diverse system models will
have to be applied according to the nature of the case and
operational criteria.

                                              Table 1.2

       An Informal Survey of Main Levels in the Hierarchy of Systems.
                        Partly in pursuance in Boulding, '1956b

LEVEL              DESCRIPTION AND                      THEORY AND
                      EXAMPLES                          MODELS

Static structures  Atoms, molecules, crystals,          E.g. structural formulas
Clock works        biological structures from           of chemistry; crystallogra-
                   the electron-microscopic to          phy; anatomical
                   the macroscopic level                descri ptions

                   Clocks, conventional                 Conventional physics such
                   machines in general,                 as laws of mechanics
                   solar systems                        (Newtonian and
                                                        Einsteinian) and others
Control mechanisms ThermOstat, servo-
                               mechanisms. homeostatic  Cybernetics; feedback and
                               mechanism in organisms   information theory
Introduction                                                        29

LEVEL             DESCIUl'TION AND             THEORY AND
                     EXAMl'LES                 MODELS

Open systems      Flame, cells and organisms   (a) Expansion of physical
                  in general                        theory to systems
                                                    maintaining them-
                                                    selves in flow of
                                                    matter (metabolism).

                                               (b) Information storage
                                                    in genetic code
                                                     (DNA) .

                                               Connection of (a) and
                                               (b) presently unclear

Lower organisms   "Plant-like" organisms:      Theory and models
                  Increasing differentiation   almost lacking
                  of system (so-called "divi-
                  sion of labor" in the
                  organism); distinction of
                  reproduction and func-
                  tional individual ("germ
                  track and soma")

Animals           Increasing importance of     Beginnings in automata
                  traffic in information       theory (S-R relations),
                  (evolution of receptors,     feedback (regulatory
                  nervous systems) ; learn-    phenomena) , autonomous
                  ing; beginnings of con-      behavior (relaxation
                  sciousness                   oscillations). etc.

Man               Symbolism: past and          Incipient theory of

                  future, self and world,      symbolism

                  self-awareness, etc., as

                  consequences; communica-

                  tion by language, etc.

Sodo-cul tural    Populations of organisms     Statistical and possibly
  systems         (humans included) ;          dynamic laws in popula-
                  symbol-determined com-       tion dynamics. sociology.
                  munities (cultures) in       economics, possibly
                  man only                     history.
                                               Beginnings of a theory
                                               of cultural systems.

Symbolic systems  Language, logic,             Algorithms of symbols
                  mathematics, sciences,       (e.g. mathematics,
                  arts, morals, etc.           grammar) ; "rules of the
                                               game" such as in visual
                                               arts, music, etc.

NB.-This survey is impressionistic and intuitive with no claim for logical
rigor. Higher levels as a rule presuppose lower ones (e.g. life phenomena
those at the physico-chemical level, socio-cultural phenomena the level of
human activity, etc.); but the relation of levels requires clarification in each
case (d. problems such as open system and genetic code as apparent pre-
requisites of "life"; relation of "conceptual" to "real" systems, etc.). In this
sense, the survey suggests both the limits of reductionism and the gaps
in actual knowledge.
  2 The Meaning of

        General System Theory

The Quest for a General System Theory
   Modern science is characterized by its ever-increasing specializa-

tion, necessitated by the enormous amount of data, the complexity
of techniques and of theoretical structures within every field.
Thus science is split into innumerable disciplines continually
generating new subdisciplines. In consequence, the physicist, the
biologist, the psychologist and the social scientist are, so to speak,
encapsulated in their private -q,niverses, and it is difficult to get
word from one cocoon to the other.

   This, however, is opposed by another remarkable aspect. Sur-
veying the evolution of modern science, we encounter a surprising
phenomenon. Independently of each other, similar problems and
conceptions have evolved in widely different fields.

   It was the aim of classical physics eventually to resolve natural
phenomena into a play of elementary units governed by "blind"
laws of nature. This was expressed in the ideal of the Laplacean
spirit which, from the position and momentum of particles, can
predict the state of the universe at any point in time. This
mechanistic view was not altered but rather reinforced when
deterministic laws in physics were replaced by statistical laws.
According to Boltzmann's derivation of the second principle of
thermodynamics, physical events are directed toward states of
maximum probability, and physical laws, therefore, are essentially
The Meaning of General System Theory  ,.  31

"laws of disorder," the outcome of unordered, statistical events.
In contrast to this mechanistic view, however, problems of whole-
ness, dynamic interaction and organization have appeared in the
various branches of modern physics. In the Heisenberg relation
and quantum physics, it became impossible to resolve phenomena
into local events; problems of order and organization appear
whether the question is the structure of atoms, the architecture
of proteins, or interaction phenomena in thermodynamics. Simi-
larly biology, in the mechanistic conception, saw its goal in the
resolution of life phenomena into atomic entities and partial
processes. The living organism was resolved into cells, its ac-
tivities into physiological and ultimately physicochemical proc-
esses, behavior into unconditioned and conditioned reflexes, the
substratum of heredity into particulate genes, and so forth. In
contradistinction, the organismic conception is basic for modern
biology. It is necessary to study not only parts and processes in
isolation, but also to solve the decisive problems found in the
organization and order unifying them, resulting from dynamic
interaction of parts, and making the behavior of parts different
when studied in isolation or within the whole. Again, similar
trends appeared in psychology. While classical association psy-
chology attempted to resolve mental phenomena into elementary
units-psychological atoms as it were-such as elementary sensa·
tions and the like, gestalt psychology showed the existence and
primacy of psychological wholes which are not a summation of
elementary units and are governed by dynamic laws. Finally, in
the social sciences the concept of society as a sum of individuals
as social atoms, e.g., the model of Economic Man, was replaced
by the tendency to consider society, economy, nation as a whole
superordinated to its parts. This implies the great problems of
planned economy, of the deification of nation and state, but also
reflects new ways of thinking.

   This parallelism _of general cognitive principles in different
fields is even more impressive when one considers the fact that
those developments took place in mutual independence and
mostly without any knowledge of work and research in other
fields.

   There is another important aspect of modern science. Up to
recent times, exact science, the corpus of laws of nature, was
almost identical with theoretical physics. Few attempts to state
                                                                  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

exact laws in nonphysical fields have gained recognition. How·
ever, the impact of and progress in the biological, behavioral and
social sciences seem to make necessary an expansion of our
conceptual schemes in order to allow for systems of laws in fields
where application of physics is not sufficient or possible.

   Such a trend towards generalized theories is taking place in
many fields and in a variety of ways. For example, an elaborate
theory of the dynamics of biological populations, the struggle for
existence and biological equilibria, has developed, starting with
the pioneering work by Lotka and Volterra. The theory operates
with biological notions, such as individuals, species, coefficients of
competition, and the like. A similar procedure is applied in quan-
titative economics and econometrics. The models and families
of equations applied in the latter happen to be similar to those
of Lotka or, for that matter, of chemical kinetics, but the model
of interacting entities and forces is again at a different level. To
take another example: 'living organisms are essentially open sys-
tems, i.e., systems exchanging matter with their environment.
Conventional physics and physical chemistry deal with closed
systems, and only in recent years has theory been expanded to
include irreversible processes, open systems, and states of dis-
equilibrium. If, however, we want to apply the model of open
systems to, say, the phenomena of animal growth, we automati-
cally come to a generalization of theory referring not to physical
but to biological units. In other words, we are deaHng with
generalized systems. The same is true of the fields of cybernetics
and information theory which have gained so much interest in
the past few years.

   Thus, there exist models, principles, and laws that apply to
generalized systems or their subclasses, irrespective of their par-
ticular kind, the nature of their component elements, and the
relations or "forces" between them. It seems legitimate to ask
for a theory, not of systems of a more or less special kind, but
of universal principles applying to systems in general.

   In this way we postubte a new discipline called General System
Theory. Its subject matter is the formulation and derivation of
those principles which are valid for "systems" in general.

   The meaning of this discipline can be circumscribed as follows.
Physics is concerned with systems of different levels of generality.
The Meaning of General System Theory

It extends from rather special systems, such as those applied by
the engineer in the construction of a bridge or of a machine; to
special laws of physical disciplines, such as mechanics or optics;
to laws of great generality, such as the principles of thermo-
dynamics that apply to systems of intrinsically different nature,
mechanic, caloric, chemical or whatever. Nothing prescribes that
we have to end with the systems traditionally treated in physics.
Rather, we can ask for principles applying to systems in general,
irrespective of whether they are of physical, biological or socio-
logical nature. If we pose this question and conveniently define
the concept of system, we find that models, principles, and laws
exist which apply to generalized systems irrespective of their
particular kind, elements, and the "forces" involved.

   A consequence of the existence of general system properties is
the appearance of structural similarities or isomorphisms in dif-
ferent fields. There are correspondences in the principles that
govern the behavior of entities that are, intrinsically, widely
different. To take a simple example, an exponential law of growth
applies to certain bacterial cells, to populations of bacteria, of
animals or humans, and to the progress of scientific research
measured by the number of publications in genetics or science
in general. The entities in question, such as bacteria, animals,
men, books, etc., are completely different, and so are the causal
mechanisms involved. Nevertheless, the mathematical law is the
same. Or there are systems of equations describing the competi-
tion of animal and plant species in nature. But it appears that
the same systems of equations apply in certain fields in physical
chemistry andin economics as welL This correspondence is due
to the fact that the entities concerned can be considered, in cer-
tain respects, as "systems," i.e., complexes of elements standing in
interaction. The fact that the fields mentioned, and others as
well, are concerned with "systems," leads to a correspondence
in general principles and even in special laws when the condi-
tions correspond in the phenomena under consideration.

   In fact, similar concepts, models and laws have often appeared
in widely different fields, independently and based upon totally
different facts.. There are many instances where identical prin-
ciples were discovered several times because the workers in one
,field were unaware that the theoretical structure required was
    t

34  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

already well developed in some other field. General system theory
will go a long way towards avoiding such unnecessary duplication
of labor.

   System isomorphisms also appear in problems which are re-
calcitrant to quantitative analysis but are nevertheless of great
intrinsic interest. There are, for example, isomorphies between
biological systems and "epiorganisms" (Gerard) like animal com-
munities and human societies. VVhich principles are common
to the several levels of organization and so may legitimately be
transferred from one level to another, and which are specific so
that transfer leads to dangerous fallacies? Can societies and
civilizations be considered as systems?

   It seems, therefore, that a general theory of systems would be
a useful tool providing, on the one hand, models that can be
used in, and transferred to, different fields, and safeguarding, on
the other hand, from vague analogies which often have marred
the progress in these fields.

   There is, however, another and even more important aspect
of general system theory. It can be paraphrased by a felicitous
formulation due to the well-known mathematician and founder
of information theory, Warren Weaver. Classical physics, Weaver
said, was highly successful in developing the theory of unorgan-
ized complexity. Thus, for example, the behavior of a gas is the
result of the unorganized and individually untraceable move-
ments of innumerable molecules; as a whole it is governed by
the laws of thermodynamics. The theory of unorganized com-
plexity is ultimately rooted in the laws of chance and probability
and in the second law of thermodynamics. In contrast, the funda-
mental problem today is that of organized complexity. Concepts
like those of organization, wholeness, directiveness, teleology, and
differentiation are alien to conventional physics. However, they
pop up everywhere in the biological, behavioral and social
sciences, and are, in fact, indispensable for dealing with living
organisms or social groups. Thus a basic problem posed to
modern science is a general theory of organization. General sys-
tem theory is, in principle, capable of giving exact definitions
for such concepts and, in suitable cases, of putting them to
quantitative analysis.

   If we have briefly indicated what general system theory means,
n/(~ Meaning of General System Theory  ·35

IL will avoid misunderstanding also to state what it is not. It has
hcen objected that system theory amounts to no more than the
Il'ivial fact that mathematics of some sort can be applied to dif-
fcrent sorts of problems. For example, the law of exponential
Krowth is applicable to very different phenomena, from radio-
IIctive decay to the extinction of human populations with insuffi-
dent reproduction. This, however, is so because the formula is
olle of the simplest differential equations, and can therefore be
IIpplied to quite different things. Therefore, if so-called iso-
lIIorphic laws of growth occur in entirely different processes, it
has no more significance than the fact that elementary arith-
IlIcthic is applicable to all countable objects, that 2 plus 2 make 4,
It'respective of whether the counted objects are apples, atoms
ur galaxies.

   The answer to this is as follows. Not just in the example quoted
!ly way of simple illustration, but in the development of system
theory, the question is not the application of well-known mathe-
Ilmtical expressions. Rather, problems are posed that are novel
lIud partly far from solution. As mentioned, the method of clas-
Kiml science was most appropriate for phenomena that either can
he resolved into isolated causal chains, or are the statistical out-
rome of an "infinite" number of chance processes, as is true of
NLatistical mechanics, the second principle of thermodynamics and
1111 laws deriving from it. The classical modes of thinking, how-
~ver, fail in the case of interaction of a large but limited number
of elements or processes. Here those problems arise which are
drcumscribed by such notions as wholeness, organization and the
like, and which demand new ways of mathematical thinking.

  Another objection emphasizes the danger that general system
theory may end up in meaningless analogies. This danger indeed
(·xists. For example, it is a widespread idea to look at the state
or the nation as an organism on a superordinate level. Such a
theory, however, would constitute the foundation for a totalitar-
ian state, within which the human individual appears like an
illsignificant cell in an organism or an unimportant worker in
a beehive.

   But general system theory is not a search for vague and super-
ficial analogies. Analogies as such are of little value since besides
similarities between phenomena, dissimilarities can always be
36  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

found as well. The isomorphism under discussion is more than
mere analogy. It is a consequence of the fact that, in certain
respects, corresponding abstractions and conceptual models can
be applied to different phenomena. Only in view of these aspects
will system laws apply. This is not different from the general
procedure in science. It is the same situation as when the law
of gravitation applies to Newton's apple, the planetary system,
and tidal phenomena. This means that in view of certain limited
aspects a theoretical system, that of mechanics, holds true; it
does not mean that there is a particular resemblance between
apples, planets, and oceans in a great number of other aspects.

   A third objection claims that system theory lacks explanatory
value. For example, certain aspects of organic purposiveness,
such as the so-called equifinaIity of developmental processes
(p. 40), are open to system-theoretical interpretation. Nobody,
however, is today capable of defining in detail the processes lead-
ing from an animal ovum to an organism with its myriad of
cells, organs, and highly complicated functions.

   Here we should consider that there are degrees in scientific ex-
planation, and that in complex and theoretically little-developed
fields we have to be satisfied with what the economist Hayek
has justly termed "explanation in principle." An example may
show what is meant.

   Theoretical economics is a highly developed system, presenting
elaborate models for the processes in question. However, profes-
sors of economics, as a rule, are not millionaires. In other words,
they can explain economic phenomena well "in principle" bnt
they are not able to predict fluctuations in the stock market with
respect to certain shares or dates. Explanation in principle, how-
ever, is better than none at alL If and when we are able to
insert the necessary parameters, system-theoretical explanation "in
principle" becomes a theory, similar in structure to those of
physics.

Aims of General System Theory

   We may summarize these considerations as follows.
   Similar general conceptions and viewpoints have evolved in
various disciplines of modern science. While in the past, science
tried to explain observable phenomena by reducing them to an
/'I/I~ Meaning of General System Theory  37

Inlerplay of elementary units investigatable independently of
rncll other, conceptions appear in contemporary science that are
concerned with what is somewhat vaguely termed "wholeness,"

I.e.. problems of organization, phenomena not resolvable into

local events, dynamic interactions manifest in the difference of
hchavior of parts when isolated or in a higher configuration, etc.;
In short, "systems" of various orders not understandable by
Investigation of their respective parts in isolation. Conceptions
Ill1d problems of this nature have appeared in all branches of
Mdence, irrespective of whether inanimate things, living organ-
IHillS, or social phenomena are the object of study. This cor-
t·t~Mpondence is the more striking because the developments in
tlw individual sciences were mutually independent, largely un-
nware of each other, and based upon different facts and contra-
dicting philosophies. They indicate a general change in scientific
111I.itude and conceptions.

   Not only are general aspects and viewpoints alike in different
Ndences; frequently we find formally identical or isomorphic laws

111 different fields. In many cases, isomorphic laws hold for certain

!'lasses or subclasses of "systems," irrespective of the nature of
Ihe entities involved. There appear to exist general system laws
which apply to any system of a certain type, irrespective of the
pnrticular properties of the system and of the elements involved.

  These considerations lead to the postulate of a new scientific
discipline which we call general system theory. Its subject matter
iN formulation of principles that are valid for "systems" in gen-
"I'al, whatever the nature qf their component elements and the
I'dations or "forces" between them.

   General system theory, therefore, is a general science of "whole-
ness" which up till now was considered a vague, hazy, and semi-
11I(~taphysical concept. In elaborate form it would be a logico-
Illathematical discipline, in itself purely formal but applicable
10 the various empirical sciences. For sciences concerned with
"organized wholes," it would be of similar significance to that
which probability theory has for sciences concerned with "chance
('vents"; the latter, too, is a formal mathematical discipline which
t 0111 be applied to most diverse fields, such as thermodynamics,
iliological and medical experimentation, genetics, life insurance
nl atistics, etc.
38  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   This indicates major aims of general system theory:

(I) There is a general tendency towards integration in the various
     sciences, natural and social.

(2) Such integration seems to be centered in a general theory
     of systems.

(3) Such theory may be an important means for aiming at exact
     theory in the nonphysical fields of science.

(4) Developing unifying principles running "vertically" through
     the universe of the individual sciences, this theory brings us
     nearer to the goal of the unity of science.

(5) This can lead to a much-needed integration in scientific
     education.

   A remark as to the delimitation of the theory here discussed
seems to be appropriate. The term and program of a general
system theory was introduced by the present author a number of
years ago. It has turned out, however, that quite a large number
of workers in various fields had been led to similar conclusions
and ways of approach. It is suggested, therefore, to maintain this
name which is now coming into general use, be it only as a
convenient label.

   It looks, at first, as if the definition of systems as "sets of
elements standing in interaction" is so general and vague that
not much can be learned from it. This, however, is not true. For
example, systems can be defined by certain families of differen-
tial equations and if, in the usual way of mathematical reasoning,
more specified conditions are introduced, many important prop-
erties can be found of systems in general and more special
cases (d. Chapter 3).

   The mathematical approach followed in general system theory
is not the only possible or most general one. There are a number
of related modern approaches, such as information theory, cy-
bernetics, game, decision, and net theories, stochastic models,
operations research, to mention only the most important ones.
However, the fact that differential equations cover extensive fields
in the physical, biological, economical, and probably also the
behavioral sciences, makes them a suitable access to the study
of generalized systems.

   I am now going to illustrate general system theory by way of
some examples.
'/'lin Meaning of Oent1rf11 Sy.'t.r.m 'I'hfWry  30

Closed and Open Systems: Limitations of Conventiona'i
Physics

   My first example is that of closed and open systems. Conven-
tional physics deals only with closed systems, i.e., systems which
lire considered to be isolated from their environment. Thus,
physical chemistry tells us about the reactions, their rates, and
the chemical equilibria eventually established in a closed vessel
where a number of reactants is brought together. Thermo-
dynamics expressly declares that its laws apply only to closed
Hystems. In particular, the second principle of thermodynamics
Htates that, in a closed system, a certain quantity, called entropy.
must increase to a maximum, and eventually the process comes
to a stop at a state of equilibrium. The second principle can
he formulated in different ways, one being that entropy is a
measure of probability. and so a closed system tends to a state
of most probable distribution. The most probable distribution.
however, of a mixture, say, of red and blue glass beads, or of
molecules having different velocities, is a state of complete dis-
order; having separated all red beads on one hand, and all blue
ones on the other, or having, in a closed space, all fast molecules,
that is, a high temperature on the right side, and all slow ones,
a low temperature, at the left, is a highly improbable state of
affairs. So the tendency towards maximum entropy or the most
probable distribution is the tendency to maximum disorder.

   However, we find systems which by their very nature and defi-
nition are not closed systems. Every living organism is essentially
an open system. It maintains itself in a continuous inflow and
outflow, a building up and breaking down of components, never
being, so long as it is alive, in a state of chemical and thermo-
dynamic equilibrium but maintained in a so-called steady state
which is distinct from the latter. This is the very essence of that
fundamental phenomenon of life which is called metabolism, the
chemical processes within living cells. What now? Obviously, the
conventional formulations of physics are, in principle, inappli-
cable to the living organism qua open system and steady state, and
we may well suspect that many characteristics of living systems
which are paradoxical in view of the laws of physics are a con-
sequence of this fact.

  It is only in recent years that an expansion of physics, in order
40  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

     to include open systems, has taken place. This theory has shed
     light on many obscure phenomena in physics and biology, and
     has also led to important general conclusions of which I will
     mention only two.

        The first is the principle of equifinality. In any closed system,
     the final state is unequivocally determined by the initial condi-
     tions: e.g., the motion in a planetary system where the positions
     of the planets at a time t are unequivocally determined by their
     positions at a time to. Or in a chemical equilibrium, the final
     concentrations of the reactants naturally depend on the initial
     concentrations. If either the initial conditions or the process is
    altered, the final state will also be changed. This is not so in
/ open systems. Here, the same final state may be reached from
     different initial conditions and in different ways. This is what is
     called equifinality, and it has a significant meaning for the
     phenomena of biological regulation. Those who are familiar with
     the history of biology will remember that it was just equifinality
     that led the German biologist Driesch to embrace vitalism, i.e.,
     the doctrine that vital phenomena are inexplicable in terms of
     natural science. Driesch's argument was based on experiments on
     embryos in early development. The same final result, a normal
     individual of the sea urchin, can develop from a complete ovum,
     from each half of a divided ovum, or from the fusion product of
     two whole ova. The same applies to embryos of many other
     species, including man, where identical twins are the product of
     the splitting of one ovum. Equifinality, according to Driesch,
     contradicts the laws of physics, and can be accomplished only by
     a soul-like vitalistic factor which governs the processes in fore-
     sight of the goal, the normal organism to be established. It can
     be shown, however, that open systems, insofar as they attain a
     steady state, must show equifinality, so the supposed violation
     of physical laws disappears (d. pp. 132f.).

        Another apparent contrast between inanimate and animate
     nature is what sometimes was called the violent contradiction be-
     tween Lord Kelvin's degradation and Darwin's evolution, between
     the law of dissipation in physics and the law of evolution in
     biology. According to the second principle of thermodynamics,
     the general trend of events in physical nature is toward states
     of maximum disorder and levelling down of differences, with the
     so-called heat death of the universe as the final outlook, when
'fhe Meaning of General System Theory

all energy is degraded into evenly distributed heat of low temper-
ature, and the world process comes to a stop. In contrast, the
living world shows, in embryonic development and in evolution,
a transition towards higher order, heterogeneity, and organiza-
t ion. But on the basis of the theory of open systems, the apparent
contradiction between entropy and evolution disappears. In all
irreversible processes, entropy must increase. Therefore, the
change of entropy in closed systems is always positive; order is
continually destroyed. In open systems, however, we have not
only production of entropy due to irreversible processes, but also
import of entropy which may well be negative. This is the case
in the living organism which imports complex molecules high in
free energy. Thus, living systems, maintaining themselves in a ,/
steady state, can avoid the increase of entropy, and may even
develop towards states of increased order and organization.

   From these examples, you may guess the bearing of the theory
of open systems. Among other things, it shows that many sup-
posed violations of physical laws in living nature do not exist,
or rather that they disappear with the generalization of physical
theory. In a generalized version the concept of open systems can
be applied to nonphysical levels. Examples are its use in ecology
and the evolution towards a climax formation (Whittacker), in
psychology where "neurological systems" were considered as "open
dynamic systems" (Krech), in philosophy where the trend toward
"trans-actional" as opposed to "self-actional" and "inter-actional"
viewpoints closely corresponds to the open system model
(Bentley).

Tnformation and Entropy

   Another development which is closely connected with system
theory is that of the modern theory of communication. It has
often been said that energy is the currency of physics, just as
economic values can be expressed in dollars or pounds. There
are, however, certain fields of physics and technology where this
currency is not readily acceptable. This is the case in the field of
communication which, due to the development of telephones,
radio, radar, calculating machines, servomechanisms and other
uevices, has led to the rise of a new branch of physics.

   The general notion in communication theory is that of in-
42  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

formation. In many cases, the flow of information corresponds
to a flow of energy, e.g., if light waves emitted by some objects
reach the eye or a photoelectric cell, elicit some reaction of the
organism or some machinery, and thus convey information. How-
ever, examples can easily be given where the flow of information
is opposite to the flow of energy, or where information is trans-
mitted without a flow of energy or matter. The first is the case
in a telegraph cable, where a direct current is flowing in one
direction, but information, a message, can be sent in either direc-
tion by interrupting the current at one point and recording the
interruption at another. For the second case, think of the photo-
electric door openers as they are installed in many supermarkets:
the shadow, the cutting off of light energy, informs the photocell
that somebody is entering, and the door opens. So information, in
general, cannot be expressed in terms of energy.

   There is, however, another way to measure information,·
namely, in terms of decisions. Take the game of Twenty Ques-
tions, where we are supposed to find out an object by receiving
simple "yes" or "no" answers to our questions. The amount of
information conveyed in one answer is a decision between two.
alternatives, such as animal or nonanimal. With two questions,·
it is possible to decide for one out of four possibilities, e.g., mam-
mal-nonmammal, or flowering plant-nonflowering plant. With
three answers, it is a decision out of eight, etc. Thus, the logarithm
at the base 2 of the possible decisions can be used as a measure
of information, the unit being the so-called binary unit or bit.
The information contained in two answers is log2 4 _ 2 bits,
of three answers, log2 8 3 bits, etc. This measure of informa-
tion happens to be similar to that of entropy or rather negative
entropy, since entropy also is defined as a logarithm of proba-
bility. But entropy, as we have already heard, is a measure of
disorder; hence negative entropy or information is a measure of
order or of organization since the latter, compared to distribution
at random, is an improbable state.

   A second central concept of the theory of communication and
control is that of feedback. A simple scheme for feedback is the
following (Fig. 2.1). The system comprises, first, a receptor or
"sense organ," be it a photoelectric cell, a radar screen, a ther-
mometer, or a sense organ in the biological meaning. The mes-
sage may be, in technological devices, a weak current, or, in a
'fhe Meaning of General System Theory

ITIMULUS  MESSAGE                      RESPONSE

                              Fig. 2.1. Simple feedback scheme.

living organism, represented by nerve conduction, etc. Then
there is a center recombining the incoming messages and trans-
mitting them to an effector, consisting of a machine like an
electromotor, a heating coil or solenoid, or of a muscle which
responds to the incoming message in such a way that there is
power output of high energy. Finally, the functioning of the
effector is monitored back to the receptor, and this makes the
system self-regulating, i.e., guarantees stabilization or direction
of action.

   Feedback arrangements are widely used in modern technology
for the stabilization of a certain action, as in thermostats or in
radio receivers; or for the direction of actions towards a goal
where the aberration from that goal is fed back, as information,
till the goal or target is reached. This is the case in self-propelled
missiles which seek their target, anti-aircraft fire control systems,
ship-steering systems, and other so-called servomechanisms.

   There is indeed a large number of biological phenomena which
correspond to the feedback model. First, there is the phenomenon
of so-called homeostasis, or maintenance of balance in the living
organism, the prototype of which is thermoregulation in warm-
blooded animals. Cooling of the blood stimulates certain centers
in the brain which "turn on" heat-producing mechanisms of the
body, and the body temperature is monitored back to the center
so that temperature is maintained at a constant level. Similar
homeostatic mechanisms exist in the body for maintaining the
constancy of a great number of physicochemical variables. Further-
more, feedback systems comparable to the servomechanisms of
technology exist in the animal and human body for the regula-
tion of actions. If we want to pick up a pencil, a report is made
44  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

to the central nervous system of the distance by which we have
failed to grasp the pencil in the first instance; this information is
then fed back to the central nervous system so that the motion
is controlled till the aim is reached.

   So a great variety of systems in technology and in living nature
follow the feedback scheme, and it is well-known that a new
discipline, called Cybernetics, was introduced by Norbert Wiener
to deal with these phenomena. The theory tries to show that
mechanisms of a feedback nature are the base of teleological
or purposeful behavior in man-made machines as well as in living
organisms, and in social systems.

   It should be borne in mind, however, that the feedback scheme
is of a rather special nature. It presupposes structural arrange-
ments of the type mentioned. There are, however, many regula-
tions in the living organism which are of essentially different
nature, namely, those where the order is effectuated by a dynamic
interplay of processes. Recall, e.g., embryonic regulations where
the whole is reestablished from the parts in equifinal processes.
It can be shown that the pTimary regulations in organic systems,
i.e., those which are most fundamental and primitive in em-
bryonic development as well as in evolution, are of the nature
of dynamic interaction. They are based upon the fact that the
living organism is an open system, maintaining itself in, or ap-
proaching a steady state. Superposed are those regulations which
we may call secondary, and which are controlled by fixed ar-
rangements, especially of the feedback type. This state of affairs
is a consequence of a general principle of organization which may
be called progressive mechanization. At first, systems-biological,
neurological, psychological or social-are governed by dynamic
interaction of their components; later on, fixed arrangements
and conditions of constraint are established which render the
system and its parts more efficient, but also gradually diminish
and eventually abolish its equipotentiality. Thus, dynamics is
the broader aspect, since we can always arrive from general
system laws to machinelike function by introducing suitable con-

ditions of constraint, gut the opposite is not possible.

Causality and Teleology
  Another point I would like to mention IS the change the
The Meaning of General System Theory        45

scientific world picture has undergone in the past few decades.

In the world view called mechanistic, which was born of classical

physics of the nineteenth century, the aimless play of the atoms,

governed by the inexorable laws of causality, produced all phe-

nomena in the world, inanimate, living, and mental. No room

was left for any directiveness, order, or telos. The world of the

organisms appeared a product of chance, accumulated by the

senseless play of random mutations and selection; the mental

world as a curious and rather inconsequential epiphenomenon

of material events.

The only goal of science appeared to be analytical, i.e., the

splitting up of reality into ever smaller units and the isolation of

individual causal trains. Thus, physical reality was split up into

mass points or atoms, the living organism into cells, behavior into

reflexes, perception into punctual sensations, etc. Correspondingly,

causality was essentially one-way: one sun attracts one planet in

Newtonian mechanics, .one gene in the fertilized ovum produces

such and such inherited character, one sort of bacterium produces

this or that disease, mental elements are lined up, like the beads

in a string of pearls, by the law of association. Remember Kant's

famous table of the categories which attempts to systematize the

fundamental notions of classical science: it is symptomatic that

the notions of interaction and of organization were only space-

fillers or did not appear at all.

We may state as characteristic of modern science that this'

scheme of isolable units acting in one-way causality has proved to

be insufficient. Hence the appearance, in all fields of science, of

notions like wholeness, holistic, organismic, gestalt, etc., which

all signify that, in the last resort, we must think in terms of

systems of elements in mutual interaction.  -

Similarly, notions of teleology and directiveness appeared to

be outside the scope of science and to be the playground of

mysterious, supernatural or anthropomorphic agencies; or else,

a pseudoproblem, intrinsically alien to science, and merely a

misplaced projection of the observer's mind into a nature gov-

erned by purposeless laws. Nevertheless, these aspects exist, and

you cannot conceive of a living organism, not to speak of be-

havior and human society, without taking into account what

variously and rather loosely is called adaptiveness, purposiveness,

goal-seeking and the like.
46  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   It is characteristic of the present view that these aspects are
taken seriously as a legitimate problem for science; moreover, we
can well indicate models simulating such behavior.

   Two such models we have already mentioned. One is equifinal-
ity, the tendency towards a characteristic final state from different
initial states and in different ways, based upon dynamic inter-
action in an open system attaining a steady state; the second,
feedback, the homeostatic maintenance of a characteristic state
or the seeking of a goal, based upon circular causal chains and
mechanisms monitoring back information on deviations from
the state to be maintained or the goal to be reached. A third
model for adaptive behavior, a "design for a brain," was developed
by Ashby, who incidentally started with the same mathematical
definitions and equations for a general system as were used by
the present author. Both writers have developed their systems
independently and, following different lines of interest, have
arrived at different theorems and conclusions. Ashby's model for
adaptiveness is, roughly, that of step functions defining a. system,
i.e., functions which, after a certain critical value is passed, jump
into a new family of differential equations. This means that.
having passed a critical state, the system starts off in a new way
of behavior. Thus, by means of step functions, the system shows
adaptive behavior by what the biologist would call trial and
error: it tries different ways and means, and eventually settles
down in a field where it no longer comes into conflict with
critical values of the environment. Such a system adapting itself
by trial and error was actually constructed by Ashby as an
electromagnetic machine, called the nomeostat.

   I am not going to discuss the merits and shortcomings of these
models of teleological or directed behavior. What should be
stressed, however, is the fact that teleological behavior directed
towards a characteristic final state or goal is not something off
limits for natural science and an anthropomorphic misconception
of processes which, in themselves, are undirected and accidental.
Rather it is a form of behavior which can well be defined in
scientific terms and for which the necessary conditions and pos-
sible mechanisms can be indicated.

What Is Organization?
  Similar considerations apply to the concept of organization.
The Meaning of General System Theory  47"

Organization also was alien to the mechanistic world. The prob-
lem did not appear in classical physics, mechanics, electro-
dynamics, etc. Even more, the second principle of thermodynamics
indicated destruction of order as the general direction of events.
It is true that this is different in modern physics. An atom, a
crystal, or a molecule are organizations, as Whitehead never
failed to emphasize. In biology, organisms are, by definition,
organized things. But although we have an enormous amount of
data on biological organization, from biochemistry to cytology
to histology and anatomy, we do not have a theory of biological
organization, i.e., a conceptual model which permits explanation
of the empirical facts.

   Characteristic of organization, whether of a living organism or
a society, are notions like those of wholeness, growth, differentia-
tion, hierarchical order, dominance, control, competition, etc.
Such notions do not appear in conventional physics. System
theory is well capable of dealing with these matters. It is possible
to define such notions within the mathematical model of a system;
moreover, in some respects, detailed theories can be developed
which deduce, from general assumptions, the special cases. A good
example is the theory of biological equilibria, cyclic fluctuations,
etc., as initiated by Lotka, Volterra, Gause and others. It will
certainly be found that Volterra's biological theory and the theory
of quantitative economics are isomorphic in many respects.

   There are, however, many aspects of organizations which do
not easily lend themselves to quantitative interpretation. This
difficulty is not unknown in natural science. Thus, the theory of
biological equilibria or that of natural selection are highly de-
veloped fields of mathematical biology, and nobody doubts that
they are legitimate, essentially correct, and an important part of
the theory of evolution and of ecology. It is hard, however, to
apply them in the field because the parameters chosen, such as
selective value, rate of destruction and generation and the like,
cannot easily be measured. So we have to content ourselves with
an "explanation in· principle," a qualitative argument which,
however, may lead to interesting consequences.

  As an example of the application of general system theory to
human society, we may quote a recent book by Boulding, entitled
The Organizational Revolution. Boulding starts with a general
model of organization and states what he calls Iron Laws which
48  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

hold good for any organization. Such Iron Laws are, for example,
the Malthusian law that the increase of a population is, in gen-
eral, greater than that of its resources. Then there is a law of
optimum size of organizations: the larger an organization grows,
the longer is the way of communication and this, depending on
the nature of the organization, acts as a limiting factor and does
not allow an organization to grow beyond a certain critical size.
According to the law of instability, many organizations are not
in a stable equilibrium but show cyclic fluctuations which result
from the interaction of subsystems. This, incidentally, could prob-
ably be treated in terms of the Volterra theory, Volterra's so-
called first law being 'that of periodic cycles in populations of
two species, one of which feeds at the expense of the other. The
important law of oligopoly states that, if there are competing
organizations, the instability of their relations and hence the
danger of friction and conflicts increases with the decrease of the
number of those organizations. Thus, so long as they are rela-
tively small and numerous, they muddle through in some way of
coexistence. But if only a few or a competing pair are left, as is
the case with the colossal political blocks of the present day,
conflicts become devastating to the point of mutual destruction.
The number of such general theorems for organization can easily
be enlarged. They are well capable of being developed in a
mathematical way, as was actually done for certain aspects.

General System Theory and the Unity of Science

   Let me close these remarks with a few words about the general
implications of interdisciplinary theory.

   The integrative function of general system theory can perhaps
be summarized as follows. So far, the unification of science has
been seen in the reduction of all sciences to physics, the final
resolution of all phenomena into physical events. From our point
of view, unity of science gains a more realistic aspect. A unitary
conception of the world may be based, not upon the possibly
futile and certainly farfetched hope finally to reduce all levels
of reality to the level of physics, but rather on the isomorphy of
laws in different fields. Speaking in what has been called the
"formal" mode, i.e., looking at the conceptual constructs of
science, this means structural uniformities of the schemes we are
The Meaning of General System Theory  49

applying. Speaking in "material" language, it means that the
world, i.e., the total of observable events, shows structural uni-
formities, manifesting themselves by isomorphic traceS of order
in the different levels or realms.

   '\IVe come, then, to a conception which in contrast to reduc-
tionism, we may call perspectivism. We cannot reduce the bio-
logical, behavioral, and social levels to the lowest level, that of
the constructs and laws of physics. We can, however, find con-
structs and possibly laws within the individual levels. The world
is, as Aldous Huxley once put it, like a Neapolitan ice cream
cake where the levels-the physical, the biological, the social and
the moral universe-represent the chocolate, strawberry, and
vanilla layers. We cannot reduce strawberry to chocolate-the
most we can say is that possibly in the last resort, all is vanilla,
all mind or spirit. The unifying principle is that we find organi-
zation at all levels. The mechanistic world view, taking the play
of physical particles as ultimate reality, found its expression in
a civilization which glorifies physical technology that has led
eventually to the catastrophes of our time. Possibly the model
of the world as a great organization can help to reinforce the
sense of reverence for the living which we have almost lost in
the last sanguinary decades of human history.

General System Theory in Education:
The Production of Scientific Generalists

   After this sketchy outline of the meaning and aims of
general system theory, let me try to answer the question of what
it may contribute to integrative education. In order not to appear
partisan, I give a few quotations from authors who were not
themselves engaged in the development of general system theory.

   A few years ago, a paper, entitled "The Education of
Scientific Generalists," was published by a group of scientists
including the engineer Bode, the sociologist Mosteller, the
mathematician Tukey, and the biologist ·Winsor. The authors
emphasized the "need for a simpler, more unified approach to
scientific problems." They wrote:

      We often hear that "one man can no longer cover a broad
   enough field" and that "there is too much narrow specializa-
50  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

    tion." ... We need a simpler, more unified approach to scien-
    tific problems, we need men who practice science-not a
    particular science, in a word, we need scientific generalists

    (Bode et at., 1949).

  The authors then make clear how and why generalists are
needed in fields such as physical chemistry, biophysics, the ap-
plication of chemistry, physics, and mathematics to medicine,
and they continue:

  Any research group needs a generalist, whether it is an
institutional group in a university or a foundation, or an
industrial group.... In an engineering group, the generalist
would naturally be concerned with system problems. Thel.
problems arise whenever parts are made into a balanced whole

(Bode et at., 1949).

   In a symposium of the Foundation for Integrated Education,
Professor Mather (1951) discussed "Integrative Studies for General
Education." He stated:

   One of the criticisms of general education is based upon
the fact that it may easily degenerate into the mere presenta-
tion of information picked up in as many fields of enquiry II
there is time to survey during a semester or a year.... If you
were to overhear several senior students talking, you might
hear one of them say "our professors have stuffed us full, but
what does it all mean?" ... More important is the search for
basic concepts and underlying principles that may be valid
throughout the entire body of knowledge.

    In answer to what these basic concepts may be, Mather states:

   Very similar general concepts have been independently de-
veloped by investigators who have been working in widely
different fields. These correspondences are all the more signift-

cant because they are based upon totally different facts. The

men who developed them were largely unaware of each other'.
work. They started with conflicting philosophies and yet have
reached remarkably similar conclusions....

   Thus conceived, [Mather concludes], integrative studies
would prove to be an essential part of the quest for an under-
standing of reality.
The Meaning of General System Theory  '51

   No comments seem to be necessary. Conventional education in
physics, biology, psychology or the social sciences treat.s them
as separate domains, the general trend being that increasingly
smaller subdomains become separate sciences, and this process is
repeated to the point where each specialty becomes a triflingly
small field, unconnected with the rest. In contrast, the educa-
tional demands of training "Scientific Generalists" and of de-
veloping interdisciplinary "basic principles" are precisely those
general system theory tries to fill. They are not a mere program
or a pious wish since, as we have tried to show, such theoretical
structure is already in the process of development. In this sense,
general system theory seems to be an important headway towards
interdisciplinary synthesis and integrated education.

Science and Society

   However, if we speak of education, we do not mean solely
scientific values, i.e., communication and integration of facts. We
also mean ethical values, contributing to the development of
personality. Is there something to be gained from the viewpoints
we have discussed? This leads to the fundamental problem of the
value of science in general and the behavioral and social sciences
in particular.

   An often-used argument about the value of science and its
impact upon society and the welfare of mankind runs something
like this. Our knowledge of the laws of physics is excellent, and
t:Onsequently our technological control of inanimate nature al-
most unlimited. Our knowledge of biological laws is not so far
advanced, but sufficient to allow for a good amount of biological
technology in modern medicine and applied biology. It has ex-
lended the life expectancy far beyond the limits allotted to
human beings in earlier centuries or even decades. The applica-
1ion of the modern methods of scientific agriculture, husbandry,
{·Ie., would well suffice to sustain a human population far sur-
passing the present one of our planet. What is lacking, however,
is knowledge of the laws of human society, and consequently a
sociological technology. So the achievements of physics are put
10 use for ever more efficient destruction; we have famines in
vast parts of the world while harvests rot or are destroyed in
other parts; war and indiscriminate annihilation of human life,
52  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

culture, and means of sustenance are the only way out of un-
controlled fertility and consequent overpopulation. They are the
outcome of the fact that we know and control physical forces
only too well, biological forces tolerably well, and social forces
not at all. If, therefore, we would have a well·developed science
of human society and a corresponding technology, it would be
the way out of the chaos and impending destruction of our
present world.

   This seems to be plausible enough and is, in fact, but a modern
version of Plato's precept that only if the rulers are philosophers,
humanity will be saved. There is, however, a catch in the argu-
ment. We have a fair idea what a scientifically controlled world
would look like. In the best case, it would be like Aldous
Huxley's Brave New World, in the worst, like Orwell's 1984.
It is an empirical fact that scientific achievements are put just
as much, or even more, to,.destructive as constructive use. The
sciences of human behavior and society are no exception. In
fact, it is perhaps the greatest danger of the systems of modern
totalitarianism that they are so alarmingly up-to-date not only
in physical and biological, but also in psychological technology.
The methods of mass suggestion, of the release of the instincts of
the human beast, of conditioning and thought control are de-
veloped to highest efficacy; just because modern totalitarianism
is so terrifically scientific, it makes the absolutism of former
periods appear a dilettantish and comparatively harmless make·
shift. Scientific control of society is no highway to Utopia.

The Ultimate Precept: Man as the Individual

  We may, however, conceive of a scientific understanding of
human society and its laws in a somewhat different and more
modest way. Such knowledge can teach us not only what human
behavior and society have in common with other organizations,
but also what is their uniqueness. Here the main tenet will be:
Man is not only a political animal; he is, before and above all,
an individual. The real values of humanity are not those which
it shares with biological entities, the function of an organism or
a commumty of animals, but those which stem from the in-
dividual mind. Human society is not a commumty of ants or
termites, governed by inherited instinct and controlled by the I

                                                                                                                                                I
The Meaning of General System Theory

laws of the superordinate whole; it is based upon the achieve-
ments of the individual and is doomed if the individual is made
a cog in the social machine. This, I believe, is the ultimate pre-
cept a tbeory of organization can give: not a manual for dictators
of any denomination more efficiently to subjugate human beings
by the scientific application of Iron Laws, but a warning that
the Leviathan of organization must not swallow the individual
without sealing its own inevitable doom.
      3 Sorne System Concepts

           in Elementary
           Mathematical Consideration

The System Concept

   In dealing with complexes of "elements," three different kinds
of distinction may be made-i.e., 1. according to their number;
2. according to their species; 3. according to the relations of
elements. The following simple graphical illustration may clarify
this point (FIG. S.l) with a and b symbolizing various complexes.

1)0   000 0         6      000         00
      0000
2) Q  0---0---0--0  6      000         ·

:Va                 D b

      Fig. 3.1. See text.

   In cases I and 2, the complex may be understood as the
(d. pp. 66fI.) sum of elements considered in isolation. In case 3, not·
only the elements should be known, but also the relations be-
tween them. Characteristics of the first kind may be called
summative, of the second kind constittttive. We can also say
that summative characteristics of an element are those which are
                      ,.

Some System Concepts      55

the same within and outside the complex; they may therefore
be obtained by means of summation of characteristics and be-
havior of elements as known in isolation. Constitutive charac-
teristics are those which are dependent on the specific relations
within the complex; for understanding such characteristics we
therefore must know not only the parts, but also the relations.

   Physical characteristics of the first type are, for example,
weight or molecular weight (sum of weights or atomic weights
respectively), heat (considered as sum of movements of the
molecules), etc. An example of the second kind are chemical
characteristics (e.g., isomerism, different characteristics of com-
pounds with the same gross composition but different arrange-
ment of radicals in the molecule).

   The meaning of the somewhat mystical expression, "the whole
is more than the sum of parts" is simply that constitutive charac-
teristics are not explainable from the characteristics of isolated
parts. The characteristics of the complex, therefore, compared
to those of the elements, appear as "new" or "emergent." If,
however, we know the total of parts contained in a system and
the relations between them, the behavior of the system may be
derived from the behavior of the parts. We can also say: While
we can conceive of a sum as being composed gradually, a system
as total of parts with its interrelations has to be conceived of
as being composed instantly.

   Physically, these statements are trivial; they could become
problematic and lead to confused conceptions in biology, psy-
chology and sociology only because of a misinterpretation of the
mechanistic conception, the tendency being towards resolution
of phenomena into independent elements and causal chains,
while interrelations were bypassed.

   In rigorous development, general system theory would be of
an axiomatic nature; that is, from the notion of "system" and
a suitable set of axioms propositions expressing system properties
and principles would be deduced. The following considerations
are much more modest. They merely illustrate some system prin-
ciples by formulations which are simple and intuitively accessible,
without attempt at mathematical rigor and generality.

   A system can be defined as a complex of interacting elements.

Interaction means that elements, p, stand in relations, R, so that
the behavior of an element p in R is different from its behavior
56  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

in another relation, R'. If the behaviors in Rand R' are not
different, there is no interaction, and the elements behave in-
dependently with respect to the relations Rand R'.

   A system can be defined mathematically in various ways. For
illustration, we choose a system of simultaneous differential equa-

tions. Denoting some measure of elements, p, (i = 1, 2, ... n),
by Q.. these, for a finite number of elements and in the simplest

case, will be of the form:

                                                                                                      (3.1)

                   .~ . ...... .....~ ......

                      dQ!'

                            dt

   Change of any measure Q, therefore is a function of all Q's,
from Ql to Q,,; conversely, change of any Q, entails change of
all other measures and of the system as a whole.

   Systems of equations of this kind are found in many fields
and represent a general principle of kinetics. For example, in
Simultankinetik as developed by Skrabal (1944, 1949), this is
the general expression of the law of mass action. The same
system was used by Lotka (1925) in a broad sense, especially
with respect to demographic problems. The equations for bio-
coenotic systems, as developed by Volterra, Lotka, D'Ancona,
Gause and others, are special cases of equation (3.1). So are the
equations used by Spiegelman (1945) for kinetics of cellular
processes and the theory of competition within an organism.
G. Werner (1947) has stated a similar though somewhat more
general system (considering the system as continuous, and using

therefore partial differential equations with respect to x, y, z,
and t) as the basic law of pharmacodynamics from which the

various laws of drug action can be derived by introducing the
relevant special conditions.

   Such a definition of "system" is, of course, by no means general.
It abstracts from spatial and temporal conditions, which would
be expressed by partial differential equations. It also abstracts
from a possible dependence of happenings on the previous history
Some System Concepts           57

of the system ("hysteresis" in a broad sense); consideration of
this would make the system into integro-difIerential equations
as discussed by Volterra (1931; d. also d'Ancona, 1939) and
Donnan (1937). Introduction of such equations would have a
definite meaning: The system under consideration would be not
only a spatial but also a temporal whole.

   Notwithstanding these restrictions, equation (3.1) can be used
for discussing several general system properties. Although nothing

is said about the nature of the measures Q, or the functions

f,-i.e., about the relations or interactions within the system-
certain general principles can be deduced.

   There is a condition of stationary state, characterized by dis-
appearance of the changes dQJdt

      h =]2 .. ·in 0           (3.2)

By equating to zero we obtain n equations for n variables, and
by solving them obtain the values:

                               (3.3)

These values are constants, since in the system, as presupposed,
the changes disappear. In general, there will be a number of
stationary states, some stable, some instable.

  We may introduce new variables:

                                                                                                        (3.4)

and reformulate system (3.1):

dQl'

dt

dQ2'

dt                             (3.5)

   Let us assume that the system can be developed in Taylor
series:
58                                                                   GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

                            dQ/

                      dt

       + + ... ain Qn' alli QI/2 a1l2 Q/ 0' am 0'2

                            dd0t' = a2l QI' a22 0' + ...

       + + 0'2 0' a2n Qn' aUI QI'2 a212 QI'                                                                     (.3.6)

                                                                            am

                    dQn'
                      dt

       ann Qn' + anll 0'2 + anI2 Q/ Q2' + an22 Q2'2 + ...

A general solution of this system of equations is:

+ + ... + + ... } = QI' Gll eAlt G12 e A2t
                                                          Gia eAnt Glli e2A1I
+ + ... + + ... 0
'   .  .     G2I   e Al  t  ..  .G.2.2  .e'2 1  ..  .  .  G2n  .e.A  nt  .  .  Gn i     e  2A1I  .  .  .     .  (.3.7)
..
.         ~  " ..  ..    .              . ..              ...        ..        ...   .     ...            ~

+ + ... + ... Qu' Gni e'lt Gn2 eA2t
                                                          Gnn'eAnt Gnll e2AI1

where the G are constants and the A the roots of the charac-
teristic equation:

                                                                                                 o              (.3.S)

                                                                     ann A

   The roots A may be real or imaginary. By inspection of equa-
tions (3.7) we find that if all A are real and negative (or,

if complex, negative in their real parts), Q:, with increasing time,
approach 0 because e-OO = 0; since, however, according to (3.5)
Q. Q/~ - Q/, the Q. thereby obtain the stationary values
Q.*. In this case the equilibrium is stable, since in a sufficient

period of time the system comes as close to the stationary state

as possible.
   However, if one of the A is positive or 0, the equilibrium is

unstable.
   If finally so. A are positive and complex, the system con-

tains periodic terms since the exponential function for complex

exponents takes the form:

                                e(a-ib)t = eat (cos bt - i sin bt).

In this case there will be periodic fluctuations, which generally
are damped.
Some System Concepts                                                 · 59
                                                              2, a system
   For illustration, consider the simplest case, n
consisting of two kinds of elements:

      ddQt-l = j1 (Qh ~) }

      d~ h (Ql, Q2)                                           (3.9)

      dt

  Again provided that the functions can be developed into
Taylor series, the solution is:

      QI = Q1· - GneAII G12eA21 - GnIe2A11 - ... }            (3.10)

      Q2 = Q2· - G2ICAlt - G22eA2t - Gznc2AIt - ...

with Q1·, Q2· as stationary values of QI' Q2, obtained by setting

11 = 12 = 0; the G's integration constants; and the A 's roots

of the characteristic equation:

                                                          0,

or developed:

                      (all - A) (a22 A) aI2a21 = 0,

                        Y - AC+ D 0,

             A ~ ±~-D (~y,

with

   In the case:

                C < 0, D > 0, E = C2 4D > 0,

both solutions of the characteristic equation are negative. There-
fore a node is given; the system will approach a stable stationary

state (Q1·, Q2·) as e-oo = 0, and therefore the second and follow-

ing terms continually decrease (FIG. 3.2).
   In the case:

               C < 0, D > 0, E = C2 4D < 0,

both solutions of the characteristic equation are complex with
negative real part. In this case we have a loop, and point (Ql' Q2)
tends towards (Ql·, ~.) describing a spiral curve.
60  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

    ~ node

    11'--------.....

    Fig. 3.2. See text.

   In the case:

                    C = 0, D > 0, E < 0,

both solutions are imaginary, therefore the solution contains
periodic terms; there will be oscillations or cycles around the
stationary values. Point (Qv Q2) describes a closed curve around
(Ql*, Q2*)'

   In the case:

                       C > 0, D < 0, E > 0,

both solutions are positive, and there is no stationary' state.

Growth

   Equations of this type are found in a variety of fields, and we
can use system (3.1) to illustrate the formal identity of system
laws in various realms, in other words, to demonstrate the
existence of a general system theory.

   This may be shown,wr the simplest case-Le., the system con-
sisting of elements of o~y one kind. Then the system of equations
is reduced to the single equation:

    dQ !(Q),             (3.11)

    dt
Some System Concepts                                     ~ 61
which may be developed into a Taylor series:

                                                         (3.12)

   This series does not contain an absolute term in the case in
which there is no "spontaneous generation" of elements. Then c
dQj dt must disappear for Q = 0, which is possible only if the
absolute term is equal to zero.

  The simplest possibility is realized when we retain only the
first term of the series:

dQ                                                       (3.13)
dt = alQ,

   This signifies that the growth of the system is directly propor-
tional to the number of elements present. Depending on whether
the constant al is positive or negative, the growth of the system
is positive or negative, and the system increases or decreases.
The solution is:

Q = Qoe<llt,                                             (3.14)

Qo signifying the number of elements at t O. This is the
exponential law (FIG. 3.3) found in many fields.

          t                                           t
                                              b
a

Fig. 3.3. Exponential curves.
62                               GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   In mathematics, the exponential law is called the "law of

natural growth," and with (a] > 0) is valid for the growth of

capital by compound interest. Biologically, it applies to the in-
dividual growth of certain bacteria and animals. Sociologically,
it is valid for the unrestricted growth of plant or animal popula-
tions, in the simplest case for the increase of bacteria when each
individual divides into two, these into four, etc. In social science,
it is called the law of Malthus and signifies the unlimited growth
of a population, whose birth rate is higher than its death rate.
It also describes the growth of human knowledge as measured
by the number of textbook pages devoted to scientific discoveries,
or the number of publications on drosophila (Hersh, 1942). With

negative constant (a1 < 0), the exponential law applies to radio-

active decay, to the decomposition of a chemical compound in
monomolecular reaction, to the killing of bacteria by rays or
poison, the loss of body substance by hunger in a multicellular
organism, the rate of extinction of a population in which the
death rate is higher than the birth rate, etc.

   Going back to equation (3.12) and retaining two terms, we
have:

    dQ

                                                                 (3.15)

    dt

A solution of this equation is:

    Q                            (3.16)

   Keeping the second term has an important consequence. The
simple exponential (3.14) shows an infinite increase; taking into
account the second term, we obtain a curve which is sigmoid
and attains a limiting value. This curve is the so-called logistic
curve (FIG. 3.4), and is also of wide application.

   In chemistry, this is the curve of an autocatalytical reaction,
i.e., a reaction, in which the reaction product obtained accelerates
its own production. In sociology, it is the law of Verhulst (1838)
describing the growth of human populations with limited re-
sources.

   Mathematically trivial as these examples are, they illustrate
a point of interest for the present consideration, namely the
fact that certain laws of nature can be arrived at not only on
Some System Concepts                             63

                      Fig. 3.4. Logistic curve.

 the basis of experience, but also in a purely formal way. The
 equations discussed signify no more than that the rather general
 system of equation (3.1), its development into a Taylor series
 and suitable conditions have been applied. In this sense such
 laws are "a priori," independent from their physical, chemical,
 biological, sociological, etc., interpretation. In other words, this
. shows the existence of a general system theory which deals with
 formal characteristics of systems, concrete facts appearing as their
 special applications by defining variables and parameters. In
 still other terms, such examples show a formal uniformity of
 nature.

Competition

   Our system of equations may also indicate competition be-
tween parts.

   The simplest possible case is, again, that all coefficients
(ajr'i) = 0, i.e., that the increase in each element depends only
on this element itself. Then we have, for two elements:

                                    dQl          (3.17)
                                     dt

                                    dQ2
                                     dt
or

                                                 (3.18)
64                                    GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY
  Eliminating time, we obtain:
                                    In

                                                                             (3.19)

and

                                                                                                       (3.20)

with

  This is the equation known in biology as the allometric equa-
tion. In this discussion, the simplest form of growth of the parts
-viz., the exponential-has been assumed (3.17 and 3.18). The
allometric relation holds, however, also for somewhat more
complicated cases, such as growth according to the parabola, the
logistic, the Gompertz function, either strictly or as an approxi-
mation (Lumer, 1937).

   The allometric equation applies to a wide range of mor-
phological, biochemical, physiological and phylogenetic data. It
means that a certain characteristic, Ql, can be expressed as a
power function of another characteristic, Q2' Take, for instance,
morphogenesis. Then the length or weight of a certain organ, Ql'
is, in general, an allometric function of the size of another organ,
or of the total length or weight of the organism in question, Q2'
The meaning of this becomes clear if we write equations (3.17)
in a slightly different form:

            1 dQ2 1                        (3.21)

    dt                          dt

or

    dQl                             QI     (3.22)
        -=a'~--'

        dt                          Q2 dt

   Equation (3.21) states that the relative growth rates (i.e., in-
crease calculated as a percentage of actual size) of the parts under
consideration, Ql and Q2, stand in a constant proportion through-
out life, or during a life cycle for which the allometric equation
holds. This rather astonishing relation (because of the immense
complexity of growth processes it would seem, at first, unlikely
that the growth of parts is governed by an algebraic equation
Some System Concepts                                          65

of such simplicity) is explained by equation (3.22). According
to this equation, it can be interpreted as a result of a process
of distribution. Take Q2 for the whole organism; then equation
(3.22) states that the organ Ql takes, from the increase resulting

from the metabolism of the total organism (d~2), a share which

(g:). is proportional to its actual proportion to the latter  r:J. is

a partition coefficient indicating the capacity of the organ to

seize its share. If at > a2-i.e., if the growth intensity of Ql is

greater than that of Q2-then a: = ClJ, > I; the organ captures
                                                               a2

more than other parts; it grows therefore more rapidly than these

or with positive allometry. Conversely, if a l < a2-i.e., > r:J. I-the

organ grows more slowly, or shows negative allometry. Similarly,
the allometric equation applies to biochemical changes in the
organism, and to physiological functions. For instance, basal
metabolism increases, in wide groups of animals, with r:J. 2/3,
wIth respect to body weight if growing animals of the same
species, or animals of related species, are compared; this means
that basal metabolism is, in general, a surface function of body

= weight. In certain cases, such as insect larvae and snails, r:J. I,

i.e. basal metabolism is proportional to weight itself.
   In sociOlogy, the expression in question is Pareto's law

(1897) of the distribution of income within a nation, whereby

Ql = h0", with Ql number of individuals gaining a certain

income, Q2 = amount of the income, and band r:J. constants.
The explanation is similar to that given above, substituting for
"increase of the total organism" the national income, and for
"distribution constant" the economic abilities of the individuals
concerned.

   The situation becomes more complex if interactions between

the parts of the system are assumed-i.e., if a#i'i"'- O. Then we

come to systems of equations such as those studied by Volterra
(1931) for competition among species, and, correspondingly, by
Spiegelman (1945) for competition within an organism. Since
these cases are fully discussed in the literature we shall not enter
into a detailed discussion. Only one or two points of general
interest may be mentioned.
66  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   It is an interesting consequence that, in Volterra's equations,
competition of two species for the same resources is, in a way,
more fatal than a predator-prey relation-Le., partial annihilation
of one species by the other. Competition eventually leads to the
extermination of the species with the smaller growth capacity;
a predator-prey relation only leads to periodic oscillation of the
numbers of the species concerned around a mean value. These
relations have been stated for biocoenotic systems, but it may well
be that they have also sociological implications.

   Another point of philosophical interest should be mentioned.
If we are speaking of "systems," we mean "wholes" or "unities."
Then it seems paradoxical that, with respect to a whole, the
concept of competition between its parts is introduced. In fact,
however, these apparently contradictory statements both belong
to the essentials of systems. Every whole is based upon the
competition of its elements, and presupposes the "struggle be-
tween parts" (Roux). The latter is a general principle of org-<lni-
zation in simple physico-chemical systems as well as in organisms
and social units, and it is, in the last resort, an expression of the
coincidentia oppositorum that reality presents.

Wholeness) Sum, iVIechanization) Centralization

   The concepts just indicated have often been considered to
describe characteristics only of living beings, or even to be a
proof of vitalism. In actual fact they are formal properties of
systems.

   (1) Let us assume again that the equations (3.1) can be de-
veloped into Taylor series:

   We see that any change in some quantity, Qv is a function
of the quantities of all elements, Ql to Qu' On the other hand,
a change in a certain Qi causes a change in all other elements
and in the total system. The system therefore behaves as a whole,
the changes in every element depending on all the others.

   (2) Let the coefficients of the variables Qj (j ,.t. i) now become
zero. The system of equations degenerates into:
Some System Concepts

                                dQ;

                                                                                                   (3.24)

                                 dt

   This means that a change in each element depends only on
that element itself. Each element can therefore be considered
independent of the others. The variation of the total complex
is the (physical) sum of the variations of its elements. We may
call such behavior physical summativity or independence.

   We may define summativity by saying that a complex can be
built up, step by step, by putting together the first separate
elements; conversely, the characteristics of the complex can be
analyzed completely into those of the separate elements. This is
true for those complexes which we may call "heaps," such as a
heap of bricks or odds and ends, or for mechanical forces, acting
according to the parallelogram of forces. It does not apply to
those systems which were called Gestalten in German. Take the
most simple example: three electrical conductors have a certain
charge which can be measured in each conductor separately. But
if they are connected by wires, the charge in each conductor
depends on the total constellation, and is different from its
charge when insulated.

   Though this is trivial from the viewpoint of physics, it is still
necessary to emphasize the non-summative character of physical
and biological systems because the methodological attitude· has
been, and is yet to a large extent, determined by the mechanistic
program (von Bertalanffy, 1949a, 1960). In Lord Russell's book
(1948), we find a rather astonishing rejection of the "concept
of organism." This concept states, according to Russell, that the
laws governing the behavior of the parts can be stated only
by considering the place of the parts in the whole. Russell rejects
this view. He uses the example of an eye, the function of which
as a light receptor can be understood perfectly well if the eye
is isolated and if only the internal physico-chemical reactions,
and the incoming stimuli and outgoing nerve impulses, are taken,
into account. "Scientific progress has been made by analysis and
artificial isolation.... It is therefore in any case prudent to adopt
the mechanistic view as a working hypothesis, to be abandoned
only where there is clear evidence against it. As regards biological
phenomena, such evidence, so far, is entirely absent." It is true
that the principles of summativity are applicable to the living
68  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

organism to a certain extent. The beat of a heart, the twitch of
a nerve-muscle preparation, the action potentials in a nerve are
much the same if studied in isolation or within the organism as
a whole. This applies to those phenomena we shall define later
as occurring in highly "mechanized" partial systems. But Russell's
statement is profoundly untrue with respect exactly to the basic
and primary biological phenomena. If you take any realm of
biological phenomena, whether embryonic development, metabo-
lism, growth, activity of the nervous system, biocoenoses, etc.,
you will always find that the behavior of an element is different
within the system from what it is in isolation. You cannot sum
up the behavior of the whole from the isolated parts, and you
have to take into account the relations between the various
subordinated systems and the systems which are super-ordinated
to them in order to understand the behavior of the parts. Analysis
and artificial isolation are useful, but in no way sufficient,
methods of biological experimentation and theory.

   (3) Summativity in the mathematical sense means that the
change in the total system obeys an equation of the same form
as the equations for the parts. This is possible only when the
functions on the right side of the equation contain linear terms
only; a trivial case.

   (4) There is a further case which appears to be unusual in
physical systems but is common and basic in biological,psy-
chological and sociological systems. This case is that in which
the interactions between the elements decrease with time. In
terms of our basic model equation (3.1), this means that the
coefficients of the Q. are not constant, but decrease with time.
The simplest case will be:

    lim aij = 0  (3.25)

        t-'HD

   In this case the system passes from a state of wholeness to a
state of independence of the elements. The primary state is that
of a unitary system which splits up gradually into independent
causal chains. We may call this progressive segregation.

  As a rule, the organization of physical wholes, such as atoms,
molecules, or crystals, results from the union of pre-existing
elements. In contrast, the organization of biological wholes is
built up by differentiation of an original whole which segregates
Some System Concepts

into parts. An example is determination in embryonic develop-
ment, when the germ passes from a state of equipotentiality to
a state where it behaves like a mosaic or sum of regions which
develop independently into definite organs. The same is true in
the development and evolution of the nervous system and of
behavior starting with actions of the whole body or of large
regions and passing to the establishment of definite centers and
localized reflex arcs, and for many other biological phenomena.

   The reason for the predominance of segregation in living
nature seems to be that segregation into subordinate partial sys-
tems implies an increase of complexity in the system. Such transi-
tion towards higher order presupposes a supply of energy, and
energy is delivered continuously into the system only if the latter
is an open system, taking energy from its environment. We shall
come back to this question later on.

   In the state of wholeness, a disturbance of the system leads to
the introduction of a new state of equilibrium. If, however, the
system is split up into individual causal chains, these go on
independently. Increasing mechanization means increasing de-
termination of elements to functions only dependent on them-
selves, and consequent loss of regulability which rests in the
system as a whole, owing to the interrelations present. The
smaller the interaction coefficients become, the more the respec-
tive terms Qi can be neglected, and the more "machine-like" is the
system-Le., like a sum of independent parts.

   This fact, which may be termed "progressive mechanization,"
plays an important role in biology. Primary, it appears, is be-
havior resulting from interaction within the system; secondarily,
determination of the elements on actions dependent only on
these elements, transition from behavior as a whole to summative
behavior takes place. Examples are found in embryonic develop-
ment, where originally the performance of each region depends
on its position within the whole so that regulation following
arbitrary disturbance is possible; later on, the embryonic regions
are determined for one single performance-e.g., development of
a certain organ. In the nervous system, similarly, certain parts
become irreplaceable centers for certain-e.g., reflex-perform-
ances. Mechanization, however, is never complete in the biological
realm; even though the organism is partly mechanized, it still
remains a unitary system; this is the basis of regulation and of
70  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

the interaction with changing demands of the environment.
Similar considerations apply to social structures. In a primitive
community every member can perform almost anything expected
in its connection with the whole; in a highly differentiated com-
munity, each member is determined for a certain performance, or
complex of performances. The extreme case is reached in certain
insect communities, where the individuals are, so to speak, trans-
formed into machines determined for certain performances. The
determination of individuals into workers or soldiers in some ant
communities by way of nutritional differences at certain stages
amazingly resembles ontogenetic determination of germinal re-
gions to a certain developmental fate.

   In this contrast between wholeness and sum lies the tragical
tension in any biological, psychological and sociological evolu-
tion. Progress is possible only by passing from a state of undif-
ferentiated wholeness to differentiation of parts. This implies,
however, that the parts become fixed with respect to a certain
action. Therefore progressive segregation also means progressive
mechanization. Progressive mechanization, however, implies loss
of regulability. As long as a system is a unitary whole, a dis-
turbance will be followed by the attainment of a new stationary
state, due to the interactions within the system. The system is
self-regulating. If, however, the system is split up into independent
causal chains, regulability disappears. The partial processes will
go on irrespective of each other. This is the behavior we find,
for example, in embryonic development, determination going
hand in hand with decrease of regulability.

   Progress is possible only by subdivision of an initially unitary
action into actions of specialized parts. This, however, means at
the same time impoverishment, loss of performances still possible
in the undetermined state. The more parts are specialized in a
certain way, the more they are irreplaceable, and loss of parts
may lead to the breakdown of the total system. To speak
Aristotelian language, every evolution, by unfolding some poten-
tiality, nips in the bud many other possibilities. 1:Ve may find this
in embryonic development as well as in phylogenetic specializa-
tion, or in specialization in science or daily life (von Bertalanffy,
1949a, 1960, pp. 42 ff.).

   Behavior as a whole and summative behavior, unitary and
elementalistic conceptions, are usually regarded as being an-
Some System Concepts  ji71

titheses. But it is frequently found that there is no oppoSitIOn
between them, but gradual transition from behavior as a whole
to summative behavior.

   (5) Connected with this is yet another principle. Suppose that

the coefficients of one element, p., are large in all equations

while the coefficients of the other elements are considerably
smaller or even equal to zero. In this case the system may look
like this:

dt                    (3.26)

dQn

dt

if for simplicity we write the linear members only.
   Then relationships are given which can be expressed in

several ways. We may call the element p. a leading part, or say

that the system is centered around P., If the coefficients a,. of

p, in some or all equations are large while the coefficients in the
equation of p, itself are small, a small change in P. will cause a
considerable change in the total system. P. may be then called

a trigger. A small change in Ps will be "amplified" in the total

system. From the energetic viewpoint, in this case we do not find
"conservation causality" (Erhaltungskausalitat) where the prin-
ciple "causa aequat ef/ectum" holds, but "instigation causality"
(Anstosskausalitat) (Mittasch, 1948), an energetically insignificant

change in Ps causing a considerable change in the total system.

   The principle of centralization is especially important in the
biological realm. Progressive segregation is often connected with
progressive centralization, the expression of which is the time-

dependent evolution of a leading part-i.e., a combination of the
schemes (3.25) and (3.26). At the same time, the principle of

progressive centralization is that of progressive individualization.
An "individual" can be defined as a centralized system. Strictly

speaking this is, in the biological realm, a limiting case, only
approached ontogenetically and phylogenetically, the organism
growing through progressive centralization more and more unified
and "more indivisible."
72  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   All these facts may be observed in a variety of systems. Nicolai
Hartmann even demands centralization for every "dynamic
structure." He therefore recognizes only a few kinds of structures,
in the physical realm, those of smallest dimensions (the atom as
a planetary system of electrons around a nucleus) and of large
dimensions (planetary systems centralized by a sun). From the
biological viewpoint, we would emphasize progressive mechaniza-
tion and centralization. The primitive state is that where the
behavior of the system results from the interactions of equipoten-
tial parts; progressively, subordination under dominant parts
takes place. In embryology, for example, these are called organi-
zers (Spemann); in the central nervous system, parts first are
largely equipotential as in the diffuse nervous systems of lower
animals; later on subordination to leading centers of the nervous
system takes place.

   Thus, similar to progressive mechanization a principle of pro-
gressive centralization is found in biology, symbolized by time-
dependent formation of leading parts-i.e., a combination of
schemes (3.25) and (3.26). This viewpoint casts light on an
important, but not easily definable concept, that of the individual.
"Individual" stands for "indivisible." Is it, however, possible to
call a planarian or hydra an "individual" if these animals may
be cut up into any number of pieces and still regenerate a
complete animal? Double-headed hydras can easily be made by
experiment; then the two heads may fight for a daphnia, al-
though it is immaterial on which side the prey is caught; in any
case it is swallowed to reach the common stomach where it is
digested to the benefit of all parts. Even in higher organisms
individuality is doubtful, at least in early development. Not only
each half of a divided sea urchin embryo, but also the halves of a
salamander embryo develop into complete animals; identical
twins in man are, so to speak, the result of a Driesch experiment
carried out by nature. Similar considerations apply to the be-
havior of animals: in lower animals tropotaxis may take place
in the way of antagonistic action of the two halves of the body
if they are appropriately exposed to stimuli; ascending /the
evolutionary scale, increasing centralization appears; behavior is
not a resultant of partial mechanisms of equal rank but domi-
nated and unified by the highest centers of the nervous system
(d. von Bertalanffy, 1937; pp. 131ff., I 39ff.).
Some System Concepts

   Thus strictly speaking, biological individuality does not exist,
but only progressive individualization in evolution and develop-
ment resulting from progressive centralization, certain parts
gaining a dominant role and so determining behavior of the
whole. Hence the principle of progressive centralization also con-
stitutes progressive individualization. An individual is to be
defined as a centered system, this actually being a limiting case
approached in development and evolution so that the organism
becomes more unified and "indivisible" (d. von Bertalanffy, 1932;
pp. 269ff.). In the psychological field, a similar phenomenon is
the "centeredness" of gestalten, e.g., in perception; such centered-
ness appears necessary so that a psychic gestalt distinguishes itself
from others. In contrast to the "principle of ranklessness" of
association psychology, Metzger states (1941, p. 184) that "every
psychic formation, object, process, experience down to the
simplest gestalten of perception. exhibits a certain weight dis-
tribution and centralization; there is rank order, sometimes a
derivative relationship, among its parts, loci, properties." The
same applies again in the sociological realm: an amorphous mob
has no "individuality"; in order that a social structure be dis-
tinguished from others, grouping around certain individuals is
necessary. For this very reason, a biocoenosis like a lake or a
forest is not an "organism," because an individual organism
always is centered to a more or less large extent.

   Neglect of the principle of progressive mechanization and
centralization has frequently led to pseudoproblems, because
only the limiting cases of independent and summative elements,
or else complete interaction of equivalent elements were recog-
nized, not the biologically important intermediates. This plays
a role with respect to the problems of "gene" and "nervous
center." Older genetics (not modern genetics any more) was
inclined to consider the hereditary substance as a sum of corpus-
cular units determining individual characteristics or organs; the
objection is obvious that a sum of macromolecules cannot produce
the organized wholeness of the organism. The correct answer is
that the genome as a whole produces the organism as a whole,
certain genes, however, preeminently determining the direction of
development of certain characters-i.e., acting as "leading parts."
This is expressed in the insight that every hereditary trait is
co-determined by many, perhaps all genes, and that every gene
74                          GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

influences not one single trait but many, and possibly the total
organism (polygeny of characteristics and polypheny of genes).
In a similar way, in the function of the nervous system there·
was apparently the alternative of considering it either as a sum
of mechanisms for the individual functions, or else as a homo-
geneous nervous net. Here, too, the correct conception is that any
function ultimately results from interaction of all parts, but that
certain parts of the central nervous system influence it decisively
and therefore can be denoted as "centers" for that function.

   (6) A more general (but less visualizable) formulation of what
was said follows. If the change of Q, be any function F, of the Q.
and their derivates in the space coordinates we have:

    (2) If of. 0, i ~ j: "independence";

            oQj

    (4) If of; = J(t) , li'm of; 0:" progressi.ve mechllalza"tlO"n;
    aQi     OQi t -'> CJ:)

    (5) If o- f; » -o,J f .~. .s, or even: of; =0 :Q. 1. Sthe "dom.mant
    oQ. OQi                 oQi

    part."

   (7) The system concept as outlined asks for an important
addition. Systems are frequently structured in a way so that their
individual members again are systems of the next lower level.

° Hence each of the elements denoted by Ql> Q2 ... Q" is a system

of elements Oil' 0,2 ... 0,,,, in which each system is again
definable by equations similar to those of (3.1):

                  dOu Jii (0 i1, Oi2, ... 0 in).

                           dt

  Such superposition of systems is called hierarchical order. For
its individual levels, again the aspects of wholeness and sum-
mativity, progressive mechanization, centralization, finality, etc.,
apply.

  Such hierarchical structure and combination into systems of
ever higher order, is characteristic of reality as a whole and of
fundamental importance especially in biology, psychology and
sociology.
Some System Concepts  # 75

   (8) An important distinction is that of closed and open systems.
This will be discussed in Chapters 6-8.

Finality

   As we have seen, systems of equations of the type considered
may have three different kinds of solution. The system in ques·
tion may asymptotically attain a stable stationary state with
increasing time; it may never attain such state; or there may be
periodic oscillations. In case the system approaches a stationary
state, its variation can be expressed not only in terms of the
actual conditions but also in terms of the distance from the

stationary state. If Q,* are the solutions for the stationary state,

new variables:

                             Qi Qi* - Ql

can be introduced so that

dQl                   (3.27)

dt

   We may express this as follows. In case a system approaches
a stationary state, changes occurring may be expressed not only
in terms of actual conditions, but also in terms of the distance
from the equilibrium state; the system seems to "aim" at an
equilibrium to be reached only in the future. Or else, the happen-
ings may be expressed as depending on a future final state.

   It has been maintained for a long time that certain formula-
tions in physics have an apparently finalistic character. This
applies in two respects. Such teleology was especially seen in

the minimum principles of mechanics. Already Maupertuis con-

sidered his minimum principle as proof that the world, where
among many virtual movements the one leading to maximum
effect with minimum effort is realized, is the "best of all worlds"
and work of a purposeful creator. Euler made a similar remark:
"Since the construction of the whole world is the most eminent
and since it originated from the wisest creator, nothing is found
in the world which would not show a maximum or minimum
characteristic." A similar teleological aspect can be seen in Le
Chatelier's principle in physical chemistry and in Lenis rule of
electricity. All these principles express that in case of disturbance,
76  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

the system develops forces which counteract the disturbance and
restore a state of equilibrium; they are derivations from the
principle of minimum effect. Principles homologous to the prin-
ciple of minimum action in mechanics can be construed for any
type of system; thus Volterra (d. d'Ancona, 1939; pp. 98ff.) has
shown that a population dynamics homologous to mechanical
dynamics can be developed where a similar principle of minimum
action appears.

   The conceptual error of an anthropomorphic interpretation is
easily seen. The principle of minimum action and related prin-
ciples simply result from the fact that, if a system reaches a state
of equilibrium, the derivatives become zero; this implies that
certain variables reach an extremum, minimum or maximum;
only when these variables are denoted by anthropomorphic terms
like effect, constraint, work, etc., an apparent teleology in physical
processes emerges in physical action (d. Bavink, 1944).

   Finality can be spoken of also in the sense of dependence on
the future. As can be seen from equation (3.27), happenings can,
in fact, be considered and described as being determined not by
actual conditions, but also by the final state to be reached.
Secondly, this formulation is of a general nature; it does not only
apply to mechanics, but to any kind of system. Thirdly, the ques-
tion was frequently misinterpreted in biology and philosophy, so
that clarification is fairly important.

   Let us take, for a change, a growth equation formulated by the
author (von Bertalanffy, 1934 and elsewhere). The equation is:

= 1 l* - (1* - loe-kl) (d. pp. 17Iff.), where I represents the length

of the animal at time t, l* the final length, 10 the initial
length, and k a constant. This looks as if the length I of the
animal at time t were determined by the final value 1* which
will be reached only after infinitely long time. However, the
final state (1*) simply is an extremum condition obtained by
equating the differential quotient to zero so that t disappears.
In order to do so, we must first know the differential equation
by which the process is actually determined. This differential

equation is: c!!: = E ki and states that growth is determined

                  dt
by a counteraction of processes of anabolism and catabolism,
with parameters E and k respectively. In this equation, the process
at time t is determined only by the actual conditions and no
Some System Concepts  17

future state appears. By equating to zero, l* is defined by Elk.
The "teleological" final-value formula therefore is only a trans-
formation of the differential equation indicating actual condi-
tions. In other words, the directedness of the process towards
a final state is not a process differing from causality, but another
expression of it. The final state to be reached in future is not
a "vis a tronte" mysteriously attracting the system, but only
another expression for causal "vires a tergo." For this reason,
physics makes ample use of such final-value formulas because
the fact is mathematically clear and nobody attributes an anthro-
pomorphic "foresight" of the goal to a physical system. Biologists,
on the other hand, often regarded such formulas as somewhat
uncanny, either fearing a hidden vitalism, or else considering
such teleology or goal-directedness as "proof" for vitalism. For
with respect to animate rather than to inanimate nature, we tend
to compare finalistic processes with human foresight of the goal;
while, in fact, we are dealing with obvious, even mathematically
trivial relations.

   This matter was frequently misinterpreted even by philoso-
phers. From E. von Hartmann to modern authors like Kafka
(1922) and myself, finality was defined as the reverse of causality,
as dependence of the process on future instead of past con-
ditions. This was frequently objected to because, according to
this conception, a state A would depend on a state B in the
future, an existent on a non-existent (e.g., Gross 1930; similarly
Schlick). As the above shows, this formulation does not mean
an inconceivable "action" of a not existent future, but merely a
sometimes useful formulation of a fact which can be expressed
in terms of causality.

Types of Finality

   No detailed discussion of the problem of finality is intended
here, but enumeration of several types may be useful. Thus we
can distinguish:

   (1) Static teleology or fitness, meaning that an arrangement
        seems to be useful for a certain "purpose." Thus a fur
        coat is fit to keep the body warm, and so are hairs, feathers,
        or layers of fat in animals. Thorns may protect plants
        against grazing cattle, or imitative colorations and mimicries
78  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

     may be advantageous to protect animals against enemies.
(2) Dynamic teleology, meaning a directiveness of processes.

     Here different phenomena can be distinguished which are
     often confused:
  (i) Direction of events towards a final state which can be

        expressed as if the present behavior were dependent on
         that final state. Every system which attains a time-
        independent condition behaves in this way.
  (ii) Directiveness based upon structure, meaning that an
        arrangement of structures leads the process in such way
         that a certain result is achieved. This is true, of course,
        of the function of man-made machines yielding products
        or performances as desired. In living nature we find a
        structural order of processes that in its complication
        widely surpasses all man-made machines. Such order is
        found from the function of macroscopic organs, such
        as the eye as a sort of camera or the heart as a pump,
         to microscopic cell structures responsible for metabolism,
        secretion, excitability, heredity and so forth. Whilst
        man-made machines work in such a way as to yield
        certain products and performances, for example, fabrica-
        tion of airplanes or moving a railway train, the order
        of process in living systems is such as to maintain the
        system itself. An important part of these processes is
        represented by homeostasis (Canon)-i.e., those processes
        through which the material and energetical situation of
        the organism is maintained constant. Examples are the
        mechanisms of thermoregulation, of maintenance of
        osmotic pressure, of pH, of salt concentration, the regula-
        tion of posture and so forth. These regulations are
        governed, in a wide extent, by feedback mechanisms.
        Feedback means that from the output of a machine a
        certain amount is monitored back, as "information," to
        tHe input so as to regulate the latter and thus to stabilize
        or direct the action of the machine. Mechanisms of this
        kind are well known in technology, as, for instance, the
        governor of the steam-engine, self-steering missiles and
        other "servomechanisms." Feedback mechanisms appear
        to be responsible for a large part of organic regulations
        and phenomena of homeostasis, as recently emphasized
        by Cybernetics (Frank et al., 1948; Wiener, 1948).
Some System Concepts  79

(iii) There is, however, yet another basis for organic regula-
       tions. This is equifinality-i.e., the fact that the same
      final state can be reached from different initial condi-
       tions and in different ways. This is found to be the
      case in open systems, insofar as they attain a steady
       state. It appears that equifinality is responsible for the
      primary regulability of organic systems-i.e., for all
       those regulations which cannot be based upon prede-
       termined structures or mechanisms, but on the contrary,
      exclude such mechanisms and were regarded therefore
       as arguments for vitalism.

(iv) Finally, there is true finality or purposiveness, meaning
      that the actual behavior is determined by the foresight
      of the goaL This is the original Aristotelian concept.
      It presupposes that the future goal is already present
      in thought, and directs the present action. True pur-
      posiveness is characteristic of human behavior, and it
      is connected with the evolution of the symbolism of
      language and concepts (von BertalanffYl 1948a, 1965).
         The confusion of these different types of finality is
      one of the factors responsible for the confusion occurring
      in epistemology and theoretical biology. In the field of
      man-made things, fitness (a) and teleological working of
      machines (b, ii) are, of course, due to a planning intel-
     ligence (b, iv). Fitness in organic structures (a) can
      presumably be explained by the causal play of random
      mutations and natural selection. This explanation is,
      however, much less plausible for the origin of the very
      complicated organic mechanisms and feedback systems
      (b, ii). Vitalism is essentially the attempt to explain
     organic directiveness (b, ii and iii) by means of intelli-
      gence in foresight of the goal (b, ivy. This leads,
      methodologically, beyond the limits of natural science,
      and is empirically unjustified, since we have, even in
      the most astonishing phenomena of regulation or in-
      stinct, no justification for, but most definite reasons
      against, the assumption that for example an embryo
     or an insect is endowed with superhuman intelligence.
      An important part of those phenomena which have
      been advanced as "proofs of vitalism," such as equifi-
     nality and anamorphosis, are consequences of the char-
80  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

    acteristic state of the organism as an open system, and
    thus accessible to scientific interpretation and theory.

Isomorphism in Science

   The present study merely intended to briefly point out the
general aim and several concepts of general system theory.
Further tasks on the one hand would be to express this theory
in a logico.mathematically strict form; on the other hand the
principles holding for any type of systems would have to be
further developed. This is a concrete problem. For example,
demographic dynamics may be developed homologous to mechan-
ical dynamics (Volterra, d. d'Ancona, 1939). A principle of
minimum action may be found in various fields, in mechanics,
in physical chemistry as Le Cha.telier's principle which, as may
be proved, is also valid for open systems, in electricity as Lenz's
rule, in population theory according to Volterra, etc. A principle
of relaxation oscillations occurs in physical systems as well as in
many biological phenomena and certain models of population
dynamics. A general theory of periodicities appears as a desidera-
tum of various fields of science. Efforts will therefore have to be
made towards a development of principles such as those of
minimum action, conditions of stationary and periodic solutions
(equilibria and rhythmic fluctuations), the existence of steady
states and similar problems in a form generalized with respect
to physics and valid for systems in general.

   General system theory therefore is not a catalogue of well-
known differential equations and their solutions, but raises new
and well-defined problems which partly do not appear in physics,
but are of basic importance in non-physical fields. Just because
the phenomena concerned are not dealt with in ordinary physics,
these problems have often appeared as metaphysical or vitalistic.

   General system theory should further be an important regula-
tive device in science. The existence of laws of similar structure
in different fields makes possible the use of models which are
simpler or better known, for more complicated and less manage-
able phenomena. Therefore general system theory should be,
methodologically, an important means of controlling and instigat-
ing the transfer of principles from one field to another, and
it will no longer be necessary to duplicate or triplicate the
discovery of the same principles in different fields isolated from
Some System Concepts  81

each other. At the same time, by formulating exact criteria,
general system theory will guard against superficial analogies
which are useless in science and harmful in their practical con-
sequences.

   This requires a definition of the extent to which "analogies"
in science are permissible and useful.

   We have previously seen the appearance of similar system laws
in various sciences. The same is true of phenomena where the
general principles can be described in ordinary language though
they cannot be formulated in mathematical terms. For instance,
there are hardly processes more unlike phenomenologically and
in their intrinsic mechanisms than the formation of a whole
animal out of a divided sea-urchin or newt germ, the reestablish-
ment of normal function in the central nervous system after
removal or injury to some of its parts, and gestalt perception
in psychology. Nevertheless, the principles governing these dif-
ferent phenomena show striking similarities. Again, when we
investigate the development of the Germanic languages, it may
be observed that, beginning with a primitive language, certain
sound mutations occurred in parallel development in various
tribes, though these were geographically located far apart from
each other; in Iceland, on the British Isles, on the Iberian
peninsula. Mutual influence is out of question; the languages
rather developed independently after separation of the tribes,
and yet show definite parallelism.* The biologist may find a
corresponding principle in certain evolutionary developments.
There is, for instance, the group of extinct hoofed animals, the
titanotheres. During the Tertiary, they developed from smaller
into gigantic forms, while with increasing body size formation
of ever larger horns took place. A more detailed investigation
showed that the titanotheres, starting from those small, early
forms, split up into several groups which developed independently
of each other but still showed parallel characteristics. Thus we
find an interesting similarity in the phenomenon of parallel evo-
lution starting from common origins but developing independ-
ently-here: the independent evolution of tribal languages; there:
independent evolution of groups within a certain class of
mammals.

   In simple cases, the reason for isomorphism is readily seen.

   ·I am obliged to Prof. Otto Hofler for having indicated this phenomenon
to me.
82  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

For example, the exponential law states that, given a complex
of a number of entities, a constant percentage of these elements
decay or multiply per unit time. Therefore this law will apply
to the pounds in a banking account as well as to radium atoms,
molecules, bacteria, or individuals in a population. The logistic
law says that the increase, originally exponential, is limited by
some restricting conditions. Thus in autocatalytic reaction, a
compound catalyzes its own formation; but since the number of
molecules is finite in a closed reaction vessel, the reaction must
stop when all molecules are transformed, and must therefore
approach a limiting value. A population increases exponentially
with the increasing number of individuals, but if space and food
are limited, the amount of food available per individual de-
creases; therefore the increase in number cannot be unlimited,
but must approach a steady state defined as the maximum popu-
lation compatible with resources available. Railway lines which
already exist in a country lead to the intensification of traffic and
industry which, in turn, make necessary a denser railway net-
work, till a state of saturation is eventually reached; thus, railways
behave like autocatalyzers accelerating their own increase, and
their growth follows the autocatalytic curve. The parabolic law
is an expression for competition within a system, each element
taking its share according to its capacity as expressed by a
specific constant.. Therefore the law is of the same form whether it
applies to the competition of individuals in an economic system,
according to Pareto's law, or to organs competing within an
organism for nutritive material and showing allometric growth.

   There are obviously three prerequisites for the existence of
isomorphisms in different fields and sciences. Apparently, the
isomorphisms of laws rest in our cognition on the one hand, and
in reality on the other. Trivially, it is easy to write down any
complicated differential equation, yet even innocent-looking
expressions may be hard to solve, or give, at the least, cumber-
some solutions. The number of simple mathematical expressions
which will be preferably applied to describe natural phenomena
is limited. For this reason, laws identical in structure will appear
in intrinsically different fields. The same applies to statements in
ordinary language; here, too, the number of intellectual schemes
is restricted, and they will be applied in quite different realms.

   However, these laws and schemes would be of little help if the
Some System Concepts

world (i.e., the totality of observable events) was not such that
they could be applied to it. We can imagine a chaotic world or a
world which is too complicated to allow the application of the
relatively simple schemes which we are able to construct with
our limited intellect. That this is not so is the prerequisite that
science is possible. The structure of reality is such as to permit
the application of our conceptual constructs. We realize, how-
ever, that all scientific laws merely represent abstractions and
idealizations expressing certain aspects of reality. Every science
means a schematized picture of reality, in the sense that a certain
conceptual construct is unequivocally related to certain features
of order in reality; just as the blueprint of a building isn't the
building itself and by no means represents it in every detail
such as the arrangement of bricks and the forces keeping them
together, but nevertheless an unequivocal correspondence exists
between the design on paper and the real construction of stone,
iron and wood. The question of ultimate "truth" is not raised,
that is, in how far the plan of reality as mapped by science is
correct or in need or capable of improvement; likewise, whether
the structure of reality is expressed in one single blueprint
-i.e., the system of human science. Presumably different repre-
sentations are possible or even necessary-in a similar way as it
is meaningless to ask whether central or parallel projection, a
horizontal or a vertical plan are more "correct." That the latter
may be the case is indicated by instances where the same physical
"given" can be expressed in different "languages"-e.g., by thermo-
dynamics and statistical mechanics; or even complementary con-
siderations become necessary, as in the corpuscle and wave models
of microphysics. Independent of these questions, the existence
of science proves that it is possible to express certain traits of
order in reality by conceptual constructs. A presupposition for
this is that order exists in reality itself; similarly-to quote the
illustration mentioned-as we are able to draw the plan of a
house or a crystal, but not of stones whirling around after an
explosion or of the irregularly moving molecules in a liquid.

   Yet there is a third reason for the isomorphism of laws in
different realms which is important for the present purpose. In
our considerations we started with a general definition of "sys-
tem" defined as "a number of elements in interaction" and ex-
pressed by the system of equations (3.1). No special hypotheses
84  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

or statements were made about the nature of the system, of its
elements or the relations between them. Nevertheless from this
purely formal definition of "system," many properties follow
which in part are expressed in laws well-known in various fields
of science, and in part concern concepts previously regarded as
anthropomorphic, vitalistic or metaphysical. The parallelism of
general conceptions or even special laws in different fields there-
fore is a consequence of the fact that these are concerned with
"systems," and that certain general principles apply to systems
irrespective of their nature. Hence principles such as those of
wholeness and sum, mechanization, hierarchic order, approach
to steady states, equifinality, etc., may appear in quite different
disciplines. The isomorphism found in different realms is based
on the existence of general system principles, of a more or less
well-developed "general system theory."

   The limitations of this conception, on the other hand, can be
indicated by distinguishing three kinds or levels in the descrip-
tion of phenomena.

   At first, there are analogies-i.e., superficial similarities of
phenomena which correspond neither in their causal factors nor
in their relevant laws. Of this kind are the simulacra vitae,
popular in previous times, such as when the growth of an
organism was compared to the growth of a crystal or of an
osmotic cell. There are superficial similarities in the one or other
respect, while we are safe to say that the growth of a plant or an
animal does not follow the pattern of crystal growth or of an
osmotic structure, and the relevant laws are different in both
cases. The same applies to the consideration of a biocoenosis
(e.g., a forest) as an "organism," with the obvious difference
between the unification of an individual organism and the loose-
ness of a plant association; or the comparison of the development
of a population with birth, growth, aging and death of an
organism where the comparison of life cycles remains highly
dubious.

   A second level are homologies. Such are present when the
efficient factors are different, but the respective laws are formally
identical. Such homologies are of considerable importance as
conceptual models in science. They are frequently applied in
physics. Examples are the consideration of heat flow as a flow of
a heat substance, the comparison of electrical flow with the flow
Some System Concepts  '85

of a fluid, in general the transfer of the originally hydrodynamic
notion of gradient to electrical, chemical, etc., potentials. We
know exactly, of course, that there is no "heat substance" but
heat is to be interpreted in the sense of kinetic theory; yet the
model enables the stipulation of laws which are formally correct.

   It is logical homologies with which the present investigation
is concerned. We may express this as follows: If an object is a
system, it must have certain general system characteristics, ir-
respective of what the system is otherwise. Logical homology
makes possible not only isomorphy in science, but as a conceptual
model has the capacity of giving instructions for correct con-
sideration and eventual explanation of phenomena.

   The third level finally is explanation-Le., the statement of
specific conditions and laws that are valid for an individual
object or for a class of objects. In logico-mathematical language,

this means that the general functions f of our equation (3.1)

are replaced by specified functions applicable to the individual
case. Any scientific explanation necessitates the knowledge of
these specific laws as, for example, the laws of chemical equili-
brium, of growth of an organism, the development of a popula-
tion, etc. It is possible that also specific laws present formal
correspondence or homologies in the sense discussed; but the
structure of individual laws may, of course, be different in the
individual cases.

   Analogies are scientifically worthless. Homologies, in contrast,
often present valuable models, and therefore are widely applied
in physics. Similarly, general system theory can serve as a regula-
tory device to distinguish analogies and homologies, meaningless
similarities and meaningful transfer of models. This function
particularly applies to sciences which, like demography, sociology,
and large fields in biology, cannot be fitted in the framework of
physics and chemistry; nevertheless, there are exact laws which
can be stated by application of suitable models.

   The homology of system characteristics does not imply reduc-
tion of one realm to another and lower one. But neither is it
mere metaphor or analogy; rather, it is a formal correspondence
founded in reality inasmuch as it can be considered as consti-
tuted of "systems" of whatever kind.

   Speaking philosophically, general system theory, in its de-
veloped form, would replace what is known as "theory of
86  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

categories" (N. Hartmann, 1942) by an exact system of logico-
mathematical laws. General notions as yet expressed in the
vernacular would acquire the unambiguous and exact expression
possible only in mathematical language.

The Unity of Science

   We may summarize the main results of this presentation as
follows:

   (a) The analysis of general system principles shows that many
concepts which have often been considered as anthropomorphic,
metaphysical, or vitalistic are accessible to exact formulation.
They are consequences of the definition of systems or of certain
system conditions.

   (b) Such investigation is a useful prerequisite with respect to
concrete problems in science. In particular, it leads to the eluci-
dation of problems which, in the usual schematisms and pigeon-
holes of the specialized fields, are not envisaged. Thus system
theory should prove an important means in the process of
developing new branches of knowledge into exact science-i.e.,
into systems of mathematical laws.

   (c) This investigation is equally important to philosophy of
science, major problems of which gain new and often surprising
aspects.

   (d) The fact that certain principles apply to systems in general,
irrespective of the nature of the systems and of the entities con-
cerned, explains that corresponding conceptions and laws appear
independently in different fields of science, causing the remark-
able parallelism in their modern development. Thus, concepts
such as wholeness and sum, mechanization, centralization, hier-
archical order, stationary and steady states, equifinality, etc., are
found in different fields of natural science, as well as in psy-
chology and sociology.

   These considerations have a definite bearing on the question
of the Unity of Science. The current opinion has been well repre-
sented by Carnap (1934). As he states, Unity of Science is granted
by the fact that all statements in science can ultimately be
expressed in physical language-i.e., in the form of statements
that attach quantitative values to definite positions in a space-
time system of co-ordinates. In this sense, all seemingly non-
                      ~

Some System Concepts     87

physical concepts, for instance specifically biological notions such
as "species," "organism," "fertilization," and so forth, are defined
by means of certain perceptible criteria-i.e., qualitative determi-
nations capable of being physicalized. The physical language is
therefore the universal language of science. The question whether
biological laws can be reduced to physical ones-i.e., whether the
natural laws sufficient to explain all inorganic phenomena are
also sufficient to explain biological phenomena-is left open by
Carnap, though with preference given to an answer in the
affirmative.

   From our point of view, Unity of Science wins a much more
concrete and, at the same time, profounder aspect. We too leave
open the question of the "ultimate reduction" of the laws of
biology (and the other non-physical realms) to physics-i.e., the
question whether a hypothetico-deductive system embracing all
sciences from physics to biology and sociology may ever be
established. But we are certainly able to establish scientific laws
for the different levels or strata of reality. And here we find,
speaking in the "formal mode" (Carnap), a correspondence or
isomorphy of laws and conceptual schemes in different fields,
granting the Unity of Science. Speaking in "material" language,
this means that the world (i.e., the total of observable phenomena)
shows a structural uniformity, manifesting itself by isomorphic
traces of order in its different levels or realms.

   Reality, in the modern conception, appears as a tremendous
hierarchical order of organized entities, leading, in a superposition
of many levels, from physical and chemical to biological and
sociological systems. Unity of Science is granted, not by a utopian
reduction of all sciences to physics and chemistry, but by the
structural uniformities of the different levels of reality.

   Especially the gap between natural and social sciences, or, to
use the more expressive German terms, of Natur- und Geisteswis-
senschaften, is greatly diminished, not in the sense of a reduction
of the latter to biological conceptions but in the sense of struc-
tural similarities. This is the cause of the appearance of cor-
responding general viewpoints and notions in both fields, and
may eventually lead to the establishment of a system of laws in
the latter.

   The mechanistic world-view found its ideal in the Laplacean
spirit-i.e., in the conception that all phenomena are ultimately
88  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

aggregates of fortuitous actions of elementary physical units.
Theoretically, this conception did not lead to exact sciences out-
side the field of physics-i.e., to laws of the higher levels of reality,
the biological, psychological and sociological. Practically, its
consequences have been fatal for our civilization. The attitude
that considers physical phenomena as the sole standard of reality
has lead to the mechanization of mankind and to the devaluation
of higher values. The unregulated domination of physical tech-
nology finally ushered the world into the catastrophical crises
of our time. After having overthrown the mechanistic view, we
are careful not to slide into "biologism," that is, into considering
mental, sociological and cultural phenomena from a merely
biological standpoint. As physicalism considered the living or-
ganism as a strange combination of physico-chemical events or
machines, biologism considers man as a curious zoological species,
human society as a beehive or stud-farm. Biologism has,. theoret-
ically, not proved its theoretical merits, and has proved fatal in
its practical consequences. The organismic conception does not

mean a: unilateral dominance of biological conceptions. When

emphasizing general structural isomorphies of different levels, it
asserts, at the same time, their autonomy and possession of
specific laws.

   We believe that the future elaboration of general system theory
will prove to be a major step towards unification of science. It
may be destined in the science of the future, to playa role similar
to that of Aristotelian logic in the science of antiquity. The Greek
conception of the world was static, things being considered to be
a mirroring of eternal archetypes or ideas. Therefore classification
was the central problem in science, the fundamental organon of
which is the definition of subordination and superordination of
concepts. In modern science, dynamic interaction appears to be
the central problem in all fields of reality. Its general principles
are to be defined by system theory.
  4 Advances in

         General System Theory

                                      Since creative thought is the most important
                                thing that makes people different from monkeys,
                              it should be treated as a commodity more precious

                                           than gold and preserved with great care.
                            A. D. Hall, A Methodology for Systems Engineering

A pproaches and A ims in Systems Science
   When, some 40 years ago, I started my life as a scientist, biology

was involved in the mechanism-vitalism controversy. The mecha-
nistic rrocedure essentially was to resolve the living organism into
parts and partial processes: the organism was an aggregate of
cells, the cell one of colloids and organic molecules, behavior
a sum of unconditional and conditioned reflexes, and so forth.
The problems of organization of these parts in the service of
maintenance of the organism, of regulation after disturbances
and the like were either by-passed or, according to the theory
known as vitalism, explainable only by the action of soul-like
fc::ctors-little hobgoblins as it were-hovering in the cell or the
organism-which obviously was nothing less than a declaration of
the bankruptcy of science. In this situation, I and others were led
to the so-called organismic viewpoint. In one brief sentence, it
means that organisms are organized things and, as biologists, we
have to find out about it. I tried to implement this organismic
program in various studies on metabolism, growth, and the bio-
                                                                      GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

physics of the organism. One step in this direction was the so-
called theory of open systems and steady states which essentially is
an expansion of conventional physical chemistry, kinetics and
thermodynamics. It appeared, however, that I could not stop on
the way once taken and so I was led to a still further generaliza-
tion which I called "General System Theory." The idea goes back
some considerable time: I presented it first in 1937 in Charles
Morris' philosophy seminar at the University of Chicago. How-
ever, at that time theory was in bad repute in biology, and I
was afraid of what Gauss, the mathematician, called the "clamor
of the Boeotians." So I left my drafts in the drawer, and it was
only after the war that my first publications on the subject
appeared.

   Then, however, something interesting and surprising happened.
It turned out that a change in intellectual climate had taken
place, making model building and abstract generalizations fash-
ionable. Even more: quite a number of scientists had followed
similar lines of thought. So general system theory, after all,
was not isolated, not a personal idiosyncrasy as I had believed,
but corresponded to a trend in modern thinking.

   There are quite a number of novel developments intended to
meet the needs of a general theory of systems. We may enumerate
them in a brief survey:

   (1) Cybernetics, based upon the principle of feedback or cir-
cular causal trains providing mechanisms for goal-seeking and
self-controlling behavior.

   (2) Information theory, introducing the concept of information
as a quantity measurable by an expression isomorphic to nega-
tive entropy in physics, and developing the principles of its
transmission.

   (3) Game theory analyzing, in a novel mathematical frame-
work, rational competition between two or more antagonists for
maximum gain and minimum loss.

   (4) Decision theory, similarly analyzing rational choices, within
human organizations, based upon examination of a given situa-
tion and its possible outcomes.

   (5) Topology or relational mathematics, including non-metrical
fields such as network and graph theory.

   (6) Factor analysis, i.e., isolation, by way of mathematical
analysis, of factors in multivariable phenomena in psychology
and other fields.
Advances in General System Theory

   (7) General system theory in the narrower sense (G.S.T.), try-
ing to derive, from a general definition of "system" as a complex
of interacting components, concepts characteristic of organized
wholes such as interaction, sum, mechanization, centralization,
competition, finality, etc., and to apply them to concrete phe-
nomena.

   While systems theory in the broad sense has the character of a
basic science, it has its correlate in applied science, sometimes
subsumed under the general name of Systems Science. This de-
velopment is closely connected with modern automation. Broadly
speaking, the following fields can be distinguished (Ackoff, 1960;
A.D. Hall, 1962):

   Systems Engineering, i.e., scientific planning, design, evaluation,
and construction of man-machine systems;

   Operations research, i.e., scientific control of existing systems
of men, machines, materials, money, etc.;

   Human Engineering, i.e., scientific adaptation of systems and
especially machines in order to obtain maximum efficiency with
minimum cost in money and other expenses.

   A very simple example for the necessity of study of "man-
machine systems" is air travel. Anybody crossing continents by
jet with incredible speed and having to spend endless hours
waiting, queuing, being herded in airports, can easily realize that
the physical techniques in air travel are at their best, while
"organizational" techniques still are on a most primitive level.

   Although there is considerable overlapping, different concep-
tual tools are predominant in the individual fields. In systems
engineering, cybernetics and information theory and also general
system theory in the narrower sense are used. Operations research
uses tools such as linear programming and game theory. Human
engineering, concerned with the abilities, physiological limita·
tions and variabilities of human beings, includes biomechanics,
engineering psychology, human factors, etc., among its tools.

   The present survey is not concerned with applied systems
science; the reader is referred to Hall's book as an excellent
textbook of systems engineering (1962). However it is well to
keep in mind that the systems approach as a novel concept in
science has a close parallel in technology.

   The motives leading to the postulate of a general theory of
systems can be summarized under a few headings.

   (1) Up to recent times the field of science as a nomothetic en·
92  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY·

deavor, i.e., trying to establish an explanatory and predictive
system of laws, was practically identical with theoretical physics.
Consequently, physical reality appeared to be the only one vouch-
safed by science. The consequence was the postulate of reduc-
tionism, i.e. the principle that biology, behavior and the social
sciences are to be handled according to the paragon of physics,
and eventually should be reduced to concepts and entities of
the physical level. Owing to developments in physics itself, the
physicalistic and reductionist theses became problematic, and
indeed appeared as metaphysical prejudices. The entities about
which physics is talking-atoms, elementary particles and the like
-have turned out to be much more ambiguous than previously
supposed: not metaphysical building blocks of the universe, but
rather complicated conceptual models invented to take account
of certain phenomena of observation. On the other hand, the
biological, behavioral and social sciences have come into their
own. Owing to the concern with these fields on the one hand, and
the exigencies of a new technology, a generalization of scientific
concepts and models became necessary which resulted in the
emergence of new fields beyond the traditional system of physics.

   (2) In the biological, behavioral and sociological fields, there
exist predominant problems which were neglected in classical
science or rather which did not enter its considerations. If we
look at a living organism, we observe an amazing order, organiza-
tion, maintenance in continuous change, regulation and apparent
teleology. Similarly, in human behavior goal-seeking and pur-
posiveness cannot be overlooked, even if we accept a strictly be-
havioristic standpoint. However, concepts like organization,
directiveness, teleology, etc., just do not appear in the classic
system of science. As a matter of fact, in the so-called mechanistic
world view based upon classical physics, they were considered as
illusory Or metaphysical. This means, for example, to the biologist
that just the specific problems of living nature appeared to lie
beyond the legitimate field of science. The appearance of
models-conceptual and in some cases even material-represent-
ing such aspects of multivariable interaction, organization, self-
maintenance, directiveness, etc., implies introduction of new
categories in scientific thought and research.

   (3) Classical science was essentially concerned with two-variable
problems, linear causal trains, one cause and one effect, or with
Advances in General System Theory  98

few variables at the most. The classical example is mechanics.
It gives perfect solutions for the attraction between two celestial.
bodies, a sun and a planet, and hence permits exact prediction
of future constellations and even the existence of still undetected
planets. However, already the three·body problem of mechanics
is insoluble in principle and can only be approached by ap-
proximations. A similar situation exists in the more modern
field of atomic physics (Zacharias, 1957). Here also two-body prob-
lems such as that of one proton and electron are solvable, but
trouble arises with the many-body problem. Many problems, par-
ticularly in biology and the behavioral and social sciences, are
essentially multivariable problems for which new conceptual tools
are needed. Warren Weaver (1948), co-founder of information
theory, has expressed this in an often-quoted statement. Classical
science, he stated, was concerned either with linear causal trains,
that is, two-variable problems; or else with unorganized complex-
ity. The latter can be handled with statistical methods and ulti-
mately stems from the second principle of thermodynamics.
However, in modern physics and biology, problems of organized
complexity, i.e., interaction of a large but not infinite number
of variables, are popping up everywhere and demand new con-
ceptual tools.

   (4) What has been said are not metaphysical or philosophic
contentions. We are not erecting a barrier between inorganic and
living nature which obviously would be inappropriate in view of
intermediates such as viruses, nudeo-proteins and self-duplicating
units. Nor do we protest that biology is in principle "irreducible
to physics" which also would be out of place in view of the tre-
mendous advances of physical and chemical explanation of life
processes. Similarly, no barrier between biology and the behav-
ioral and social sciences is intended. This, however, does not
obviate the fact that in the fields mentioned we do not have
appropriate conceptual tools serving for explanation and predic-
tion as we have in physics and its various fields of application.

   (5) It therefore appears that an expansion of science is required
to deal with those aspects which are left out in physics and
happen to concern the specific characteristics of biological, be-
havioral, and social phenomena. This amounts to new conceptual
models to be introduced.

   (6) These expanded and generalized theoretical constructs or
94  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

models are interdisciplinary-i.e., they transcend the conventional
departments of science, and are applicable to phenomena in
various fields. This results in the isomorphism of models, general
principles and even special laws appearing in various fields.

   In summary: Inclusion of the biological, behavioral and social
sciences and modern technology necessitate generalization of basic
concepts in science; this implies new categories of scientific think-
ing compared to those in traditional physics; and models intro-
duced for such purpose are of an interdisciplinary nature.

   An important consideration is that the various approaches
enumerated are not, and should not be considered to be monopo-
listic. One of the important aspects of the modern changes in
scientific thought is that there is no unique and all-embracing
"world system." All scientific constructs are models representing
certain aspects or perspectives of reality. This even applies to
theoretical physics: far from being a metaphysical presentation
of ultimate reality (as the materialism of the past proclaimed
and modern positivism still implies), it is but one of tbese models
and, as recent developments show, neither exhaustive nor unique.
The various "systems theories" also are models that mirror dif-
ferent aspects. They are not mutually exclusive and are often com-
bined in application. For example, certain phenomena may be
amenable to scientific exploration by way of cybernetics, others
by way of general system theory in the narrower sense; or even
in the same phenomenon, certain aspects may be describable in
the one or the other way. This, of course, does not preclude but
rather implies the bope for further synthesis in which the various
approaches of the present toward a theory of "wholeness" and
"organization" may be integrated and unified. Actually, such
further syntheses, e.g., between irreversible thermodynamics and
information theory, are slowly developing.

Methods in General Systems Research

   Ashby (1958a) has admirably outlined two possible ways or
general methods in systems study:

      Two main lines are readily distinguished. One, already well
   developed in the hands of von Bertalanffy and his co-workers,
   takes the world as we find it, examines the various systems
   that occur in it-zoological, physiological, and so on-and then
Advances in General System Theory  " 95

draws up statements about the regularities that have been ob-
served to hold. This method is essentially empirical. The second
method is to start at the other end. Instead of studying first
one system, then a second, then a third, and so on, it goes to
the other extreme, considers the set of all conceivable systems
and then reduces the set to a more reasonable size. This is
the method I have recently followed.

   It will easily be seen that all systems studies follow one or the
other of these methods or a combination of both. Each of the
approaches has its advantages as well as shortcomings.

   (1) The first method is empirico-intuitive; it has the advantage
that it remains rather close to reality and can easily be illustrated
and even verified by examples taken from the individual fields
of science. On the other hand, the approach lacks mathematical
elegance and deductive strength and, to the mathematically
minded, will appear naive and unsystematic.

   Nevertheless, the merits of this empirico-intuitive procedure
should not be minimized.

   The present writer has stated a number of "system principles,"
partly in the context of biological theory and without explicit
reference to G.S.T. (von Bertalanffy, 1960a, pp. 37-54), partly in
what emphatically was entitled an "Outline" of this theory (Chap-
ter 3). This was meant in the literal sense: It was intended to call
attention to the desirability of such a field, and the presentation
was in the way of a sketch or blueprint, illustrating the approach
by simple examples.

   However, it turned out that this intuitive survey appears to be
remarkably complete. The main principles offered such as whole-
ness, sum, centralization, differentiation, leading part, closed and
open system, finality, equifinality, growth in time, relative growth,
competition, have been used in manifold ways (e.g., general
definition of system: Hall and Fagen, 1956; types of growth:
Keiter, 1951-52; systems engineering: A.D. Hall, 1962; social work:
Hearn, 1958). Excepting minor variations in terminology intended
for clarification or due to the subject matter, no principles of
similar significance were added-even though this would be highly
desirable. It is perhaps even more significant that this also applies
to considerations which do not refer to the present writer's work
and hence cannot be said to be unduly influenced by it. Perusal
96  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

of studies such as those by Beer (1960) and Kremyanskiy (1960) on
principles, Bradley and Calvin (1956) on the network of chemical
reactions, Haire (1959) on growth of organizations, etc., will
easily show that they are also using the "Bertalanffy principles."

   (2) The way of deductive systems theory was followed by Ash-
by (1958b). A more informal presentation which summarizes
Ashby's reasoning (1962) lends itself particularly well to analysis.

   Ashby asks about the "fundamental concept of machine" and
answers the question by stating "that its internal state, and the
state of its surroundings, defines uniquely the next state it will
go to." If the variables are continuous, this definition corresponds
to the description of a dynamic system by a set of ordinary dif-
ferential equations with time as the independent variable. How-
ever, such representation by differential equations is too restricted
for a theory to include biological systems and calculating ma-
chines where discontinuities are ubiquitous. Therefore the modern
definition is the "machine with input": It is defined by a set S

of internal states, a set I of input and a mapping f of the product

set I X S into S. "Organization," then, is defined by specifying
the machine's states S and its conditions 1. If S is a product set

= S TTiT" with i as the parts and T specified by the mapping

f, a "self-organizing" system, according to Ashby, can have two

meanings, namely: (1) The system starts with its parts separate,
and these parts then change toward forming connections (ex-
ample: cells of the embryo, first having little or no effect on one
another, join by formation of dendrites and synapses to form the
highly interdependent nervous system). This first meaning is
"changing from unorganized to organized." (2) The second mean-
ing is "changing from a bad organization to a good one" (ex-
amples: a child whose brain organization makes it fire-seeking at
first, while a new brain organization makes him fire-avoiding; an
automatic pilot and plane coupled first by deleterious positive
feedback and then improved). "There the organization is bad.
The system would be 'self-organizing' if a change were automati-
cally made" (changing positive into negative feedback). But "no
machine can be self-organizing in this sense" (author'S italics).
For adaptation (e.g., of the homeostat or in a self-programming

computer) means that we start with a set S of states, and that f

changes into g, so that organization is a variable, e.g., a function

of time a (t) which has first the value f and later the value g.
Advances in General System Theory  ~ 97

However, this change "cannot be ascribed to any cause in the
set S; so it must come from some outside agent, acting on the
system S as input" (our italics). In other terms, to be "self-
organizing" the machine S must be coupled to another machine.

   This concise statement permits observation of the limitations
of this approach. We completely agree that description by dif-
ferential equations is not only a clumsy but, in principle, in-
adequate way to deal with many problems of organization. The
author was well aware of this, emphasizing that a system of
simultaneous differential equations is by no means the most
general formulation and is chosen only for illustrative purposes
(Chapter 3).

   However, in overcoming this limitation, Ashby introduced
another one. His "modern definition" of system as a "machine
with input" as reproduced above, supplants the general system
model by another rather special one: the cybernetic model-i.e.,
a system open to information but closed with respect to entropy
transfer. This becomes apparent when the definition is applied to
"self-organizing systems." Characteristically, the most important
kind of these has no place in Ashby's model, namely systems
organizing themselves by way of progressive differentiation, evolv-
ing from states of lower to states of higher complexity. This is,
of course, the most obvious form of "self-organization," apparent
in ontogenesis, probable in phylogenesis, and certainly also valid
in many social organizations. We have here not a question of
"good" (i.e., useful, adaptive) or "bad" organization which, as
Ashby correctly emphasizes, is relative to circumstances; increase
in differentiation and complexity-whether useful or not-is a
criterion that is objective and at least in principle amenable to
measurement (e.g., in terms of decreasing entropy, of information).
Ashby's contention that "no machine can be self-organizing,"
more explicitly, that the "change cannot be ascribed to any cause
in the set S" but "must come from some outside agent, an input"
amounts to exclusion of self-differentiating systems. The reason
that such systems are not permitted as "Ashby machines" is
patent. Self-differentiating systems that evolve toward higher
complexity (decreasing entropy) are, for thermodynamic reasons,
possible only as open systems-e.g., systems importing matter con-
taining free energy to an amount overcompensating the increase
in entropy due to irreversible processes within the system ("im-
98  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

port of negative entropy" in Schrodinger's expression). However,
we cannot say that "this change comes from some outside agent,
an input"; the differentiation within a developing embryo and
organism is due to its internal laws of organization, and the
input (e.g., oxygen supply which may vary quantitatively, or
nutrition which can vary qualitatively within a broad spectrum)
makes it only possible energetically.

   The above is further illustrated by additional examples given
by Ashby. Suppose a digital computer is carrying through multi-
plications at random; then the machine will "evolve" toward
showing even numbers (because products even X even as well
as even X odd give numbers even), and eventually only zeros
will be "surviving." In still another version Ashby quotes Shan-
non's Tenth Theorem, stating that if a correction channel has
capacity H, equivocation of the amount H can be removed, but
no more. Both examples illustrate the working of closed systems:
The "evolution" of the computer is one toward disappearance
of differentiation and establishment of maximum homogeneity
(analog to the second principle in closed systems); Shannon's
Theorem similarly concerns closed systems where no negative
entropy is fed in. Compared to the information content (organi-
zation) of a living system, the imported matter (nutrition, etc.)
carries not information but "noise." Nevertheless, its negative
entropy is used to maintain or even to increase the information
content of the system. This is a state of affairs apparently not
provided for in Shannon's Tenth Theorem, and understandably
so as he is not treating information transfer in open systems
with transformation of matter.

   In both respects, the living organism (and other behavioral
and social systems) is not an Ashby machine because it evolves
toward increasing differentiation and inhomogeneity, and can
correct "noise" to a higher degree than an inanimate communica-
tion channeL Both, however, are consequences of the organism's
character as an open system.

   Incidentally, it is for similar reasons that we cannot replace
the concept of "system" by the generalized "machine" concept of
Ashby. Even though the latter is more liberal compared to the
classic one (machines defined as systems with fixed arrangement
of parts and processes), the objections against a "machine theory"
of life (von Bertalanffy, 1960, pp. 16-20 and elsewhere) remain
valid.
Advances in General System Theory  .. 99

   These remarks are not intended as adverse criticism of Ashby's
or the deductive approach in general; they only emphasize that
there is no royal road to general systems theory. As every other
scientific field, it will have to develop by an interplay of empirical,
intuitive and deductive procedures. If the intuitive approach
leaves much to be desired in logical rigor and completeness, the
deductive approach faces the difficulty of whether the funda-
mental terms are correctly chosen. This is not a particular fault
of the theory or of the workers concerned but a rather common
phenomenon in the history of science; one may, for example,
remember the long debate as to what magnitude-force or energy
-is to be considered as constant in physical transformations until
the issue was decided in favor of mv2/2.

   In the present writer's mind, G.S.T. was conceived as a
working hypothesis; being a practicing scientist, he sees the main
function of theoretical models in the explanation, prediction and
control of hitherto unexplored phenomena. Others may, with
equal right, emphasize the importance of axiomatic approach
and quote to this effect examples like the theory of probability,
non-Euclidean geometries, more recently information and game
theory, which were first developed as deductive mathematical
fields and later applied in physics or other sciences. There should
be no quarrel about this point. The danger, in both approaches,
is to consider too early the theoretical model as being closed
and definitive-a danger particularly important in a field like
general systems which is still groping to find its correct foun-
dations.

Advances of General System Theo-ry

   The decisive question is that of the explanatory and predictive
value of the "new theories" attacking the host of problems around
wholeness, teleology, etc. Of course, the change in intellectual
climate which allows one to see new problems which were over-
looked previously, or to see problems in a new light, is in a way
more important than any single and special application. The
"Copernican Revolution" was more than the possibility some-
what better to calculate the movement of the planets; general
relativity more than an explanation of a very small number of
recalcitrant phenomena in physics; Darwinism more than a
hypothetical answer to zoological problems; it was the changes
100  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

in the general frame of reference that mattered (d. Rapoport,
I 959a). Nevertheless, the justification of such change ultimately
is in specific achievements which would not have been obtained
without the new theory.

   There is no question that new horizons have been opened up
but the relations to empirical facts often remain tenuous. Thus,
information theory has been hailed as a "major breakthrough,"
but outside the original technological field, contributions have
remained scarce. In psychology, they are so far limited to rather
trivial applications such as rote learning, etc. (Rapoport, 1956,
Attneave, 1959). When, in biology, DNA is spoken of as "coded
information" and of "breaking the code" when the structure of
nucleic adds is elucidated, use of the term information is a fafon
de parler rather than application of information theory in the
technical sense as developed by Shannon and Weaver (1949).
"Information theory, although useful for computer design and
network analysis, has so far not found a significant place in
biology" (Bell, 1962). Game theory, too, is a novel mathematical
development which was considered to be comparable in scope to
Newtonian mechanics and the introduction of calculus; again,
"the applications are meager and faltering" (Rapoport, 1959a;
the reader is urgently referred to Rapoport's discussions on in-
formation and game theory which admirably analyze the prob-
lems here mentioned). The same is seen in decision theory from
which considerable gain in applied systems science was expected;
but as regards the much-advertised military and business games,
"there has been no controlled evaluation of their performance in
training, personnel selection, and demonstration" (Ackoff, 1959).

   A danger in recent developments should not remain unmen-
tioned. Science of the past (and partly still the present) was
dominated by one-sided empiricism. Only collection of data and
experiments were considered as being "scientific" in biology (and
psychology); "theory" was equated with "speculation" or "phi-
losophy," forgetting that a mere accumulation of data, although
steadily piling up, does not make a "science." Lack of recogni-
tion and support for development of the necessary theoretical
framework and unfavorable influence on experimental research
itself (which largely became an at-random, hit-or-miss endeavor)
was the consequence (d. Weiss, 1962a). This has, in certain fields,
changed to the contrary in recent years. Enthusiasm for the new
Advances in General System Theory  ~. 101

mathematical and logical tools available has led to feverish
"model building" as a purpose in itself and often without regard
to empirical fact. However, conceptual experimentation at ran-
dom has no greater chances of success than at-random experi-
mentation in the laboratory. In the words of Ackoff (1959), there
is the fundamental misconception in game (and other) theory to
mistake for a "problem" what actually is only a mathematical
"exercise." One would do well to remember the old Kantian
maxim that experience without theory is blind but theory with-
out experience a mere intellectual play.

   The case is somewhat different with cybernetics. The model
here applied is not new; although the enormous development
in the field dates from the introduction of the name, Cybernetics·
(Wiener, 1948), application of the feedback principle to physio-
logical processes goes back to R. Wagner's work nearly 40 years
ago (d. Kment, 1959). The feedback and homeostasis model has
since been applied to innumerable biological phenomena and-
somewhat less persuasively-in psychology and the social sciences.
The reason for the latter fact is, in Rapoport's words (1956) that

usually, there is a well-marked correlation between the scope
and the soundness of the writings.... The sound work is con-
fined either to engineering or to rather trivial applications;
ambitious formulations remain vague.

   This, of course, is an ever-present danger in all approaches to
general systems theory: doubtless, there is a new compass of
thought but it is difficult to steer between the Scylla of the trivial
and the Charybdis of mistaking neologisms for explanation.

   The following survey is limited to "classical" general system
theory-"classical" not in the sense that it claims any priority or
excellence, but that the models used remain in the framework
of "classical" mathematics in contradistinction to the "new"
mathematics in game, network, information theory, etc. This does
not imply that the theory is merely application of conventional
mathematics. On the contrary, the system concept poses problems
which are partly far from being answered. In the past, system
problems have led to important mathematical developments such
as Volterra's theory of integro-differential equations, of systems
with "memory" whose behavior depends not only on actual con-
ditions but also on previous history. Presently important prob-
102  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

lems are waiting for further developments, e.g., a general theory
of non-linear differential equations, of steady states and rhythmic
phenomena, a generalized principle of least action, the thermo-
dynamic definition of steady states, etc.

   It is, of course, irrelevant whether or not research was explicitly
labeled as "general system theory." No complete or exhaustive
review is intended. The aim of this unpretentious survey will be
fulfilled if it can serve as a sort of guide to research done in the
field, and to areas that are promising for future work.

OPEN SYSTEMS

   The theory of open systems is an important generalization of
physical theory, kinetics and thermodynamics. It has led to new
principles and insight, such as the principle of equifinality, the
generalization of the second thermodynamic principle, the pos-
sible increase of order in open systems, the occurrence of periodic
phenomena of overshoot and false start, etc.

   The extensive work in biology and related fields is partly
reviewed in Chapters 5-7. (For further discussion also d. Bray
and White, 1957; lung, 1956; Morchio, 1956; Netter, 1953, 1959).

   Beyond the individual organism, systems principles are also

used in population dynamics and ecologic theory (review: J. R.

Bray, 1958). Dynamic ecology, Le., the succession and climax of
plant populations, is a much-cultivated field which, however,
shows a tendency to slide into verbalism and terminological
debate. The systems approach seems to offer a new viewpoint.
Whittacker (1953) has described the sequence of plant communi-
ties toward a climax formation in terms of open systems and
equifinality. According to this author, the fact that similar climax
formations may develop from different initial vegetations is a
striking example of equifinality, and one where the degree of
independence of starting conditions and the course development
has taken appear even greater than in the individual organism.
A quantitative analysis on the basis of open systems in terms of
production of biomass, with climax as steady state attained, was
given by Patten (1959).

   The open-system concept has also found application in the
earth sciences, geomorphology (Chorley, 1964) and meteorology
(Thompson, 1961) drawing a detailed comparison of modern
meteorological concepts and Bertalanffy's organismic concept in
Advances in General System Theory  ~ 103

biology. It may be remembered that already Prigogine in his
classic (1947) mentioned meteorology as one possible field of
application of open systems.

GROWTH-IN-TIME

  The simplest forms of growth which, for this reason, are par-
ticularly apt to show the isomorphism of law in different fields
are the exponential and the logistic. Examples are, among many
others, the increase of knowledge of number of animal species
(Gessner, 1952), publications on drosophila (Hersh, 1942), of
manufacturing companies (Haire, 1959). Boulding (1956a) and
Keiter (1951-52) have emphasized a general theory of growth.

   The theory of animal growth after Bertalanffy (and others)-
which, in virtue of using overall physiological parameters ("an-
abolism," "catabolism") may be subsumed under the heading of
G.S.T. as well as under that of biophysics-has been surveyed
in its various applications (Bertalanffy, 1960b).

RELATIVE GROWTH

   A principle which is also of great simplicity and generality
concerns the relative growth of components v.>ithin a system. The
simple relationship of allometric increase applies to many growth
phenomena in biology (morphology, biochemistry, physiology,
evolution).

   A similar relationship obtains in social phenomena. Social dif-
ferentiation and division of labor in primitive societies as well
as the process of urbanization (i.e., growth of cities in comparison
to rural population) follow the allometric equation. Application
of the latter offers a quantitative measure of social organization
and development, apt to replace the usual, intuitive judgments
(Naroll and Bertalanffy, 1956). The same principle apparently
applies to the growth of staff compared to total number of em-
ployees in manufacturing companies (Haire, 1959).

COMPETITION AND RELATED PHENOMENA

   The work in population dynamics by Volterra, Lotka, Gause
and others belongs to the classics of G.S.T., having first shown
that it is possible to develop conceptual models for phenomena
104  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORy

such as the "struggle for existence" that can be submitted to
empirical test. Population dynamics and related population
genetics have since become important fields in biological research.

   It is important to note that investigation of this kind belongs
not only to basic but also to applied biology. This is true of
fishery biology where theoretical models are used to establish
optimum conditions for the exploitation of the sea (survey of the
more important models: \'\Tatt, 1958). The most elaborate dy-
namic model is by Beverton and Holt (1957; short survey: Holt,
w.y.) developed for fish populations exploited in commercial
fishery but certainly of wider application. This model takes into
account recruitment (i.e., entering of individuals into the popu-
lation), growth (assumed to follow the growth equations after
Bertalanffy), capture (by exploitation), and natural mortality.
The practical value of this model is illustrated by the fact that
it has been adopted for routine purposes by the Food and Agri-
culture Organization of the United Nations, the British Ministry
of Agriculture and Fisheries and other official agencies.

   Richardson's studies on armaments races (d. Rapoport, 1957,
1960), notwithstanding their shortcomings, dramatically show the
possible impact of the systems concept upon the most vital con-
cerns of our time. If rational and scientific considerations matter
at all, this is one way to refute such catchwords as Si vis pacem
para bellum.

   The expressions used in population dynamics and the bio-
logical "struggle for existence," in econometrics, in the study of
armament races (and others) all belong to the same family of
equations (the system discussed in Chapter 3). A systematic com·
parison and study of these parallelisms would be highly interest-
ing and rewarding (d. also Rapoport, 1957, p. 88). One may, for
example, suspect that the laws governing business cycles and
those of population fluctuations according to Volterra stem from
similar conditions of competition and interaction in the system.

   In a non·mathematical way, Boulding (1953) has discussed what
he calls the "Iron Laws" of social organizations: the Malthusian
law, the law of optimum size of organizations, existence of cycles,
the law of oligopoly, etc.

SYSTEMS ENGINEERING

   The theoretical interest of systems engineering and operations
research is in the fact that entities whose components are most
Advances in General System Theory  t'105

heterogeneous-men, machines, buildings, monetary and other
values, inflow of raw material, outflow of products and many
other items-can successfully be submitted to systems analysis.

   As already mentioned, systems engineering employs the meth-
odology of cybernetics, information theory, network analysis, flow
and block diagrams, etc. Considerations of G.S.T. also enter
(A.D. Hall, 1962). The first approaches are concerned with struc-
tured, machine-like aspects (yes-or-no decisions in the case of
information theory); one would suspect that G.S.T. aspects will
win increased importance with dynamic aspects, flexible organi-
zations, etc.

PERSONALITY THEORY

   Although there is an enormous amount of theorizing on neural
and psychological function in the cybernetic line based upon the
brain-computer comparison, few attempts have been made to
apply G.S.T. in the narrower sense to the theory of human
behavior (e.g., Krech, 1956; Menninger, 1957). For the present
purposes, the latter may be nearly equated with personality
theory.

   We have to realize at the start that personality theory is at
present a battlefield of contrasting and controversial theories.
Hall and Lindzey (1957, p. 71) have justly stated: "All theories
of behavior are pretty poor theories and all of them leave much
to be desired in the way of scientific proof"-this being said in
a textbook of nearly 600 pages on "Theories of Personality."

   We can therefore not well expect that G.S.T. can present
solutions where personality theorists from Freud and Jung to
a host of modern writers were unable to do so. The theory will
have shown its value if it opens new perspectives and viewpoints
capable of experimental and practical application. This appears
to be the case. There is quite a group of psychologists who are
committed to an organismic theory of personality, Goldstein and
Maslow being well-known representatives.

   There is, of course, the fundamental question whether, first,
G.S.T. is not essentially a physicalistic simile, inapplicable to
psychic phenomena; and secondly whether such model has ex-
planatory value when the pertinent variables cannot be defined
quantitatively as is in general the case with psychological phe-
nomena.

   (1) The answer to the first question appears to be that the
106  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

system concept is abstract and general enough to permit appli-
cation to entities of whatever denomination. The notions of
"equilibrium," "homeostasis," "feedback," "stress," etc., are no
less of technologic or physiological origin but more or less suc-
cessfully applied to psychological phenomena. System theorists
agree that the concept of "system" is not limited to material
entities but can be applied to any "whole" consisting of inter-
acting "components."

   (2) If quantization is impossible, and even if the components
of a system are ill-defined, it can at least be expected that certain
principles will qualitatively apply to the whole qua system. At
least "explanation in principle" (see below) may be possible.

   Bearing in mind these limitations, one concept which may
prove to be of a key nature is the organismic notion of the
organism as a spontaneously active system. In the present author's
words,

Even under constant external conditions and in the absence
of external stimuli the organism is not a passive but a basically
active system. This applies in particular to the function of the
nervous system and to behavior. It appears that internal activity
rather than reaction to stimuli is fundamental. This can be
shown with respect both to evolution in lower animals and to
development, for example, in the first movements of embryos
and fetuses (von Bertalanffy, 1960a).

   This agrees with what von Holst has called the "new concep-
tion" of the nervous system, based upon the fact that primitive
locomotor activities are caused by central automatisms that do
not need external stimuli. Therefore, such movements persist, for
example, even after the connection of motoric to sensory nerves
had been severed. Hence the reflex in the classic sense is not the
basic unit of behavior but rather a regulatory mechanism super-
posed upon primitive, automatic activities. A similar concept
is basic in the theory of instinct. According to Lorenz, innate
releasing mechanisms (I.R.M.) play a dominant role, which
sometimes go off without an external stimulus (in vacuo or run-
ning-idle reactions): A bird which has no material to build a
nest may perform the movements of nest building in the air.
These considerations are in the framework of what Hebb (1955)
called the "conceptual GN.S. of 1930-1950_" The more recent
Advances in General System Theory  107

insight into activating systems of the brain emphasizes differently,
and with a wealth of experimental evidence, the same basic
concept of the autonomous activity of the C.N.S.

   The significance of these concepts becomes apparent when we
consider that they are in fundamental contrast to the conventional
stimulus-response scheme which assumes that the organism is an
essentially reactive system answering, like an automaton, to ex-
ternal stimuli. The dominance of the S-R scheme in contemporary
psychology needs no emphasis, and is obviously connected with
the zeitgeist of a highly mechanized society. This principle is
basic in psychological theories which in all other respects are
opposite, for example, in behavioristic psychology as well as in
psychoanalysis. According to Freud it is the supreme tendency
of the organism to get rid of tensions and drives and corne to
rest in a state of equilibrium governed by the "principle of
stability" which Freud borrowed from the German philosopher,
Fechner. Neurotic and psychotic behavior, then, is a more or less
effective or abortive defense mechanism tending to restore some
sort of equilibrium (according to D. Rapaport's analysis (1960)
of the structure of psychoanalytic theory: "economic" and "adap-
tive points of view").

   Charlotte Buhler (1959), the well-known child psychologist, has
aptly epitomized the theoretical situation:

In the fundamental psychoanalytic model, there is only one
basic tendency, that is toward need gratification or tension
reduction. . . . Present-day biologic theories emphasize the
"spontaneity" of the organism's activity which is due to its
built-in energy. The organism'S autonomous functioning, its
"drive to perform certain movements" is emphasized by Ber-
talanffy.... These concepts represent a complete revision of the
m'iginal homeostasis principle which emphasized exclusively
the tendency toward equilibrium. It is the original homeostasis
principle with which psychoanalysis identified its theory of
discharge of tensions as the only primary tendency (italics
partly ours).

   In brief, we may define our viewpoint as "Beyond the Homeo-
static Principle":

   (1) The S-R scheme misses the realms of play, exploratory ac-
tivities, creativity, self-realization, etc.;
108  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   (2) The economic scheme misses just specific, human achieve-
ments-the most of what loosely is termed "human culture";

   (3) The equilibrium principle misses the fact that psychological
and behavioral activities are more than relaxation of tensions;
far from establishing an optimal state, the latter may entail psy-
chosis-like disturbances as, e.g., in sensory-deprivation experi-
ments.

   It appears that the S-R and psychoanalytic model is a highly
unrealistic picture of human nature and, in its consequences, a
rather dangerous one. Just what we consider to be specific human
achievements can hardly be brought under the utilitarian, homeo-
stasis, and stimulus-response scheme. One may call mountain
climbing, composing of sonatas or lyrical poems "psychological
homeostasis"-as has been done-but at the risk that this physio-
logically well-defined concept loses all meaning. Furthermore, if
the principle of homeostatic maintenance is taken as a golden
rule of behavior, the so-called well-adjusted individual will be
the ultimate goal, that is a well-oiled robot maintaining itself
in optimal biological, psychological and social homeostasis. This
is Brave New World-not, for some at least, the ideal state of
humanity. Furthermore, that precarious mental equilibrium must
not be disturbed: Hence, in what rather ironically is called pro-
gressive education, the anxiety not to overload the child, not to
impose constraints and to minimize all directing influences-
with the result of a previously unheard-of crop of illiterates and
juvenile delinquents.

   In contrast to conventional theory, it can safely be maintained
that not only stresses and tensions but equally complete release
from stimuli and the consequent mental void may be neuroso-
genic or even psychosogenic. Experimentally this is verified by
the experiments with sensory deprivation when subjects, insulated
from all incoming stimuli, after a few hours develop a so-called
model psychosis with hallucinations, unbearable anxiety, etc.
Clinically it amounts to the same when insulation leads to
prisoners' psychosis and to exacerbation of mental disease by
isolation of patients in the ward. In contrast, maximal stress need
not necessarily produce mental disturbance. If conventional
theory were correct, Europe during and after the war, with ex-
treme physiological as well as psychological stresses, should have
been a gigantic lunatic asylum. As a matter of fact, there was
Advances in General System Theory  ~09

statistically no increase either in neurotic or psychotic disturb-
ances, apart from easily explained acute disturbances such as
combat neurosis (see Chapter 9).

   So we arrive at the conception that a great deal of biological
and human behavior is beyond the principles of utility, homeo-
stasis and stimulus-response, and that it is just this which is
characteristic of human and cultural activities. Such a new look
opens new perspectives not only in theory but in practical impli-
cations with respect to mental hygiene, education, and society
in general. (See Chapter 9).

   'Yhat has been said can also be couched in philosophical terms.
If existentialists speak of the emptiness and meaninglessness of
life, if they see in it a source not only of anxiety but of actual
mental illness, it is essentially the same viewpoint: that behavior
is not merely a matter of satisfaction of biological drives and of
maintenance in psychological and social equilibrium but that
something more is involved. If life becomes unbearably empty
in an industrialized society, what can a person do but develop
a neurosis? The principle, which may loosely be called spon-
taneous activity of the psychophysical organism, is a more realis-
tic formulation of what the existentialists want to say in their
often obscure language. And if personality theorists like Maslow
or Gardner Murphy speak of self-realization as human goal, it
is again a somewhat pompous expression of the same.

THEORETICAL HISTORY

   We eventually come to those highest and ill-defined entItles
that are called human cultures and civilizations. It is the field
often called "philosophy of history." 'Ye may perhaps better
speak of "theoretical history," admittedly in its very first begin-
nings. This name expresses the aim to form a connecting link
between "science" and the "humanities"; more in particular, be-
tween the social sciences and history.

   It is understood, of course, that the techniques in sociology and
history are entirely different (polls, statistical analysis against
archival studies, internal evidence of historic relics, etc.). How-
ever, the object of study is essentially the same. Sociology is
essentially concerned with a temporal cross-section as human so-
cieties are; history with the "longitudinal" study how societies
no  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

become and develop. The object and techniques of study certainly
justify practical differentiation; it is less dear, however, that they
justify fundamentally different philosophies.

   The last statement already implies the question of constructs in
history, as they were presented, in grand form, from Vico to
Hegel, Marx, Spengler, and Toynbee. Professional historians re-
gard them at best as poetry, at worst as fantasies pressing-with
paranoic obsession-the facts of history into a theoretical bed of
Procrustes. It seems history can learn from the system theorists
not ultimate solutions but a sounder methodological outlook.
Problems hitherto considered to be philosophical or metaphysical
can well be defined in their scientific meaning, with some interest-
ing outlook at recent developments (e.g., game theory) thrown
into the bargain.

   Empirical criticism is outside the scope of the present study.
For example, Geyl (1958) and many others have analyzed ob-
vious misrepresentations of historical events in Toynbee's work,
and even the non-specialist reader can easily draw a list of fal-
lacies especially in the later, Holy Ghost-inspired volumes of
Toynbee's magnum opus. The problem, however, is larger than
errors in fact or interpretation or even the question of the
merits of Marx's, Spengler's or Toynbee's theories; it is whether,
in principle, models and laws are admissible in history.

   A widely held contention says that they are not. This is the
concept of "nomothetic" method in science and "idiographic"
method in history. While science to a greater or less extent can
establish "laws" for natural events, history, concerned with human
events of enormous complexity in causes and outcome and pre-
sumably determined by free decisions of individuals, can only
describe, more or less satisfactorily, what has happened in the past.

   Here the methodologist has his first comment. In the attitude
just outlined, academic history condemns constructs of history
as "intuitive," "contrary to fact," "arbitrary," etc. And, no doubt,
the criticism is pungent enough vis-a-vis Spengler or Toynbee.
It is, however, somewhat less convincing if we look at the work
of conventional historiography. For example, the Dutch historian,
Peter Geyl, who made a strong argument against Toynbee from
such methodological considerations, also wrote a brilliant book
about Napoleon (1949), amounting to the result that there are a
dozen or so different interpretations-we may safely say, models
Advances in General System Theory  111

-of Napoleon's character and career within academic history,
all based upon "fact" (the Napoleonic period happens to be one
of the best documented) and all flatly contradicting each other.
Roughly speaking, they range from Napoleon as the brutal ty-
rant and egotistic enemy of human freedom to Napoleon the wise
planner of a unified Europe; and if one is a Napoleonic student
(as the present writer happens to be in a small way), one can
easily produce some original documents refuting misconceptions
occurring even in generally accepted, standard histories. You
cannot have it both ways. If even a figure like Napoleon, not
very remote in time and with the best of historical documenta-
tion, can be interpreted contrarily, you cannot well blame the
"philosophers of history" for their intuitive procedure, subjec-
tive bias, etc., when they deal with the enormous phenomenon of
universal history. What you have in both cases is a conceptual
model which always will represent certain aspects only, and for
this reason will be one-sided or even lopsided. Hence the con-
struction of conceptual models in history is not only permissible
but, as a matter of fact, is at the basis of any historical interpre-
tation as distinguished from mere enumeration of data-i.e.,
chronicle or annals.

   If this is granted, the antithesis between idiographic and nomo-
thetic procedure reduces to what psychologists are wont to call
the "molecular" and "molar" approach. One can analyze events
within a complex whole-individual chemical reactions in an
organism, perceptions in the psyche, for example; or one can look
for overall laws covering the whole such as growth and develop-
ment in the first or personality in the second instance. In terms
of history, this means detailed study of individuals, treaties, works
of art, singular causes and effects, etc., or else overall phenomena
with the hope of detecting grand laws. There are, of course, all
transitions between the first and second considerations; the ex-
tremes may be iIIustrated by Carlyle and his hero worship at one
pole and Tolstoy (a far greater "theoretical historian" than com-
monly admitted) at the other.

   The question of a "theoretical history" therefore is essentially
that of "molar" models in the field; and this is what the con-
structs of history amount to when divested of their philosophical
embroidery.

   The evaluation of such models must follow the general rules
112  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

for verification or falsification. First, there is the consideration of
empirical bases. In this particular instance, it amounts to the
question whether or not a limited number of civilizations-some
20 at the best-provide a sufficient and representative sample to
establish justified generalizations. This question and that of the
value of proposed models will be answered by the general
criterion: whether or not the model has explanatory and pre-.
dictive value, i.e., throws new light upon known facts and
correctly foretells facts of the past or future not previously known.

   Although elementary, these considerations nevertheless are
apt to remove much misunderstanding and philosophical fog
which has clouded the issue.

   (1) As has been emphasized, the evaluation of models should
be simply pragmatic in terms of their explanatory and predic-
tive merits (or lack thereof); a priori considerations as to their
desirability or moral consequences do not enter.

   Here we encounter a somewhat unique situation. There is little
objection against so-called "synchronic" laws-i.e., supposed regu-
larities governing societies at a certain point in time; as a matter
of fact, beside empirical study this is the aim of sociology. Also
certain "diachronic" laws-i.e., regularities of development in
time-are undisputed such as, e.g., Grimm's law stating rules for
the changes of consonants in the evolution of Indo-Germanic
languages. It is commonplace that there is a sort of "life cycle"
-stages of primitivity, maturity, baroque dissolution of form and
eventual decay for which no particular external causes can be
indicated-in individual fields of culture, such as Greek sculpture,
Renaissance painting or German music. Indeed, this even has
its counterpart in certain phenomena of biological evolution
showing, as in ammonites or dinosaurs, a first explosive phase of
formation of new types, followed by a phase of speciation and
eventually of decadence.

   Violent criticism comes in when this model is applied to civili-
zation as a whole. It is a legitimate question-why often rather
unrealistic models in the social sciences remain matters of aca-
demic discussion, while models of history encounter passionate
resistance? Granting all factual criticism raised against Spengler
or Toynbee, it seems rather obvious that emotional factors are
involved. The highway of science is strewn with corpses of de-
ceased theories which just decay or are preserved as mummies
Advances in General System Theory  il3

in the museum of history of science. In contrast, historical con-
structs and especially theories of historical cycles appear to touch
a raw nerve, and so opposition is much more than usual criticism
of a scientific theory.

   (2) This emotional involvement is connected with the question
of "Historical Inevitability" and a supposed degradation of
human "freedom." Before turning to it, discussion of mathemati-
cal and non-mathematical models is in order.

   Advantages and shortcomings of mathematical models in the
social sciences are well known (Arrow, 1956; Rapoport, 1957).
Every mathematical model is an oversimplification, and it remains
questionable whether it strips actual events to the bones or cuts
away vital parts of their anatomy. On the other hand, so far as
it goes, it permits necessary deduction with often unexpected
results which would not be obtained by ordinary "common
sense."

   In particular, Rashevsky has shown in several studies how
mathematical models of historical processes can be constructed
(Rashevsky, 1951, 1952).

   On the other hand, the value of purely qualitative models
should not be underestimated. For example, the concept of
"ecologic equilibrium" was developed long before Volterra and
others introduced mathematical models; the theory of selection
belongs to the stock-in-trade of biology, but the mathematical
theory of the "struggle for existence" is comparatively recent,
and far from being verified under wildlife conditions.

   In complex phenomena, "explanation in principle" (Hayek,
1955) by qualitative models is preferable to no explanation at
aIL This is by no means limited to the social sciences and history;
it applies alike to fields like meteorology or evolution.

   (3) "Historical inevitability"-subject of a well-known study by
Sir Isaiah Berlin (1955) -dreaded as a consequence of "theoretical
history," supposedly contradicting our direct experience of having
free choices and eliminating all moral judgment and values-is
a phantasmagoria based upon a world view which does not exist
any more. As in fact Berlin emphasizes, it is founded upon the
concept of the Laplacean spirit who is able completely to predict
the future from the past by means of deterministic laws. This has
no resemblance to the modern concept of "laws of nature." All
"laws of nature" have a statistical character. They do not predict
114  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

an inexorably determined future but probabilities which, de-
pending on the nature of events and on the laws available, may
approach certainty or else remain far below it. It is nonsensical
to ask for or fear more "inevitability" in historical theory than
is found in sciences with relatively high sophistication like
meteorology or economics.

   Paradoxically, while the cause of free will rests with the testi-
mony of intuition or rather immediate experience and can never
be proved objectively ("Was it Napoleon's free will that led him
to the Russian Campaign?"), determinism (in the statistical sense)
can be proved, at least in small-scale models. Certainly business
depends on personal "initiative," the individual "decision" and
"responsibility" of the entrepreneur; the manager's choice whether
or not to expand business by employing new appointees is "free"
in precisely the sense as Napoleon's choice of whether or not to
accept battle at the Moskwa. However, when the growth curve
of industrial companies is analyzed, it is found that "arbitrary"
deviations are followed by speedy return to the normal curve,
as if invisible forces were active. Haire (1959, p. 283) states that
"the return to the pattern predicted by earlier growth suggests
the operation of inexorable forces operating on the social or-
ganism" (our italics).

   It is characteristic that one of Berlin's points is "the fallacy of
historical determinism (appearing) from its utter inconsistency
with the common sense and everyday life of looking at human
affairs." This characteristic argument is of the same nature as
the advice not to adopt the Copernican system because everybody
can see that the sun and not the earth moves from morning to
evening.

   (4) Recent developments in mathematics even allow to submit
"free will"-apparently the philosophical problem most resistant
to scientific analysis-to mathematical examination.

   In the light of modern systems theory, the alternative between
molar and molecular, nomothetic and idiographic approach can
be given a precise meaning. For mass behavior, system laws would
apply which, if they can be mathematized, would take the form
of differential equations of the sort of those used by Richardson
(d. Rapoport, 1957) mentioned above. In contrast, free choice of
the individual would be described by formulations of the nature
of game and decision theory.
Advances in General System Theory  · 115

   Axiomatically, game and decision theory are concerned with
"rational" choice. This means a choice which "maximizes the

individual's utility or satisfaction," that "the individual is free
to choose among several possible courses of action and decides
among them at the basis of their consequences," that he "selects,

being informed of all conceivable consequences of his actions,

what stands highest on his list," he "prefers more of a commodity
to less, other things being equal," etc. (Arrow, 1956). Instead of
economical gain, any higher value may be inserted without

changing the mathematical formalism.
   The above definition of "rational choice" includes everything

that can be meant by "free, will." If we do not wish to equate
"free will" with complete arbitrariness, lack of any value judg-
ment and therefore completely inconsequential actions (like the

philosopher's favorite example: It is my free will whether or not
to wiggle my left little finger), it is a fair definition of those
actions with which the moralist, priest or historian is concerned:
free decision between alternatives based upon insight into the
situation and its consequences and guided by values.

   The difficulty to appl y theory even to simple, actual situations
is of course enormous; so is the difficulty in establishing overall

laws. However, without explicit formulation, both approaches can
be evaluated in principle-leading to an unexpected paradox.

   The "principle of rationality" fits-not the majority of human
actions but rather the "unreasoning" behavior of animals. Ani-

mals and organisms in general do function in a "ratiomorphic"
way, maximizing such values as maintenance, satisfaction, sur-
vival, etc.; they select, in general, what is biologically good for
them, and prefer more of a commodity (e.g., food) to less.

   Human behavior, on the other hand, falls far short of the
principle of rationality. It is not even necessary to quote Freud
to show how small is the compass of rational behavior in man.
Women in a supermarket, in general, do not maximize utility
but are susceptible to the tricks' of the advertiser and packer;
they do not make a rational choice surveying all possibilities and

consequences; and do not even prefer more of the commodity
packed in an inconspicuous way to less when packed in a big
red box with attractive design. In our society, it is the job of an
influential specialty-advertisers, motivation researchers, etc.-to

make choices irrational which essentially is done by coupling
116  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

biological factors-conditioned reflex, unconscious drives-with
symbolic values (d. von Bertalanffy, I956a).

   And there is no refuge by saying that this irrationality of
human behavior concerns only trivial actions of daily life; the
same principle applies to "historical" decisions. That wise old
bird Oxenstierna, Sweden's Chancellor during the Thirty Years'
War, expressed this perfectly by saying: Nescis, mi /ili, quantilla
ratione mundus regatur-you don't know, my dear boy, with what
little reason the world is governed. Reading newspapers or listen-
ing to the radio readily shows that this applies perhaps even
more to the 20th than the 17th century.

   Methodologically, this leads to a remarkable conclusion. If one
of the two models is to be applied, and if the "actuality principle"
basic in historical fields like geology and evolution is adopted
(i.e., the hypothesis that no other principles of explanation should
be used than can be observed as operative in the present)-then
it is the statistical or mass model whicb is backed by empirical
evidence. The business of the motivation and opinion researcher,
statistical psychologist, etc., is based upon the premise that sta-
tistical laws obtain in human behavior; and that, for this reason,
a small but well-chosen sample allows for extrapolation to the
total population under consideration. The generally good work-
ing of a Gallup poll and prediction verifies the premise-with
some incidental failure like the well-known example of the
Truman election thrown in, as is to be expected with statistical
predictions. The opposite contention-that history is governed
by "free will" in the philosophical sense (i.e., rational decision
for the better, the higher moral value or even enlightened self-
interest) is hardly supported by fact. That here and there the sta-
tisticallaw is broken by "rugged individualists" is in its character.
Nor does the role played in history by "great men" contradict the
system concept in history; they can be conceived as acting like
"leading parts," "triggers" or "catalyzers" in the historical process
-a phenomenon well accounted for in the general theory of
systems.

   (5) A further question is the "organismic analogy" unanimously
condemned by historians. They combat untiringly the "meta-
physical," "poetical," "mythical" and thoroughly unscientific
nature of Spengler's assertion that civilizations are a sort of
A dvances in General System Theory  117

"organisms," being born, developing according to their internal
laws and eventually dying. Toynbee (e.g., 1961) takes great pains
to emphasize that he did not fall into Spengler's trap-even
though it is somewhat difficult to see that his civilizations, con-
nected by the biological relations of "affiliation" and "apparenta-
tion," even with a rather strict time span of development, are not
conceived organismically.

   Nobody should know better than the biologist that civilizations
are not "organisms." It is trivial to the extreme that a biological
organism, a material entity and unity in space and time, is some-
thing different from a social group consisting of distinct in-
dividuals, and even more from a civilization consisting of genera-
tions of human beings, of material products, institutions, ideas,
values, and what not. It implies a serious underestimate of Vico's,
Spengler's (or any normal individual's) intelligence to suppose
that they did not realize the obvious.

   Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that, in contrast to the
historians' scruples, sociologists do not abhor the "organismic
analogy" but rather take it for granted. For example, in the
words of Rapoport and Horvath (1959):

There is some sense in considering a real organization as an
organism, that is, there is reason to believe that this compari-
son need not be a sterile metaphorical analogy, such as was
common in scholastic speculation about the body politic. Quasi-
biological functions are demonstrable in organizations. They
maintain themselves; they sometimes reproduce or metastasize;
they respond to stresses; they age, and they die. Organizations
have discernible anatomies and those at least which transform
material inputs (like industries) have physiologies.

Or Sir Geoffrey Vickers (1957):

Institutions grow, repair themselves, reproduce themselves,
decay, dissolve. In their external relations they show many
characteristics of organic life. Some think that in their internal
relations also human institutions are destined to become in-
creasinglyorganic, that human cooperation will approach ever
more closely to the integration of cells in a body. I find this
118                        GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

prospect unconvincing (and) unpleasant. (N.B., so does the
present author.)

And Haire (1959, p. 272):

The biological model for social organizations-and here,
particularly for industrial organizations-means taking as a
model the living organism and the processes and principles
that regulate its growth and development. It means looking
for lawful processes in organizational growth.

   The fact that simple growth laws apply to social entities such
as manufacturing companies, to urbanization, division of labor,
etc., proves that in these respects the "organismic analogy" is
correct. In spite of the historians' protests, the application of
theoretical models, in particular, the model of dynamic, open and
adaptive systems (McClelland, 1958) to the historical process cer-
tainly makes sense. This does not imply "biologism," i.e., reduc-
tion of social to biological concepts, but indicates system principles
applying in both fields.

   (6) Taking all objections for granted-poor method, errors in
fact, the enormous complexity of the historical process-we have
nevertheless reluctantly to admit that the cyclic models of history
pass the most important test of scientific theory. The predictions
made by Spengler in The Decline of the West, by Toynbee when
forecasting a time of trouble and contending states, by Ortega y
Gasset in Revolt of the Masses-we may as well add Brave New
World and 1984-have been verified to a disquieting extent and
considerably better than many respectable models of the social
scientists.

   Does this imply "historic inevitability" and inexorable dissolu-
tion? Agflin, the simple answer was missed by moralizing and
philosophizing historians. By extrapolation from the life cycles
of previous civilizations nobody could have predicted the Indus-
trial Revolution, the Population Explosion, the development of
atomic energy, the emergence of underdeveloped nations, and
the expansion of Western civilization over the whole globe. Does
this refute the alleged model and "law" of history? No, it only
says that this model-as everyone in science-mirrors only certain
aspects or facets of reality. Every model becomes dangerous only
when it commits the "Nothing-but" fallacy which mars not only
Advances in General System Theory  fIg

theoretical history, but the models of the mechanistic world pic-
ture, of psychoanalysis and many others as well.

   We have hoped to show in this survey that General System
Theory has contributed toward the expansion of scientific theory;
has led to new insights and principles; and has opened up new
problems that are "researchable," i.e., are amenable to further
study, experimental or mathematical. The limitations of the
theory and its applications in their present status are obvious;
but the principles appear to be essentially sound as shown by
their application in different fields.
  5 The Organism Considered as

        Physical System

The Organism as Open System
   Physical chemistry presents the theory of kinetics and equilibria

in chemical systems. As example, consider the reversible reaction
in ester formation:

      + C2 H 5 0H + CHa· COOH p CHaCOO· C2H 5 H 20,

in which always a certain quantitative ratio between alcohol and
acetic acid on the one hand, and between ester and water on
the other, is established.

   Application of physico-chemical equilibrium principles, espe-
cially of chemical kinetics and the law of mass action, has proved
to be of fundamental importance for the explanation of physio-
logical processes. An example is the function of blood, to transport
oxygen from the lung to the tissues of the body and, conversely,
carbon dioxide formed in the tissues to the lungs for exhalation;
the process results from the equilibria between hemoglobin,
oxyhemoglobin and oxygen according to the law of mass action,
and quantitative formulations can be stated not only for the
simple conditions in hemoglobin solution, but also for the more
complicated ones in the blood of vertebrates. The importance
of kinetic consideration of enzyme reactions, of respiration,
fermentation, etc., is well known. Similarly, other physico-chemical
equilibria (distribution, diffusion, adsorption, electrostatic equi-
The Organism Considered as Physical System  t21

libria) are of fundamental physiological significance (d. Moser
and Moser-Egg, 1934).

   Considering the organism as a whole, it shows characteristics
similar to those of systems in equilibrium (d. Zwaardemaker,
1906, 1927) . We find, in the cell and in the multicellular organism,
a certain composition, a constant ratio of the components, which
at first resembles the distribution of components in a chemical
system in equilibrium and which, to a large extent, is main-
tained under different conditions, after disturbances, at different
body size, etc.: an independence of composition of the absolute
quantity of components, regulative capacity after disturbances,
comtancy of composition under changing conditions and with
changing nutrition, etc. (d. von Bertalanffy, 1932, pp. 190ff.;
1937, pp. 80ff.) .

   We realize at once, however, that there may be systems in
equilibrium in the organism, but that the organism as such
cannot be considered as an equilibrium system.

   The organism is not a closed, but an open system. We term
a system "closed" if no material enters or leaves it; it is called
"open" if there is import and export of material.

   There is, therefore, a fundamental contrast between chemical
equilibria and the metabolizing organisms. The organism is not
a static system closed to the outside and always containing the
identical components; it is an open system in a (quasi-)steady
state, maintained constant in its mass relations in a continuous
change of component material and energies, in which material
continually enters from, and leaves into, the outside environment.

   The character of the organism as a system in steady (or rather
quasi-steady) state is one of its primary criteria. In a general
way, the fundamental phenomena of life can be considered as
consequences of this fact. Considering the organism over a shorter
span of time, it appears as a configuration maintained in a steady
state by the exchange of components. This corresponds to the
first main field of general physiology-i.e., physiology of metabo-
lism in its chemical and energetic aspects. Superimposed on the
steady state are smaller process waves, basically of two kinds.
First there are periodic processes originating in the system itself
and hence autonomic (e.g., automatic movements of the organs
of respiration, circulation and digestion; automatic-rhythmic,
electrical activities of nerve centers and the brain supposedly
resulting from rhythmic chemical discharges; automatic move-
122  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

ments of the organism as a whole). Secondly, the organism reacts
to temporary changes in environment, to "stimuli," with reversible
fluctuations of its steady state. This is the group of processes
caused by changes of external conditions and hence heteronomic
subsumed in physiology of excitation. They can be considered as
temporary disturbances of the steady state from which the or-
ganism returns to "equilibrium," to the equal flow of the steady
state. Such consideration has proved to be useful and leading to
quantitative formulations (d. p. 137). Finally, the definition of
the state of the organism as steady state is valid only in first
approximation, insofar as we envisage shorter periods of time
in an "adult" organism, as we do, for example, in investigating
metabolism. If we take the total life cycle, the process is not
stationary but only quasi-stationary, subject to changes slow
enough to abstract from them for certain research purposes, and
comprising embryonic development, growth, aging, death, etc.
These phenomena, not quite exhaustively encompassed under
the term of morphogenesis, represent the third large complex of
problems in general physiology. Such consideration proves espe-
cially useful in areas accessible to quantitative formulation.

   In general, physical chemistry)s limited almost exclusively to
consideration of processes in closed systems. To these refer the
well-known formulations of physical chemistry; the law of mass
action, in particular, is used only for definition of true chemical
equilibria in closed systems. The applicability of chemical equi-
libria to, e.g., transfer reactions is based on the fact that these
are fast ionic reactions attaining equilibrium. Open chemical
systems are hardly taken into consideration in physical chemistry.
This restriction of kinetics to closed systems is understandable;
for open systems are more difficult to establish technically, and
not of major importance in the purely physical consideration.
Nevertheless, such arrangements are easily visualizable-e.g., when
in a reaction a ~ b the product b of the left-to-right reaction
is continually removed from the system by suitable means (pre-
cipitation, dialysis through a membrane permeable only for b
but not for a, etc.) while a is continually introduced into the
system. Systems of this kind occasionally occur in technological
chemistry; continuous fermentation in the production of acetic
acid is an example for what is here called "open chemical system."

   However, such systems are of great importance to the biologist.
The Organism Considered as Physical System  "123

For open chemical systems are indeed realized in nature in the
form of living organisms, maintaining themselves in a continuous
exchange of their components. "Life is a dynamic equilibrium
in a polyphasic system" (Hopkins).

   We therefore need a definition of the so-called stationary equi-
librium, the constancy of composition in the change of com-
ponents, similarly as well-known expressions of physical chemistry
define true chemical equilibria in dosed systems.

   Obviously, the reaction system and reaction conditions are
infinitely more complicated in organisms than in the systems
usually dealt with in physical chemistry. These are reactions
among an extraordinarily high number of components. More-
over, the cell and organism are not homogeneous systems (a true
solution), but represent highly heterogeneous, colloidal systems
so that reactions depend not only on mass action but on many
physico-chemical factors of adsorption, diffusion, etc. Even enzyme
reactions in the test tube do not, in general, simply follow the
law of mass action. This being the case, it is clear that reactions
even in simple organismic systems cannot be written in a closed
system of equations; this is possible only for isolated partial
systems. It is, however, possible, first, to state certain general
principles for open systems, irrespective of the special nature of
the system. Secondly, although in view of the enormous number
of reactions in the organism and even the individual cell, it is
impossible to follow individual reactions, expressions can be used
that represent statistical averages of a multitude of incalculable
or even unknown processes. Such a procedure is already applied
in chemistry by using overall formulas for reactions consisting of
numerous steps. Similarly, balance equations in physiology of
metabolism and bioenergetics are based on statistical averages
resulting from numerous and largely unknown processes in inter-
mediary metabolism. We may, for instance, summarize anabolic
and catabolic processes as "assimilation" and "dissimilation,"
respectively, and consider, as a first approximation, the steady
state as balance of "assimilation" and "dissimilation." Such
magnitudes, representing statistical averages of a multitude of
inextricable processes, can be used for calculation in a way
similar to that conventionally used in physical chemistry for
individual compounds and reactions.

   The maintenance of the system in a continuous flow and ex-
124  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

change of material and energy, the order of innumerable physico-
chemical reactions in a cell or organism in a way granting the
first, the maintenance of a constant ratio of the components even
under different conditions, after disturbances, at different sizes,
etc., are the central problems of organic metabolism. The double-
faced change of living systems in assimilation and dissimilation
manifests-in the words of von Tschermaks (1916)-a trend toward
maintenance of a certain state, regeneration compensating the
disturbance caused by degeneration. How is it that what has been
lost in the process is rebuilt from the materials offered in nutri-
tion, that building blocks liberated by enzymes find the right
place in the organismic system so that it maintains itself in
metabolism? What is the principle of "automatic self-regulation"
of metabolism? We are possessed of a vast knowledge of physico-
chemical processes in the cell and in the organism; but we must
not overlook the [act "that even after complete explanation of
individual processes, we are worlds away from fully understanding
the total metabolism of a cell" (M. Hartmann, 1927, p. 258). Ex-
tremely little is known about the principles controlling the
individual processes in the way indicated above. No wonder that
again and again the problem led to vitalistic conclusions (e.g.
Kottje, 1927).

   Obviously, general principles as those we are going to develop
cannot provide a detailed explanation of those problems; they
can, however, indicate the general physical foundations of that es-
sential characteristic of life, self-regulation of metabolism and
maintenance in change of components. The special way in which
these are realized in individual metabolic processes can be de-
termined only by experimental investigation. It can be hoped,
however, that the general consideration alerts to possibilities
hitherto hardly envisaged, and that the formulations proposed,
or similar equations, be apt to describe concrete individual
phenomena.

General Characteristics of Open Chemical Systems

   True equilibria in closed systems and stationary "equilibria"
in open systems show a certain similarity, inasmuch as the
system, taken as a whole and in view of its components, remains
constant in both systems. But the physical situation in both cases
is fundamentally different. Chemical equilibria in closed systems
The Organism Considered as Physical System

are based on reversible reactions; they are a consequence of the
second principle of thermodynamics and are defined by minimum
free energy. In open systems, in contrast, the steady state is not
reversible as a whole nor in many individual reactions. Further-
more, the second principle applies, by definition, to closed systems
only and does not define the steady state.

   A closed system must, according to the second principle,
eventually attain a time-independent state of equilibrium, defined
by maximum entropy and minimum free energy (heat equilib-
rium, thermodynamic derivation of the law of mass action by
van't Hoff, etc.), where the ratio between the phases remains
constant. An open chemical system may attain (certain conditions
presupposed) a time-independent steady state, where the system
remains constant as a whole and in its (macroscopic) phases,
though there is a continuous flow of component materials.

   A closed system in equilibrium does not need energy for its
preservation, nor can energy be obtained from it. For example,
a closed reservoir contains a large amount of (potential) energy;
but it cannot drive a motor. The same is true of a chemical
system in equilibrium. It is not a state of chemical rest; rather
reactions are continually going on, so regulated by the law of
mass action that as much is formed of every species of molecules
or ions as disappears. Nevertheless, the chemical equilibrium is
incapable of performing work. For maintaining the processes
going on, no work is required nor can work be won from it. The
algebraic sum of work obtained from and used by the elementary
reactions equals zero. In order to perform work, it is necessary
that the system be not in a state of equilibrium but tend to
attain it; only then can energy be won. In order that this is
achieved continually, the hydrodynamic as well as chemical sys-
tem must be arranged as stationary-i.e., a steady How of water or
chemical substances must be maintained whose energy content is
transformed into work. Continuous working capacity is, there-
fore, not possible in a closed system which tends to attain equi-
librium as soon as possible, but only in an open system. The
apparent "equilibrium" found in an organism is not a true
equilibrium incapable of performing work; rather it is a dynamic
pseudo-equilibrium, kept constant at a certain distance from
true equilibrium; so being capable of performing work but, on
the other hand, requiring continuous import of energy for main-
taining the distance from true equilibrium.
126       GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   For the maintenance of "dynamic equilibrium," it is necessary
that the rates of processes be exactly harmonized. Only in this
way is it possible that certain components can be broken down, so
liberating usable energy while, on the other hand, import pre-
vents the system from attaining equilibrium. Fast reactions, also
in the organism, lead to chemical equilibrium (e.g. of hemoglobin
and oxygen); slow reactions do not reach equilibrium but are
kept in a steady state. Therefore, the condition for the existence
of a chemical system in a steady state is a certain slowness of
reactions. Momentary reactions, like those between ions, lead to
equilibrium in "infinitely short" time. The maintenance of a
steady state in the organism is due to the fact that it is composed
of complex carbon compounds; these are, on the one hand, rich
in energy but chemically inert, so that the maintenance of con-
siderable chemical potential is possible; on the other hand, rapid
and regulated release of this amount of energy is performed by
enzyme actions, so that a steady state is maintained.

   For deriving conditions and characteristics of steady states we
may use a general transport equation. Let Qi be a measure of
the i-th element of the system, e.g. a concentration or energy in
a system of simultaneous equations. Its variation may be ex-
pressed by:

     OQi  (5.1)

     ot

   T, represents the velocity of transport of the element Q, in a
volume element at a certain point of space, while Pi is the rate
of production.

   Many equations appearing in physics, biology and even so-
ciology, can be considered as special cases of (5.1). For example,
in molecular magnitude, the Pi are functions indicating the rate
of reactions by which the substances Q, are formed and destroyed;
the T, will have different forms depending on the system con-
cerned. If, for example, no outer forces influence the masses, the T,
will be expressed by Fick's diffusion equation. In case Ti dis-
appears, we have the usual equations for a set of reactions in a

closed system; if Pi disappears, we have the simple diffusion equa-

tion where Ti has the form: Ti = Di\],2'Q" the Laplacian symbol

\]2 representing the sum of the partial derivatives in x, y, z, the
The Organism Considered as Physical System

D, the diffusion coefficients. In biology, equations of this type
are found, e.g., in growth; and they appear in sociology and
population dynamics. In general, the rate of change of a popula-
tion equals the population movement (immigration minus emi-
gration) plus rate of reproduction (birth minus death rate).

   In general, we therefore have a set of simultaneous partial
differential equations. P, as well as T, will, in general, be non-
linear functions of Q, and other system variables Q, and further-
more functions of the space coordinates x, y, z and time t. For
solving the equation, we must know the special form of the
equations, and the initial and limiting conditions.

   For our purpose, two considerations are important, which we
may call temporal cross and longitudinal sections. The first prob-
lem is the maintenance in a steady state which, biologically, is
the fundamental problem of metabolism. The second concerns
changes of the system with respect to time, biologically expressed,
e.g. as growth. Briefly we shall also mention a third problem-
i.e., periodic changes as, in the organismic realm, are characteristic
of autonomic processes such as automatic-rhythmical movements,
etc. These three aspects correspond to the general problems of
the three main fields of physiology (d. pp. 121Ł.).

   The problem of "longitudinal temporal section," of the changes
of the system in time, will be answered by solution of differential
equation of type (5.1).

   As a simple example, consider an open chemical system, consist-
ing of only one component Q, reaction material being continually
imported and resulting reaction products removed. Let E be the
amount of imported reaction material per time unit; k, the reac-
tion constant according to the law of mass action; kQ, therefore,
the amount of change per time unit; then, presupposed the
amount imported at the beginning is greater than that trans-
formed, the concentration of the system will increase according
to the equation:

dQ = E - kQ.  (5.2)

dt

   As is easily seen, this is a special case of the general equation
(5.1). Since inflow was assumed to be constant and outflow equal
to the chemical reaction, hence diffusion and concentration
128                           GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

gradients were neglected (or, as may be said, a complete "shaking"
of the system was assumed), the space co-ordinates in (5.1) disap-
pear; instead of a partial, we have an ordinary differential
equation. Concentration at time t then is:

                                      (5.3)

= Qo being the initial concentration at t O. Concentration there-

fore asymptotically increases to a certain limit where turnover
equals inflow (assumed to be constant). This maximal concen-
tration is Qro = Elk.

   A system more approaching biological conditions is as follows.
Let there be transport of material al into the system proportional
to the difference between its concentration outside and inside
of the system (X-Xl)' Biologically, we may here think of simple
sugars or amino acids. The imported material al may form, in a
monomolecular and reversible reaction, a compound a2 of con-
centration X2 (e.g. monosaccharids transformed into polysac-
charids, amino acids into proteins). On the other hand, the
substance al may be catabolized in an irreversible reaction
(e.g. oxidation, desamination) into aa; and aa may be removed
from the system, proportional to its concentration. Then we have
the following system of reactions:

                     KI       kl
                X ---; Xl     +=! X2

                        I     k2

                         k31

                       X3

                Kd

                Outflow

and equations:

                                      (5.4)
The Organism Considered as Physical System                       "129

For eliminating the constant in the first equation, equate it

to 0; XI*' X2* .·· be the roots of these equations. We introduce

as new variables:     . ,

                      XI       =  Xl  -   Xl· ..                 (5.5)

and reformulate (5.4) accordingly.
   The general type of such equations is:

dt + ' + + ' dX'1 = allx,1
                                  a12X 2     ·. .       alnX n

+ ' + + ' ddX't2 = a21X, I a22X 2 · · · a2nX n                   (5.6)

dt + + + dx'n               ,
                   =  an       I  an 2X , 2  .··        annX' n
                          IX

with the general solution (d. p. 58):

.:. .:. . . . + + ... X'l = C11e'lt C12e'2t        Clne'n! }

~'.~.~. ~~<l.! ~~2~~2: ~2.,<n:                                   (5.7)

+ + ... x'n = Cnle'lt Cnze'2!                      Cnne,n!

The A'S are given by the characteristic equation:

a11 - A                           a12              ain

                                  a22 - A ... a2n         = o.   (5.8)

                                             ... ann - A

   We now consider the temporal cross-section, i.e. the distribution
of components in the time-independent steady state.

   In general, a system defined by equation (5.1) can have three
different solutions. First, there can be unlimited increase of the
Q.; secondly, a time-independent steady state may be attained;
thirdly, there may be periodic solutions.

   It is difficult to prove the existence of a steady state for the
general system (5.1), yet it can be shown in certain cases. Suppose
that both terms are linear in the Q. and independent of t. Then
the solution can be found by standard methods of integration
and is of the form:

+ Qi = Qil(X,y, z) Qi2 (x,y, z, t),                              (5.9)

where Q.2 is a function of t which with increasing time is decreas-
130  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

ing to zero for certain relations between constants and limiting
conditions.

   If, on the other hand, there is a time-independent steady state
expressed by Q;1 in (5.9), Qil must suffice for the time-independent
equation:

                                                                                                       (5.10)

   From this we see:
   (1) If there is a stationary solution, the composition of the
system in the steady state remains constant with respect to the
components Qi although the reactions continue and do not reach
equilibrium as in a closed system, and although there is inflow and
outflow of material; the situation so highly characteristic of
organismic systems.
   (2) In the steady state the number of elements entering state

Qi (x, y, z, t) by transport and chemical reaction per time unit

equals the number leaving it.
   Similar considerations can be made with respect to periodic

solutions. It is true that the above derivation presupposes rather
special assumptions on the nature of the equations. However,
although no general criterion is known for the existence of sta-
tionary and periodic solutions in system (5.1), these conditions
can be indicated for certain types of linear and even non-linear
cases. Important to us is the fact that the existence of stationary,
dynamic "equilibria" in open systems, or as we may also say,
the existence of a certain order of processes guaranteed by dy-
namic rather than structural-mechanical principles, can be derived
from general considerations.

   Solving equations (5.4) for the steady state we obtain:

   We therefore see that in the steady state a constant ratio be-
tween the components is established although it is not, as in a
closed system, based on an equilibrium of reversible reactions,
but the reactions are partly irreversible. Moreover, the ratio of
components in the steady state depends only on the reaction con-
stants, not on the amount of the inflow; the system thus shows
"self-regulation," comparable to organismic systems, where the
The Organism Considered as Physical System  "131

ratio of the components is maintained in changing inflow, chang-
ing absolute size, etc.

   Furthermore we find:

   In case an external disturbance ("stimulus") leads to increased
catabolism-e.g., increase of the reaction constant k3 while the
other constants remain unaltered-xl decreases. Since, however,
inflow is proportional to the concentration difference X-Xl> with
increase of the latter intake is increased. If, after cessation of the
"stimulus," the constalif of catabolism returns to its normal
value, the system will return to its original state. If, however, the
disturbance and hence the change of rate of catabolism persists,
a new steady state will be established. Thus the system develops
forces directed against the disturbance, tending to compensate
increased catabolism by increased intake. It therefore shows
"adaptation" to the new situation. These, too, are "self-regulative"
characteristics of the system.

   It can, therefore, be seen that the properties indicated as
characteristic of organismic systems, are consequences of the
nature of open systems: maintenance in "dynamic equilibrium,"
independence of composition of the absolute quantity of com-
ponents, maintenance of the composition under changing condi-
tions and nutrition, reestablishment of dynamic equilibrium
after normal catabolism or catabolism increased by a stimulus,
dynamic order of processes, etc. "Self-regulation of metabolism"
can be made understandable on the basis of physical principles.

Equifinality

   One important characteristic of biological systems is circum-
scribed by terms like "purposiveness," "finality," "goal-seeking,"
etc. Let us see whether physical considerations can contribute to
a clarification of these terms.

   It has often been emphasized that every system attaining an
equilibrium shows, in a certain way, "finalistic" behavior as was
discussed previously (pp. 75f.).

   More important is the following consideration. Frequent at-
tempts have been made to understand organic regulations as
132  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

establishment of an "equilibrium" (of course, of extremely com-
plicated nature) (e.g., Kohler, 1927), to apply LeChatelier's and
similar principles. We are not in a position to define such "equi-
librium state" in complicated organic processes, but we can
easily see that such a conception is, in principle, inadequate. For,
apart from certain individual processes, living systems are not
closed systems in true equilibrium but open systems in a steady
state.

   Nevertheless, steady states in open systems have remarkable
characteristics.

   An aspect very characteristic of the dynamic order in organismic
processes can be termed as equifinality. Processes occurring in
machine-like structures follow a fixed pathway. Therefore the
final state will be changed if the initial conditions or the course
of processes is altered. In contrast, the same final state, the same
"goal," may be reached from different initial conditions and in
different pathways in organismic processes. Examples are the
development of a normal organism from a whole, a divided or
two fused ova, or from any pieces as in hydroids or planarians,
or the reaching of a definite final size from different initial sizes
and after a different course of growth, etc.

   We may define:
  A system of elements Qi (x, y, z, t) is equifinal in any sub-
system of elements Q;, if the initial conditions Qio (x, y, z) can be
changed without changing the value of Q; (x, y, z, (0).
   We can stipulate two interesting theorems:
   1. If there exists a solution of form (5.9), initial conditions do

not enter into the solution for the steady state. This means: If

open systems (of the kind discussed) attain a steady state, this
has a value equifinal at" independent .of initial conditions. A
general proof is difficult because of the lack of general criteria
for the existence of steady states; but it can be given for special
cases.

   2. In a closed system, some function of the elements-e.g., total
mass or energy-is by definition a constant. Consider Jsuch an

                                                                                                                                                                                  I

integral of the system, M(Q,). If the initial conditions /of Qi are

given as Q,o' we must have:

     M,  (5.11)

independent of t. If the Qv tend toward an asympotic value, Qil'
The Organism Considered as Physical System

                                                                                                     (5.12)

M, however, cannot be entirely independent of Q,o; with
change of Qto' also M and therefore M(Q,l) are altered. If this in-
tegral changes its value, at least some of the Q,l must also change.
This, however, is contrary to the definition of equifinality. We
may therefore stipulate the theorem: A closed system cannot be
equi/inal with regard to all Qi'

   For example, in the simplest case of an open chemical system
according to equation (5.2), concentration at time t is given by
(5.3); for t =00, Q = Elk, i.e. It is independent of the initial

concentration Q. and dependent only on the system constants

E and k. A derivation of equifinality-i.e., the reaching of a
steady state independent of time and initial conditions-in diffu-
sion systems can be found in Rashevsky (1938, Chapter 1).

   The general consideration, of course, does not provide an ex-
planation for specific phenomena if we do not know the special
conditions. Yet, the general formulation is not without interest.
We see, first, that it is possible to give a physical formulation to
the apparently metaphysical or vitalistic concept of finality; as
is well known, the phenomenon of equifinality is the basis of
the so-called "proofs" of vitalism of Driesch. Secondly, we see
the close relation between one fundamental characteristic of the
organism, i.e. the fact that it is not a closed system in thermo-
dynamic equilibrium but an open system in a (quasi-)stationary
state with another one, equifinality.1

   A problem not here considered is the dependence of a system
not only on actual conditions, but also on past conditions and
the course taken in the past. These are the phenomena known
as "after-effect," "hereditary" (in mathematical sense: E. Picard)
or "historic" (Volterra) (d. D'Ancona, 1939. Chapter XXII). In
this category belong phenomena of hysteresis in elasticity, elec-

   1The limitations of organismic regulation are based on the fact that the
organism (ontogenetically as well as phylogenetically) passes from the state
of a system of dynamically interacting elements to the state of structural
"mechanisms" and individual causal chains (d. pp. 68ff.) . If the components
become independent of each other. the change in each one depends only
on the conditions within this component. Change or removal of a component
must cause a final state different from the normal state; regulation is im·
possible in a completely "mechanized" system disintegrated into mutually
independent causal chains (except for control by feedback mechanisms
d. p. 42ff. and elsewhere) .
134  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

tridty. magnetism, etc. Taking dependence on the past into con-
sideration, our equations would become integro-differential
equations as discussed by Volterra (d. D'Ancona) and Donnan
(1937).

Biological Applications

   It should have become evident by now that many characteristics
of organismic systems, often considered vitalistic or mystical, can
be derived from the system concept and the characteristics of
certain, rather general system equations, in connection with
thermodynamic and statistical-mechanical considerations.

  If the organism is an open system, the principles generally

applying to systems of this kind must apply to it (maintenance in
change, dynamic order of processes, equifinality, etc.) quite ir-
respective of the nature of the obviously extremely complicated
relations and processes between the components.

   Naturally, such a general consideration does not give an ex-
planation for particular life phenomena. The principles discussed
should, however, provide a general frame or scheme within which
quantitative theories of specific life phenomena should be pos-
sible. In other terms, theories of individual biological phenomena
should turn out as special cases of our general equations. Without
striving for completeness, a few examples may show that and
how the conception of organism as open chemical system and
steady state has proved an efficient working hypothesis in various
fields.

   Rashevsky (1938) investigated, as a highly simplified theoretical
model of a cell, the behavior of a metabolizing droplet into which
substances diffuse from outside, in which they undergo chemical
reactions, and from which reaction products flow out. This con-
sideration of a simple case of open system (whose equations are
special cases of our equation [5.1]) allows mathematical deduction
of a number of characteristics always considered as \essential life
phenomena. There results an order of magnitude 'or such sys-
tems corresponding to that of actual cells, growth/and periodic
division, the impossibility of spontaneous generation (omnis
cellula e cellula), general characteristics of cell division, etc.

   Osterhout (1932-33) applied, and quantitatively elaborated,
the open-system consideration to phenomena of permeability. He
The Organism Considered as Physical System

studied permeation in cell models consisting of a non-aqueous
layer surrounded by an aqueous outer and inner fluid (the latter
corresponding to cell sap). An accumulation of penetrating sub-
stances takes place within this cell, explained by salt formation
of the penetrating substance. The result is not an equilibrium
but a steady state, in which the composition of the cell sap
remains constant under increase of volume. This model is similar
to that mentioned on p. 126. Mathematical expressions were
derived, and the kinetics of this model is similar to that in living
cells.

   Open systems and steady states generally play a fundamental
role in metabolism although mathematical formulation has been
possible only in simple cases or models. For example, the con-
tinuation of digestion is only possible because of the continuous
resorption of the products of enzymatic action by the intestine;
it therefore never reaches a state of equilibrium. In other cases,
accumulation of reaction products may lead to stopping the
reaction which explains some regulatory processes (d. von Bert-
alanffy, 1932, p. 191). This is true of the use of depot materials:
Decomposition of starch stored in the endosperm of many plant
seeds into soluble products is regulated by the need of the grow-
ing plant for carbohydrates; if development is experimentally
inhibited, the use of starch in the endosperm stops. Pfeffer and
Hansteen (quoted from Hober, 1926, p. 870) made it probable
that the accumulation of sugar originating from digestion of
starch and not used up by the inhibited seedling is the cause
for the stopping of starch breakdown in the endosperm. If the
endosperm is isolated and connected with a small plaster column,
the breakdown of starch continues in the endosperm if the sugar
diffuses through the plaster column into a quantity of water, but
is inhibited if the column is placed in a small quantity of water
only so that the concentration of sugar inhibits hydrolysis.

   One field where processes can already be formulated in the
form of equations, is the theory of growth. It can be assumed
(von Bertalanffy, 1934), that growth is based on a counteraction
of anabolic and catabolic processes: The organism grows when
building-up surpasses breaking-down, and becomes stationary,
when both processes are balanced. It can further be assumed
that, in many organisms, catabolism is proportional to volume
(weight), anabolism is proportional to resorption, i.e., a surface.
136                          GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

This hypothesis can be supported by a number of morphological
and physiological arguments and in simple cases, such as planar-
ians, can be partly verified by measurement of intestinal surface
(von Bertalanffy, 1940b). If K is a constant for catabolism per unit
mass, total catabolism will be KW (w = weight); similar, with 71
as constant per unit surface, anabolism will be 71S, and weight
increase defined by the dIfference of these magnitudes:

                       -dw = 715 - KW.      (5.13)

                       dt

   From this basic equation, expressions can be derived which
quantitatively represent empirical growth curves and explain a
considerable number of growth phenomena. In simpler cases
these growth laws are realized with the exactness of physical
experiments. Moreover, the rate of catabolism can be calculated
from growth curves and comparing values so calculated with
those directly determined in physiological experiment, an excel-
lent agreement is found. This tends to show, first, that the
parameters of the equations are not mathematically constructed
entities but physiological realities; secondly, that basic processes
of growth are rendered by the theory (d. Chapter 7).

   This example well illustrates the principle of equifinality dis-
cussed previously. From (5.13) follows for weight increase:

                                            (5.14)

where E and k are constants related to 71 and K, and where

Wo is the initial weight. The stationary final weight is given by

= w· (E/k)3; it is thus independent of the initial weight. This

can also be shown experimentally since the same final weight,

defined by the species-specific constants E and k, may be reached

after a growth curve entirely different from the normal one

(d. von Bertalanffy, 1934).             ~"

Obviously, this growth theory follows the conce tions of

kinetics of open systems; equation (5.13) is a special c se of the

general equation (5.1). The basic characteristic of the organism,

its representing an open system, is claimed to be the principle

of organismic growth.
The Organism Considered as Physical System

   Another field where this concept has proved itself fruitful is
the phenomenon of excitation. Hering first considered the phe-
nomena of irritability as reversible disturbances of the stationary
flow of organismic processes. In the state of rest, assimilation and
dissimilation are balanced; a stimulus causes increased dissimila-
tion; but then the quantity of decomposable substances is de-
creased, the counteracting assimilation process is accelerated,
until a new steady state betwe~n assimilation and dissimilation
is reached. This theory has proved to be extremely fruitful. The
theory of Putter (1918-1920), further developed by Hecht (1931),
considers the formation of excitatory substances from sensitive
substances (e.g., visual purple in the rods of the vertebrate eye)
and their disappearance as the basis of excitation. From the
counteraction of these processes, production and removal of exci-
tatory substances, the quantitative relations of sensory excitation
can be derived on the basis of chemical kinetics and the law of
mass action: threshold phenomena, adaptation to light and dark-
ness, intensity discrimination, Weber's law and its limitations,
etc. A similar hypothesis of excitatory and inhibitory substances
and of a dissimilation mechanism under the influence of stimuli
forms the basis of Rashevsky's theory (1938) of nervous excita-
tion by electric stimuli, formally identical with the theory of
excitation by Hill (1936). The theory of excitatory substances
is not limited to sense organs and the peripheral nervous system,
but applicable also to the transmission of excitation from one
neuron to another at the synapses. Without entering the still
unsettled question of a chemical or electrical theory of transmis-
sion in the central nervous system, the first explains many of the
basic features of the central nervous system compared with the
peripheral nerve, such as irreciprocity of conduction, retardation
of transmission in the central nervous system, summation and
inhibition; here, too, is the possibility of quantitative formula-
tions. Lapicque, e.g., developed a mathematical theory of sum-
mation in the central nervous system; according to Umrath, it
can be interpreted by the production and disappearance of
excitatory substances.

   We may therefore say, first, that the large areas of metabolism,
growth, excitation, etc., begin to fuse into an integrated theoreti-
138  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

cal field, under the guidance of the concept of open systems;
secondly, that a large number of problems and possible quanti-
tative formulations result from this concept.

   In connection with the phenomena of excitation, it should be
mentioned that this conception also is significant in pharma-
cological problems. Loewe (1928) applied the concept of the
organism as open system in quantitative analysis of pharma-
cological effects and derived the quantitative relations for the
action mechanism of certain drugs ("put-in," "drop-in," "block-
out" systems).

   Finally, problems similar to those discussed with respect to the
individual organism also occur with respect to supra-individual
entities which, in the continual death and birth, immigration
and emigration of individuals, represent open systems of a higher
nature. As a matter of fact, the equations developed by Volterra
for population dynamics, biocoenoses, etc. (d. D'Ancona, 1939)
belong to the general type discussed above.

   In conelusion, it may be said that consideration of organismic
phenomena under the conception discussed, a few general prin-
ciples of which have been developed, has already proved its
importance for explanation of specific phenomena of life.

     )
  6 The Model of Open System

The Living Machine and Its Limitations
   The present discussion may be started with one of those trivial

questions which are often only too difficult to answer scientifi-
cally. ''\That is the difference between a normal, a sick and a dead
organism? From the standpoint of physics and chemistry the
answer is bound to be that the difference is not definable on the
basis of so-called mechanistic theory. Speaking in terms of physics
and chemistry, a living organism is an aggregate of a great
number of processes which, sufficient work and knowledge pre-
supposed, can be defined by means of chemical formulas, mathe-
matical equations, and laws of nature. These processes, it is true,
are different in a living, sick or dead dog; but the laws of physics
do not tell a difference, they are not interested in whether dogs
are alive or dead. This remains the same even if we take into
consideration the latest results of molecular biology. One DNA
molecule, protein, enzyme or hormonal process is as good as an-
other; each is determined by physical and chemical laws, none is
better, healthier or more normal than the other.

   Nevertheless, there is a fundamental difference between a live
and a dead organism; usually, we do not have any difficulty in
distinguishing between a living organism and a dead object. In
a living being innumerable chemical and physical processes are
so "ordered" as to allow the living system to persist, to grow, to
develop, to reproduce, etc. What, however, does this notion of
"order" mean, for which we would look in vain in a textbook of
140                                    GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

physics? In order to define and explain it we need a model, a

conceptual construct. One such model was used since the begin-

nings of modern science. This was the model of the living ma-

chine. Depending on the state of the art, the model found

different interpretations. W'hen, in the seventeenth century,

Descartes introduced the concept of the animal as a machine,

only mechanical machines existed. Hence the animal was a com-

plicated clockwork. Borelli, Harvey and other so-called iatro-

physicists explained the functions of muscles, of the heart, etc.,

by mechanical principles of levers, pumps and the like. One can

still see this in the opera, when in the Tales of Hoffmann the

beautiful Olympia turns out to be an artfully constructed doll,

an automaton as it was called at the time. Later, the steam

engine and thermodynamics were introduced, which led to the

organism being conceived as a heat engine, a notion which lead-

to caloric calculations and other things. However, the organism

is not a heat engine, transforming the energy of fuel into heat

and then into mechanical energy. Rather it is a chemodynamic

machine, directly transforming the energy of fuel into effective

work, a fact on which, for example, the theory of muscle action

is based. Lately, self-regulating machines came to the fore, such

as thermostats, missiles aiming at a target and the servomecha-

nisms of modern technology. So the organism became a cyber-

netic machine, explanatory of many homeostatic and related

phenomena. The most recent development is in terms of molecu-

lar machines. When one talks about the "mill" of the Krebs

cycle of oxidation or about the mitochondria as "power plant"

of the cell, it means that machinelike structures at the molecular

level determine the order of enzyme reactions; similarly, it is a

micromachine which transforms or translates the genetic code of

DNA of the chromosomes into specific proteins and eventually

into a complex organism.

Notwithstanding its success, the machine model of the or~anism

has its difficulties and limitations.  /

First, there is the problem of the origin of the machir,e. Old

Descartes did not have a problem because his animal rhachine

was the creation of a divine watchmaker. But how do machines

come about in a universe of undirected physico-chemical events?

Clocks, steam engines and transistors do not grow by themselves

in nature. Where do the infinitely more complicated living ma-
 The Model of Open System

 chines come from? We know, of course, the Darwinistic explana-
 tion; but a doubt remains, particularly in the physically minded;
 there remain questions not usually posed or answered in text-
 books on evolution.

    Secondly, there is the problem of regulation. To be sure, self-
 repairing machines are conceivable in terms of the modern theory
 of automata. The problem comd in with regulation and repair
 after arbitrary disturbances. Can a machine, say, an embryo or a
 brain, be programmed for regulation not after a certain dis-
 turbance or finite set of disturbances, but after disturbances of an
 indefinite number? The so-called Turing machine can, in prin-
 ciple, resolve even the most complex process into steps which, if
 their number is finite, can be reproduced by an automaton. How-
 ever, the number of steps may be neither finite nor infinite, but
 "immense," i.e., transcending the number of particles or possible
 events in the universe. Where does this leave the organism as
 machine or automaton? It is well-known that organic regula-
 tions of such sort were used by vitalists as proof that the organic
 machine is controlled and repaired by superphysical agents, so-
called entelechies.

    Even more important is a third question. The living organism
is maintained in a continuous exchange of components; metabo-
lism is a basic characteristic of living systems. We have, as it
were, a machine composed of fuel spending itself continually and
yet maintaining itself. Such machines do not exist in present-day
technology. In other words: A machinelike structure of the organ-
ism cannot be the ultimate reason for the order of life processes
because the machine itself is maintained in an ordered flow of
processes. The primary order, therefore, must lie in the process
itself.

Some Characteristics of Open Systems

   We express this by saying that living systems are basically open
systems (Burton, 1939; von Bertalanffy, 1940a; Chapter 5). An
open system is defined as a system in exchange of matter with its
environment, presenting import and export, building-up and
breaking-down of its material components. Up to comparatively
recent times physical chemistry, in kinetics and thermodynamics,
was restricted to closed systems; the theory of open systems is
relatively new and leaves many problems unsolved. The devel-
142                 GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

opment of kinetic theory of open systems derives from two
sources: first the biophysics of the living organism, secondly de-
velopments in industrial chemistry which, besides reactions in
closed containers or batch processes, increasingly uses continuous
reaction systems because of higher efficiency and other advan-
tages. The thermodynamic theory of open systems is the so-called
irreversible thermodynamics (Meixner & Reik, 1959); it became
an important generalization of physical theory through the work
of Meixner, Onsager, Prigogine and others.

   Even simple open systems show remarkable characteristics
(Chapter 5). Under certain conditions, open systems approach a
time-independent state, the so-called steady state (Fliessgleichge-
wicht after von Bertalanffy, 1942). The steady state is maintained
in distance from true equilibrium and therefore is capable of
doing work; as it is the case in living systems, in contrast to sys-
tems in equilibrium. The system remains constant in its compo-
sition, in spite of continuous irreversible processes, import and
export, building-up and breaking-down, taking place. The steady
state shows remarkable regulatory characteristics which become
evident particularly in its equifinality. If a steady state is reached
in an open system, it is independent of the initial conditions, and
determined only by the system parameters, i.e., rates of reaction
and transport. This is called equifinality as found in many organ-
ismic processes. e.g., in growth (FIG. 6.1). In contrast to closed

200

                    --- - /                            ~~         '"  ,  -  -  -  "

                                                                  ~.

150             VV                                            ""

              /                                        I  /"

50 . / fr;.;. f -- -",' ....-~ '-'" ',,'"... ....,I I

                                                                         /
o 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300

                                                                         Time in days,

Fig. 6.1. Equifinality of growth. Heavy curve: normal growth of rats.
Broken curve: at the 50th day, growth was stopped by vitamin deficiency.
After reestablishment of normal regime, the animals reached the normal
final weight. (After Huber from von Bertalanffy, 1960b).
The Model of Open System  '143

physico-chemical systems, the same final state can therefore be
reached equifinally from different initial conditions and after
disturbances of the process. Furthermore. the state of chemi-
cal equilibrium is independent of catalyzers accelerating the
processes. The steady state, in contrast, depends on catalyzers
present and their reaction constants. I~ open systems, phenomena
of overshoot and false start (FIG. 6.2) may occur, with the system

  Fig. 6.2. Asymptotic approach to steady state (a), false start (b), and
  overshoot (c), in open systems. Schematic.

proceeding first in a direction opposite to that eventually leading
to the steady state. Conversely, phenomena of overshoot and false
start, as frequently found in physiology, may indicate that we are
dealing with processes in open systems.

   From the viewpoint of thermodynamics, open systems can
maintain themselves in a state of high statistical improbability,
of order and organization.

   According to the second principle of thermodynamics, the
general trend of physical processes is toward increasing entropy,
i.e., states of increasing probability and decreasing order. Living
systems maintain themselves in a state of high order and im-
144                GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

probability, or may even evolve toward increasing differentiation
and organization as is the case in organismic development and
evolution. The reason is given in the expanded entropy function
of Prigogine. In a closed system, entropy always increases accord-
ing to the Clausius equation:

         dS;;;::O  (6.1)

In an open system, in contrast, the total change of entropy can
be written according to Prigogine:

     dS            (6.2)

d.S denoting the change of entropy by import, d,S the production
of entropy due to irreversible processes in the system, such as
chemical reactions, diffusion, heat transport, etc. The term d,S is
always positive, according to the second principle; d,S, entropy
transport, may be positive or negative, the latter, e.g., by import
of matter as potential carrier of free energy or "negative en-
tropy." This is the basis of the negentropic trend in organismic
systems and of Schrodinger's statement that "the organism feeds
on negative entropy."

   More complex open-system models, approximating biological
problems, have been developed and analyzed by Burton, Rashev-
sky, Hearon, Reiner, Denbigh and other authors. In recent years,
computerization has been widely applied for the solution of sets
of numerous simultaneous equations (frequently nonlinear) (e.g.,
Franks, 1967; B. Hess and others) and for the simulation of com-
plex open-system processes in physiological problems (e.g., Zerbst
and coworkers; 1963 ff.). Compartment theory (Rescigno and
Segre, 1967; Locker, 1966b) provides sophisticated methods for
cases where reactions take place not in a homogenous space but
in subsystems partly permeable to the reactants, as is the case in in-
dustrial systems and obviously many processes in the cell.

   As can be seen, open systems compared with conventional
closed systems show characteristics wbich seem to contradict the
usual physical laws, and which were often considered as vitalistic
characteristics of life, i.e., as a violation of physical laws, ex-
plainable only by introducing soul-like or entelechial factt1rs into

of the organic happening. This is true of the equifinality organic

regulations, if, for example, the same "goal," a normal organism,
is produced by a normal, a divided, two fused ova, etc. In fact,
The Model of Open System

this was the most important "proof of vitalism" according to
Driesch. Similarly, the apparent contradiction of the trend to-
ward increase of entropy and disorder in physical nature, and
the negentropic trend in development and evolution were often
used as vitalistic arguments. The apparent contradictions dis-
appear with the expansion and lpeneralization of physical theory
to open systems.

Open Systems in Biology

   The model of open systems is applicable to many problems
and fields of biology (Beier, 1962, 1965; Locker et al., 1964, 1966a).
A survey of the biophysics of open systems, including theoretical
foundations and applications, was given some years ago (von
Bertalanffy, 1953a); a revised edition (with W. Beier, R. Laue and
A. Locker) is presently in preparation. The present survey is
restricted to some representative examples.

   There is, first, the large field of Goethe's Stirb und werde, the
continuous decay and regeneration, the dynamic structure of
living systems at all levels of organization (Tables 6.1-6.3). Gen-

                                              Table 6.1
Turnover rates of intermediates of cellular metabolism. (After B. HESS 1963)

     structure                     species         organ        turnover time
                                                                  in seconds
mitod1ondria                       mou~         liver
                                                erythrocytes       t.l X IOf
hemoglobin                         man          muscle             1.SXIO'
                                   rabbit       serum              1.7XIOf
aldolase                           man          serum              t.2X 10"
                                   man          serum             9.5 X lOS
pseudocholinesterase               man          total organism    "'.8 X 10'
                                   rat          total organism     4.... X lOS
molesterin                         man          erythrocyteS      2.2 X lOS
                                   man          thrombocyteS       1.6X lOS
fibrinogen                         man          ascites tumor      4.8X 10"
                                   mouse        kidney             4.0X 101
glucose                            rat          aKites tumor       1 -10
                                   mouse        asciteS tumor     0.1- 8.5
methionine                         mouse        wing muscle        4.6X 10""
                                   grasshopper  asciteS tumor
ATP  glycolysis  +  respiration    mouse                                  10'""
ATP  glycolysis                                                   1.9 X 10-a
ATP glycolysis + resŁiration
citrate cycle interme iales

filycolytic intermediates

a voproteinrcd.l1101voprotcin..".

PeZ+IFel + - cyrochromc a

Pe2+lFeH - cytochrome a;j
146                                               GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

                                              Table 6.2

Protein turnover determined by introduction of glycine labelled with l5N.
                         (After SPIUNSON &: RITTENBERG (1 949b)

     RAT:        total protein                                        turnov,er
     MAN:        proteins of liver, plasma and internal o'1lans        rate (,)
                 rest of body
                                                                      0.0.
                 total protein                                        0.12
                 proteins of liver and serum                          0.033
                 protein of musculature and other o'1lans
                                                                      0.0087
                                                                      0.0693
                                                                      0.0044

                                           Table 6.3
     Rate of mitosis in rat tissues. (After F. D. BERTALANFFY 1960)

                                                    daily rate of     renewal time
                                                  mitoSis (per cent)      (days)

Organs without mitosis                                                    4.3-14.7
                                                                          4.3-10
nerve cells, neuroepithelium, neurilemma, re-     o                       1.9- 9.1
                                                                          1.3- 1.6
tina, adrenal medulla. . · · · . · . .                                  26.7-47.6
                                                                        13 ~2.S
Organs with occasional mitosis but                                      19.I-H.5

no cell renewal                                                               8
                                                                              6.9
liver parenchyma, renal cortex and medulla,                                   6.9
                                                                              6.4
most glandular tissue, urethra, epididymis, \'as                            16

deferens. muscle. vascular endothelium. car-

tilage, bonc . . .             , .···             less than I

Organs with cell renewal                           7 -24
   upper digestive tract .                        10 -23
   large intestine and anus                       11 -S.
   stomach and pylol'Us .                         64 -79
   small intestine . .
   trachea and bronchus                            2-4
   ureter and bladder .                            1.6- 3
   epidermis . . .                                 ) -5
   sebaceous glands
   cornea . . . .                                     13
                                                      14
   lymph node . . . .                                 14
   pulmonar.y al vcol~r cells
   seminiferous epithelium                            IS
The Model of Open System  ~47

erally it may be said that this regeneration takes place at far
higher turnover rates than was anticipated. For example, it is
certainly surprising that calculation on the basis of open system
revealed that the proteins of the human body have a turnover time
of not much more than a hundred days. Essentially the same is
true for cells and tissues. Many tissues of the adult organism are
maintained in a steady state, cells being continuously lost by
desquamation and replaced by mitosis (F. D. Bertalanffy and Lau,
1962). Techniques such as the application of colchicine that ar-
rests mitosis and thus permits counting of dividing cells over
certain periods, as well as labelling with tritiated thymidine, have
revealed a sometimes surprisingly high renewal rate. Prior to
such investigations, it was hardly expected that cells in the di-
gestive tract or respiratory system have a life span of only a few
days.

   After the exploration of the paths of individual metabolic
reactions, in biochemistry, it has now become an important task
to understand integrated metabolic systems as functional units
(Chance et al., 1965). The way is through physical chemistry of
enzyme reactions as applied in open systems. The complex net-
work and interplay of scores of reactions was clarified in functions
such as photosynthesis (Bradley and Calvin, 1956), respiration (B.
Hess and Chance, 1959; B. Hess, 1963) and glysolysis, the latter
investigated by a computer model of some hundred nonlinear
differential equations (B. Hess, 1969). From a more general view-
point, we begin to understand that besides visible morphologic
organization, as observed by the electron microscope, light micro-
scope and macroscopically, there is another, invisible, organiza-
tion resulting from interplay of processes determined by rates of
reaction and transport and defending itself against environ-
mental disturbances.

   Hydrodynamic (Burton, 1939; Garavaglia et al., 1958; Rescigno,
1960) and particularly electronic analogs provide another ap-
proach besides physiological experiment, especially permitting
solutions of multivariable problems which otherwise exceed time
limits and available mathematical techniques. In this way Zerbst
et al. (1963ff.) arrived at important results on temperature adapta-
tion of heart frequency, action potentials of senspry cells (amend-
ing the Hodgkin-Huxley feedback theory), etc. j

   Furthermore, energetic conditions have to;be taken into ac-
148                                   GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

count. The concentration, say, of proteins in an organism does

not correspond to chemical equilibrium; energy expense is nec-

essary for the maintenance of the steady state. Thermodynamic

consideration permits an estimate of energy expense and com-

parison with the energy balance of the organism (Schulz, 1950;

von Bertalanffy, 1953a).

Another field of investigation is active transport in the cellular

processes of import and export, kidney function, etc. This is con-

nected with bioelectrical potentials. Treatment requires applica-

tion of irreversible thermodynamics.

In the human organism, the prototype of open system is the

blood with its various levels of concentrations maintained con-

stant. Concentrations and removal of both metabolites and ad-

ministered test substances follow open-systems kinetics. Valuable

clinical tests have been developed on this basis (Dost, 1953-1962).

In a broader context, pharmacodynamic action in general repre-

sents processes taking place when a drug is introduced into

the open system of the living organism. The model of the open

system can serve as foundation of the laws of pharmacodynamic

effects and dose-effect relations (Loewe, 1928; Druckery and

Kuepfmiiller, 1949; G. Werner, 1947).                                \

Furthermore, the organism responds to external stimuli. This

can be conceived of as disturbance and subsequent reestablish-

ment of a steady state. Consequently, quantitative laws in sensory

physiology, such as the Weber-Fechner law, belong to open sys-

tems kinetics. Hecht (1931), long before the formal introduction

of open systems, expressed the theory of photoreceptors and ex-

isting laws in the form of "open" reaction kinetics of sensitive

material.

The greatest of biological problems, remote from exact theory,

is that of morphogenesis, the mysterious process whereby, a nearly

undifferentiated droplet of protoplasm, the fertilized ovum, be-

comes eventually transformed into the marvelous architecture of

the multicellular organism. At least a theory of growth as quanti-

tative increase can be developed (d. pp. l71ff.). This has become a

routine method in international fisheries (e.g., Beverton and

Holt, 1957). This theory integrates physiology of metabolism

and of growth by demonstrating that various types of growth,

as encountered in certain groups of animals, depend on metabolic

constants. It renders intelligible the equifinality of growth
The Model of Open System

whereby a species-specific final size is attained, even when starting
conditions were different or the growth process was interrupted.
At least part of morphogenesis is effectuated by so-called relative

growth O. Huxley, 1932), i.e., different growth rates of the various

organs. This is a consequence of the competition of these com-
ponents in the organism for available resources, as can be derived
from open system theory (Chapter 7).

   Not only the cell, organism, etc., may be considered as open
system, but also higher integrations, such as biocoenoses, etc. (d.
Beier, 1962, 1965). The open-system model is particularly evident
(and of practical importance) in continuous cell culture as ap-
plied in certain technological processes (Malek, 1958, 1964;
Brunner, 1967).

   These few examples may suffice to indicate briefly the large
fields of application of the open-system model. Years ago it was
pointed out that the fundamental characteristics of life, metabo-
lism, growth, development, self-regulation, response to stimuli,
spontaneous activity, etc., ultimately may be considered as con-
sequences of the fact that the organism is an open system. The
theory of such systems, therefore, would be a unifying prin-
ciple capable of combining diverse and heterogeneous phenomena
under the same general concept, and of deriving quantitative
laws. I believe this prediction has on a whole proved to be cor-
rect and has been testified by numerous investigations.

   Behind these facts we may trace the outlines of an even wider
generalization. The theory of open systems is part of a general
system theory. This doctrine is concerned with principles that
apply to systems in general, irrespective of the nature of their
components and the forces governing them. With general system
theory we reach a level where we no longer talk about physical
and chemical entities, but discuss wholes of a completely general
nature. Yet, certain principles of open systems still hold true and
may be applied successfully to wider fields, from ecology, the
competition and equilibrium among species, to human economy
and other sociological fields.

Open Systems and Cybernetics

   Here the important question of the relation of general system
theory and cybernetics, of open systems and regulatory mecha-
150  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

nisms appears (d. pp. 160ft). In the present context a few remarks
will suffice.

   The basis of the open-system model is the dynamic interaction
of its components. The basis of the cybernetic model is the feed-
back cycle (FIG. 1.1) in which, by way of feedback of information,
a desired value (Sollwert) is maintained, a target is reached, etc.
The theory of open systems is a generalized kinetics and thermo-
dynamics. Cybernetic theory is based on feedback and informa-
tion. Both models have, in respective fields, been successfully
applied. However, one has to be aware of their differences and
limitations.

   The open-system model in kinetic and thermodynamic formu-
lation does not talk about information. On the other hand, a
feedback system is dosed thermodynamically and kinetically; it
has no metabolism.

   In an open system increase of order and decrease of entropy is
thermodynamically possible. The magnitude, "information," is
defined by an expression formally identical with negative en-
tropy. However, in a dosed feedback mechanism information can
only decrease. never increase, i.e., information can be transformed
into "noise," but not vice versa.

   An open system may "actively" tend toward a state of higher
organization, i.e., it may pass from a lower to a higher state of
order owing to conditions in the system. A feedback mechanism
can "reactively" reach a state of higher organization owing to
"learning," i.e., information fed into the system.

   In summary, the feedback model is preeminently applicable to
"secondary" regulations, i.e., regulations based on structural ar-
rangements in the wide sense of the word. Since, however, the
structures of the organism are maintained in metabolism and
exchange of components, "primary" regulations must evolve from
the dynamics in an open system. Increasingly, the organism
becomes "mechanized" in the course of development; hence
later regulations particularly correspond to feedback mechanisms
(homeostasis, goal-directed behavior, etc.).

   The open-system model thus represents a fertile working hy-
pothesis permitting new insights, quantitative statements and
experimental verification. I would like, however, to mention some
important unsolved problems.
The Model of Open System  151

Unsolved Problems

   At present, we do not have a thermodynamic criterion that
would define the steady state in open systems in a similar way
as maximum entropy defines equilibrium in closed systems. It
was believed for some time that such criterion was provided by
minimum entropy production, a statement known as "Prigogine's
Theorem." Although it is still taken for granted by some
biologists (e.g., Stoward, 1962), it should be emphasized that
Prigogine's Theorem, as was well known to its author, applies
only under rather restrictive conditions. In particular, it does not
define the steady state of chemical reaction systems (Denbigh,
1952; von Bertalanffy, 1953a, 1960b; Foster et al., 1957). A more
recent generalization of the theorem of minimum entropy pro-
duction (Glansdorff and Prigogine, 1964; Prigogine, 1965) en-
compassing kinetic considerations has still to be evaluated in its
consequences.

   Another unsolved problem of a fundamental nature originates
in a basic paradox of thermodynamics. Eddington called entropy
"the arrow of time." As a matter of fact, it is the irreversibility
of physical events, expressed by the entropy function, which gives
time its direction. Without entropy, i.e., in a universe of com-
pletely reversible processes, there would be no difference between
past and future. However, the entropy functions do not contain
time explicitly. This is true of both the classical entropy function
for closed systems by Clausius, and of the generalized function
for open systems and irreversible thermodynamics by Prigogine.
The only attempt I know of to fill this gap is a further generali-
zation of irreversible thermodynamics by Reik (1953), who at-
tempted to introduce time explicitly into the equations of
thermodynamics.

   A third problem to be envisaged is the relation between irre-
versible thermodynamics and information theory. Order is the
basis of organization and therefore the most fundamental prob-
lem in biology. In a way, order can be measured by negative
entropy in the conventional Boltzmann sense. This was shown,
e.g., by Schulz (1951) for the nonrandom arrangement of amino
acids within a protein chain. Their organization in contrast to
hazard arrangement can be measured by a term called chain
entropy (Kettenentropie). However, there exists a different ap-
152  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

proach to the problem, i.e., by measurement in terms of yes-orono
decisions, so-called bits, within the framework of information
theory. As is well-known, information is defined by a term for-
mally identical with negative entropy, thus indicating a cor-
respondence between the two different theoretical systems of
thermodynamics and of information theory. Elaboration of a
dictionary, as it were, for translating the language of thermo-
dynamics into that of information theory and vice versa, would
seem to be the next step. Obviously, generalized irreversible ther-
modynamics will have to be employed for this purpose because
it is only in open systems that maintenance and elaboration of
order do not run contrary to the basic entropy principle.

   The Russian biophysicist Trincher (1965) came to the conclu-
sion that the state function, entropy, is not applicable to living
systems; he contrasts the entropy principle of physics with bio-
logical "principles of adaptation and evolution," expressing an
increase of information. Here we have to take into considera-
tion that the entropy principle has a physical basis in the
Boltzmann derivation, in statistical mechanics and in the transi-
tion toward more probable distributions as is necessary in chance
processes; presently, no physical explanation can be given tfor
Trincher's phenomenological principles.

   Here we are dealing with fundamental problems which, I
believe, "are swept under the carpet" in the present biological
creed. Today's synthetic theory of evolution considers evolution
to be the result of chance mutations, after a well-known simile
(Beadle, 1963), of "typing errors" in the reduplication of the
genetic code, which are directed by selection, i.e., the survival of
those populations or genotypes that produce the highest number
of offspring under existing external conditions. Similarly, the
origin of life is explained by a chance appearance of organic
compounds (amino acids, nucleic acids, enzymes, ATP, etc.) in a
primeval ocean which, by way of selection, formed reproducing
units, viruslike forms, protoorganisms, cells, etc.

   In contrast to this it should be pointed out that selection, com-
petition and "survival of the fittest" already presuppose the ex-
istence of self-maintaining systems; they therefore cannot be the
result of selection. At present we know no physical law which
would prescribe that, in a "soup" of. organic compounds, open
systems, self-maintaining in a state of highest improbability, are
The Model of Open System  *153

fonned. And even if such systems are accepted as being "given,"
there is no law in physics stating that their evolution, on the
whole, would proceed in the direction of increasing organization,
i.e., improbability. Selection of genotypes with maximum off-
spring helps little in this respect. It is hard to understand why,
owing to differential reproduction, evolution ever should have
gone beyond rabbits, herring or even bacteria, which are un-
rivaled in their reproduction rate. Production of local conditions
of higher order (and improbability) is physically possible only
if "organizational forces" of some kind enter the scene; this is the
case in the fonnation of crystals, where "organizational forces"
are represented by valencies, lattice forces, etc. Such organiza-
tional forces, however, are explicitly denied when the genome is
considered as an accumulation of "typing errors."

   Future research will probably have to take into consideration
irreversible thermodynamics, the accumulation of information in
the genetic code and "organizational laws" in the latter. Pres-
ently the genetic code represents the vocabulary of hereditary
substance, i.e., the nucleotide triplets which "spell" the amino
acids of the proteins of an organism. Obviously, there must also
exist a grammar of the code; the latter cannot, to use a psychi-
atric expression, be a word salad, a chance series of unrelated
words (nucleotide triplets and corresponding amino acids in the
protein molecules). \Vithout such "grammar" the code could at
best produce a pile of proteins, but not an organized organism.
Certairl experiences in genetic regulation indicate the existence
of such organization of the hereditary substratum; their effects
will have to be studied also in macroscopic laws of evolution
(von Bertalanffy, 1949a; Rensch, 1961). I therefore believe that the
presently generally accepted "synthetic theory of evolution" is at
best a partial truth, not a complete theory. Apart from additional
biological research, physical considerations have to be taken into
account, in the theory of open systems and its present border-
line problems.

Conclusion

  The model of the organism as open system has proved useful
in. the explanation and mathematical formulation of numerous
life phenomena; it also leads, as is to be expected in a scientific
154  GENERAL SYSTEM THEOR Y

working hypothesis, to further problems, partly of a fundamental
nature. This implies that it is not only of scientific but also of
"meta-scientific" importance. The mechanistic concept of nature
predominant so far emphasized the resolution of happenings into
linear causal chains; a conception of the world as a result of
chance events, and a physical and Darwinistic "play of dice"
(Einstein); the reduction of biological processes to laws known
from inanimate nature. In contrast to this, in the theory of open
systems (and its further generalization in general system theory),
principles of multivariable interaction (e.g., reaction kinetics,
fluxes and forces in irreversible thermodynamics) become ap-
parent, a dynamic organization of processes and a possible ex-
pansion of physical laws under consideration of the biological
realm. Therefore, these developments form part of a new formu-
lation of the scientific world view.
  7 Some Aspects of System

        Theory in Biology

                          Introducing the present symposium on Quantitative
                   Biology of Metabolism, the speaker's task, it would seem,

                           is to outline the conceptual framework of the field,
                          illustrating its leading ideas, theories, or-as we may

                                      preferably say-the conceptual constructs or
                                                                             models applied.

   According to widespread opinion, there is a fundamental dis-
tinction between "observed facts" on the one hand-which are the
unquestionable rock bottom of science and should be collected in
the greatest possible number and printed in scientific journals
-and "mere theory" on the other hand, which is the product
of speculation and more or less suspect. I think the first point
I should emphasize is that such antithesis does not exist. As a
matter of fact, when you take supposedly simple data in our
field-say, determination of Q02' basal metabolic rates or tempera-
ture coefficients-it would take hours to unravel the enormous
amount of theoretical presuppositions which are necessary to
form these concepts, to arrange suitable experimental designs, to
create machines doing the job-and this all is implied in your
supposedly raw data of observation. If you have obtained a
series of such values, the most "empirical" thing you can do is to
present them in a table of mean values and standard deviations.
This presupposes the model of a binomial distribution-and with
this, the whole theory of probability, a profound and to a large
extent unsolved problem of mathematics, philosophy and even
metaphysics. If you are lucky, your data can be plotted in a
simple fashion, obtaining the graph of a straight line. But con-
sidering the unconceivable complexity of processes even in a
simple cell, it is little short of a miracle that the simplest possible
156                                  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

model-namely, a linear equation between two variables-actually

applies in quite a number of cases.

Thus even supposedly unadulterated facts of observation al-

ready are interfused with all sorts of conceptual pictures, model

concepts, theories or whatever expression you choose. The choice

is not whether to remain in the field of data or to theorize; the

choice is only between models that are more or less abstract,

generalized, near or more remote from direct observation, more

or less suitable to represent observed phenomena.

On the other hand, one should not take scientific models too

seriously. Kroeber (1952), the great American anthropologist,

once made a learned study of ladies' fashions. You know, some-

times skirts go down until they impede the lady in walking;

again, up they go to the other possible extreme. Quantitative

analysis revealed to Kroeber a secular trend as well as short-period

fluctuations in the length of ladies' skirts. This is a perfectly good

little law of nature; however, it has little to do with the ultimate

reality of nature. I believe a certain amount of intellectual

humility, lack of dogmatism, and good humor may go a long

way to facilitate otherwise embittered debates about scientific

theories and models.                               t

It is in this vein that I am going to discuss four models which

are rather fundamental in the field of quantitative metabolism.

The models I chose are those of the organism as open system

and steady state, of homeostasis, of allometry. and the so-called

Bertalanffy model of growth. This is not to say that these models

are the most important ones in our field; but they are used rather

widely and can illustrate the conceptual framework as well as

others.

Open Systems and Steady States

   Any modern investigation of metabolism and growth has to
take into account that the living organism as well as its com-
ponents are so-called open systems, i.e., systems maintaining them-
selves in a continuous exchange of matter with environment
(FIG. 7.1). The essential point is that open systems are beyond
the limits of conventional physical chemistry in its two main
branches,kinetics and thermodynamics. In other terms, conven-
tional kinetics and thermodynamics are not applicable to many
Some Aspects of System Theory In Biology                                             157

KI  A       . "1           a
__
            11 ---"----+~
"] 1
         C                          c rco                                  l(.j ~~"
                                                                        Ł
~1                                                                         p>
                              ~.'- ... ~ . -

                                                             ,

                                                               \

                                                                \

                                                             ·

b                             ,, .. "'-_ ... ..,.- ........

Fig. 7.1. a: Model of a simple open system. showing maintenance of

constant concentrations in the steady state, equifinality. adaptation and

stimulus-response. etc. The model can be interpreted as a simplified

schema for protein synthesis (A: amino acids, B: protein, C: deamination

products; ki   : polymerizatio  n of  amino acids into                     protein, k 2 : depolymeri-
zation, k3: d  eamination; k2         ki , energy supply                   for protein synthesis not
                                «

indicated) . In somewhat modified form, the model is Sprinson & RiUen-

berg's (1949) for calculation of protein turnover from isotope experi-

ments. (After von Bertalanffy, 1953a).

    b: The open system of reaction cycles of photosynthesis in algae.

(After Bradley & Calvin, 1957)
158                                   GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

processes in the living organism; for biophysics-the application

of physics to the living organism-an expansion of theory is

necessary.

The living cell and organism is not a static pattern or machine-

like structure consisting of more or less permanent "building

materials" in which "energy-yielding materials" from nutrition

are broken down to provide the energy requirements for life

processes. It is a continuous process in which both so-called

building materials as well as energy-yielding substances (Bau- and

BetriebsstofJe of classical physiology) are broken down and re-

generated. But this continuous decay and synthesis is so regulated

that the cell and organism are maintained approximately con-

stant in a so-called steady state (Fliessgleichgewicht, von

Bertalanffy). This is one fundamental mystery of living systems;

all other characteristics such as metabolism, growth, development,

self-regulation, reproduction, stimulus-response, autonomous ac-

tivity, etc., are ultimately consequences of this basic fact. The

organism's being an "open system" is now acknowledged as one

of the most fundamental criteria of living systems, at least so

far as German science is concerned (e.g., von Bertalanffy, 1942;

Zeiger, 1955; Butenandt 1955, 1959).  t

Before going further, I wish to apologize to the German col-

leagues for dwelling on matters which are familiar to them, and

which I myself have often presented. As Dost (1962a) stated in

a recent paper, "our sons already in their premedical examination

take account of this matter," i.e., of the theory of open systems

in their kinetic and thermodynamic formulations. Remember-

to quote but two examples-the presentation of the topic by

Blasius (1962) in the new editions of our classic Landois-

Rosemann textbook, and Netter in his monumental Theoretical

Biochemistry (1959). I am sorry to say that the same does not

apply to biophysics and physiology in the United States. I have

looked in vain into leading American texts even to find the terms,

"open system," "steady state" and "irreversible thermodynamics."

That is to say, precisely that criterion which fundamentally dis-

tinguishes living systems from conventional inorganic ones is

generally ignored or bypassed.

Consideration of the living organisms as an open system ex-

changing matter with environment comprises two questions: first,

their statics, i.e., maintenance of the system in a time-independent

state; secondly, their dynamics, i.e., changes of the system in time.
Some Aspects ot System Theory in Biology  '159

The problem can be considered from the viewpoints of kinetics
and of thermodynamics.

   Detailed discussion of the theory of open systems cain be found
in the literature (extensive bibliographies in von Bertalanffy
1953a, 1960b). So I shaIl restrict myself to saying that such systems
have remarkable features of which I wiIl mention only a few.
One fundamental difference is that closed systems must eventually
attain a time-independent state of chemical and thermodynamic
equilibrium; in contrast, open systems may attain, under certain
conditions, a time-independent state which is caIled a steady
state, Fliessgleichgewicht, using a term which I introduced some
twenty years ago. In the steady state, the composition of the
system remains constant in spite of continuous exchange of com-
ponents. Steady states or Fliessgleichgewichte are equifinal (FIG.
6.1); i.e., the same time-independent state may be reached from
different initial conditions and in different ways-much in con-
trast to conventional physical systems where the equilibrium state
is determined by the initial conditions. Thus even the simplest
open reaction systems show that characteristic which defines
biological restitution, regeneration, etc. Furthermore, classical
thermodynamics, by definition, is only concerned with closed
systems, which do not exchange matter with environment. In
order to deal with open systems, an expansion and generalization
was necessary which is known as iTreversible thermodynamics.
One of its consequences is elucidation of an old vitalistic puzzle.
According to the second principle of thermodynamics, the general
direction of physical events is toward states of maximum entropy,
probability and molecular disorder, leveIling down existing dif-
ferentiations. In contrast and "violent contradiction" to the
second principle (Adams, 1920), living organisms maintain them-
selves in a fantasticaIly improbable state, preserve their order in
spite of continuous irreversible processes and even proceed, in
embryonic development and evolution, toward ever higher differ-
entiations. This apparent riddle disappears by the consideration
that the classic second principle by definition pertains only to
dosed systems. In open systems with intake of matter rich in
high energy, maintenance of a high degree of order and even
advancement toward higher order is thermodynamicaIly per-
mitted.

   Living systems are maintained in a more or less rapid exchange,
degeneration and regeneration, catabolism and anabolism of their
160  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

components. The living organism is a hierarchical order of open
systems. What imposes as an enduring structure at a certain level,
in fact, is maintained by continuous exchange of components of
the next lower level. Thus, the multicellular organism maintains
itself in and by the exchange of cells, the cell in the exchange of
cell structures, these in the exchange of composing chemical com-
pounds, etc. As a general rule, turnover rates are the faster the
smaller the components envisaged (Tables 6.1-3). This is a good
illustration for the Heraclitean flow in and by which the living
organism is maintained.

   So much about the statics of open systems. If we take a look
at changes of open systems in time, we also find remarkable
characteristics. Such changes may occur because the living system
initially is in an unstable state and tends toward a steady state;
such are, roughly speaking, the phenomena of growth and de·
velopment. Or else, the steady state may be disturbed by a change
in external conditions, a so-called stimulus; and this-again
roughly speaking-comprises adaptation and stimulus-response.
Here too characteristic differences to closed systems obtain.
Closed systems generally tend toward equilibrium states in an
asymptotic approach. In contrast, in open systems, phen<{mena of
false start and overshoot may occur (FIG. 6.2). In other terms: If
we find overshoot or false start-as is the case in many physio-
logical phenomena-we may expect this to be a process in an
open system with certain predictable mathematical characteristics.

   As a review of recent work (Chapter 6) shows, the theory of
the organism as an open system is a vividly developing field as
it should be, considering the basic nature of biological Fliess-
gleichgewicht. The above examples are given because, after the
basic investigations by Schonheimer (1947) and his group into
the "Dynamic State of Body Constituents" by way of isotope
tracers, the field is strangely neglected in American biology
which, under the influence of cybernetic concepts, rather has
returned to the machine concept of the cell and organism,
thereby neglecting the important principles offered by the theory
of open systems.

Feedback and Homeostasis
   Instead of the theory of open systems, another model construct
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology  J.61

is more familiar to the American schooL It is the concept of
feedback regulation, which is basic in cybernetics and was biologi-
cally formulated in Cannon's concept of homeostasis (e.g., Wiener,
1948; Wagner, 1954; Mittelstaedt, 1954, 1956; Kment, 19.57). We
can give it only a brief consideration.

   As is generally known, the basIc model is a circular process
where part of the output is monitored back, as information on
the preliminary outcome of the response, into the input (FIG. 7.2a),
thus making the system self-regulating; be it in the sense of main-
tenance of certain variables or of steering toward a desired goal.
The first is the case, e.g., in a simple thermostat and in the
maintenance of constant temperature and many other parameters
in the living organism; the second, in self-steering missiles and
proprioceptive control of voluntary movements. More elaborate
feedback arrangements in technology and physiology (e.g., FIG.
7.2h) are variations or aggregates of the basic scheme.

   Phenomena of regulation following the feedback scheme are of
widest distribution in all fields of physiology. Furthermore, the
concept appeals to a time when control engineering and automa-
tion are flourishing, computers, servomechanisms, etc., are in the
center of interest, and the model of the "organism as servo-
mechanism" appeals to the Zeitgeist of a mechanized society.
Thus the feedback concept sometimes has assumed a monopoly
suppressing other equally necessary and fruitful viewpoints: The
feedback model is equated with "systems theory" in general
(Grodin, 1963; Jones and Gray, 1963; Casey, 1962), or "bio-
physics" is nearly identified with "computer design and informa-
tion theory" (Elsasser, 1958, p. 9). It is therefore important to
emphasize that feedback systems and "homeostatic" control are
a significant but special class of self-regulating systems and phe-
nomena of adaptation (d. Chapter 6). The following appear to
be the essential criteria of feedback control systems:

   (1) Regulation is based upon preestablished arrangements
("structures" in a broad sense). This is well expressed by the
German term Regelmechanismen which makes it clear that the
systems envisaged are of the nature of "mechanisms"-in contrast
lo regulations of a "dynamic" nature resulting from free interplay
of forces ahd mutual interaction between components and tend-
ing toward equilibrium or steady states.

   (2) Causal trains within the feedback system are linear and uni-
   162                                               GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

STIMULUS                 MESSAGE                     MESSAGE                           RESPONSE

CI j--+- 4 1------)0 -4- RECEPTOR
                                         CONTROL        EFFECTOR                                  ~
                                     I APPARATUS
                                                      !

®                                      FEEDBACK

Cerebral cortex          Regulation

      I                  device
                         Central
Governijlg value
                         switching
                                                                    --to
                         mechanisms    " _N.!. 'y:aE~!. .... - - - _ . ,

   t ,--------Jl.1 Diencephalon "                     B-cells                          Insulin

                     ~~                ipancreotr~ H. Pancreas                                                   i
                                                         islands ~M.Q!L.--
                     i~  Hypophysis       ,           A-cells

                                   ~!"I-.r-----'--' I\adrenotroPi:

                                  I ACTH

                                  ~:rti.c~ 1 corticotroEi~~
                                                      Medulla                          Adrenalin
                                                      Adrenals                         Thyroxin
                                                      Cortex
                                  I thyreotropic H. L--'-'-.'-'--'-"-___-!
i                                                                      Thyroid

                                       Somatotropin

                     Cor ticosteroids

                     Adrenalin

                     Insulin

                                       ..-- Feedback                                                 i)1'1

                              Regulation                                                             \,1

                                value                                                                'II

                                          )~----IIl=Ąlilll----1 ! Blood sugar
Glycosensible 1-------/                               Liver storage ,---,~+,':l

--- receptors            ( Blood\-                    Muscle energy'--                            IJ
pan~~eas. Re~on ~~~:~
                                             Section          consumption                         1 I"

C.N.S.                          mg%                   Kidney' i i'l
---                                    r-B;;;l;-:O-O-;d-S--'u'-:g:-c~cc-~--t overflow          ~
                                                      ~v:.:e,--_--"
      (hypothetical                                                                    ' i l f = I.'. . . . . .

                                          Decrease
                                  L Disturbance
                                                              Governor
                                                               system

                                          factor

   Fig. 7.2. a: Simple feedback scheme. b: Homeostatic regulation of the
   blood sugar level. (After Mittelstaedt, 1954.)

directional. The basic feedback scheme (FlG. 7.2) is still the
classical stimulus-response (S-R) scheme, only the feedback loop
being added so that causality becomes circular.
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology  * 163

   (3) Typical feedback or homeostatic phenomena are "open"
with respect to incoming information, but "closed" with r~spect
to matter and energy. The concepts of information theory-
particularly in the equivalence of information and negative
entropy-correspond therefore to "closed" thermodynamics (ther-
mostatics) rather than irreversible thermodynamics of open sys-
tems. However, the latter is presupposed if the system (like the
living organism) is to be "self-organizing" (Foerster and Zopf,
1962), i.e., is to go toward higher differentiation. As was men-
tioned above, no synthesis is reached as yet. The cybernetic
scheme permits, by way of block diagrams, clarification of many
important phenomena of self-regulation in physiology and lends
itself to information-theoretical analysis. The open-system scheme
permits kinetic and thermodynamic analysis.

   Comparison of flow diagrams of feedback (FIG. 7.2) and open
systems (FIG. 7.1) intuitively shows the difference. Thus dynamics
in open systems and feedback mechanisms are two different model
concepts, each in its right in its proper sphere. The open-system
model is basically nonmechanistic, and transcends not only con-
ventional thermodynamics, but also one-way causality as is basic
in conventional physical theory (d. Chapter 4). The cybernetic
approach retains the Cartesian machine model of the organism,
unidirectional causality and closed systems; its novelty lies in
the introduction of concepts transcending conventional physics,
especially those of information theory. Ultimately, the pair is a
modern expression of the ancient antithesis of "process" and
"structure"; it will eventually have to be resolved dialectically in
some new synthesis.

   Physiologically speaking, the feedback model accounts for what
may be called "secondary regulations" in metabolism and other
fields, i.e., regulations by way of preestablished mechanisms and
fixed pathways, as in neurohormonal controL Its mechanistic
character makes it particularly applicable in the physiology of
organs and organ systems. On the other hand, dynamic interplay
of reactions in open systems applies to "primary regulations"
such as in cell metabolism (d. Hess and Chance, 1959) where the
more general and primitive open-system regulation obtains.

Allometry and the Surface Rule
   Let us now proceed to the third model which is the so-called
164             GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

principle of allometry. As is well known, many phenomena of
metabolism, and of biochemistry, morphogenesis, evolution, etc.,
follow a simple equation:

     y bx",                                (7.1)

i.e., if a .variable y is plotted logarithmically against another
variable x, a straight line results. Ther.e are so many cases where
this equation applies that examples are unnecessary. There-
fore let us look instead at fundamentals. The so-called allometric
equation is, in fact, the simplest possible law of relative growth,
the term taken in the broadest sense; i.e., increase of one variable,
y, with respect to another variable x. We see this immediately
by writing the equation in a somewhat different form:

     dy 1 dx 1 ReI. Gr. Rate (y, x) = IX.  (7.2)

     dt Y dt x

As can easily be seen, the allometric equation is a solution of
this function which states that the ratio of the relative increase
of variable y to that of x is constant. We arrive at the allometric
relation in a simple way by considering that any relative growth
-only presupposed it is continuous-can generally be expressed by:

     R. G. R. (y,x) F,                     (7.3)

where F is some undefined function af the variables concerned.
The simplest hypothesis is that F be a constant, (/., and this is the
principle of allometry.

   However, it is well known that historically the principle of
allometry came into physiology in a way very different from the
derivation given. It appeared in a much more special form when
Sarrus and Rameaux found around 1840 that metabolic rate in
animals of different body weight does not increase in proportion
to weight, but rather in proportion to surface. This is the origin
of the famous surface law of metabolism or law of Rubner, and it
is worthwhile to take a look at Rubner's original data of about
1880 (Table 7.1). In dogs of varying weight, metabolic rate de-
creases if calculated per unit of weight; it remains approximately
constant per unit surface, with a daily rate of about 1000 kcaL
per square meter. As is well known, the so-called surface law has
caused an enormous debate and literature. In fact, Rubner's law
is a very special case of the allometric function, y representing
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology                            IIr 165

                                               Table 7.1
                  Metabolism in dogs. (After RUB!,;ER around 1880)

weight in kg  cal. production  cal. production per sq. m
                   per kg             body surface
      3.t
       6.5           85.8                   1909
     11.0           6\.2
     17.7           57.3                 Ion
     19.2            45.3
     23.7            44.6                   1191
     30.4            40.2                    1047
                     34.8                   1141
                                             1082
                                              984

basal metabolic rate, x body weight, and the exponent a. amount-
ing to 2/3.

   I believe that the general derivation just mentioned puts the
surface law into correct perspective. Endless discussions of some
80 years are overcome when we consider it a special case of al-
lometry, and take the allometric equation for what it really is:
a highly simplified, approximate formula which applies to an
astonishingly broad range of phenomena, but is neither a dogma
nor an explanation for everything. Then we shall expect all
sorts of allometric relationships of metabolic measures and body
size-with a certain preponderance of surface or 2/3-power func-
tions, considering the fact that many metabolic processes are
controlled by surfaces. This is precisely what we find (Table 7.2).
In other words, 2/3 is not a magic number; nor is there anything
sacred about the 3/4 power which more recently (Brody, 1945;
Kleiber, 1961) has been preferred to the classical surface law.
Even the expression: Gesetz der fortschreitenden Stoffwechselre-
duktion (Lehmann, 1956)-law of progressive reduction of meta-
bolic rate-is not in place because there are metabolic processes
which do not regress with increasing size.

   Furthermore, from this it follows that the dependence of
metabolic rates on body size is not invariable as was presupposed
by the surface law. It rather can vary, and indeed does vary,
especially as a function of (I) the organism or tissue in question;
(2) physiological conditions; and (3) experimental factors.

   As to the variation of metabolic rate depending on the organism
166                                         GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

                                          Table 7.2

Equations relating quantitative properties with body weights among mammals.
                                 (After ADOLPH 1949; modified)

                            regression a =                             regression a =

intake of water (mVhr)        .88           myoglobin wt (g)                  1.31
                                            cytochrome wt (g)                  .62
urine output (ml/hr)          .82           nephra number                      .62

urea clearance (mllhr)        .72

inulin clearance (mllhr)      .77

creatinine clearance (mlihr)  .69           diameter renal corp. (em)    .08

diodrast clearance (ml/hr)    .89           kidneys wt (g)               .85

hippurate clearance (mlihr)   .80           ~~n~W                        .70

02 consurn. basal (ml STP/hr) .734          heart wt (g)                 .98

heartbeat duration (hr)       .27           lungs wt (g)                 .99

breath duration (hr)          .28           liver wt (g)                 .87

ventilation rate (mllhr)      .74           thyroids wt (g)              .80

                                            adrenals wt (g)              .92

tidal volume (ml)             1.01          pituitary wt (g)             .76
gut beat duration (hr)         .31          stom. + intes. wt (g)
N total output (gihr)          .735                                      .94
N endogenous output (gihr)     .72
creatinine N output (g/hr)     .90          blood wt (g)                 .99
sulphur output (g/hr)          .74
02 consum. liver slices                     Surface law: a == .66 relative to absolute
                               .77
   (ml STP/hr)                 .99          weight (y = bwa ); - .33 relative to unit
hemoglobin wt (g)
                                                              (~ weight  = bwa )

or tissue concerned, I shall give later on examples with respect
to total metabolism. Differences in size dependence of Q02 in
various tissues are shown in Figure 7.3. A similar example is
presented in Table 7.3 with respect to comparison of intra- and
interspecific allometries. Variations of size-dependence of meta-
bolic rate with physiological conditions are demonstrated by data
obtained in our laboratory in an important aspect which has
been little investigated. The size-dependence of metabolism as
expressed in the allometry exponent (1.. varies, depending on
whether basal metabolic rate (B.M.R.), resting metabolism, or
metabolism in muscular activity is measured. Figure 7.4 shows
such variation in rats, comparing basal and nonbasal metabolic
rates. Figure 7.5 gives a more extensive comparison in mice,
including different degrees of muscular activity. These data
confirm Locker's statement (1961a) that with increasing intensity
of metabolic rate, (1.. tends to decrease. Variations in the slope
of the regression lines are also found in invertebrates when
metabolic rates of fasting and nonfasting animals are compared
(FIG. 7.6). Variations of (1.. with experimental conditions deserve
much more attention than usually given. Often the attitude is
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology                                                         j 167

~111br-~__~________------------------------------------lK~ney

~
- lOr- ---_-:::.--:- "-
  t--         '--            ---                 __ --1::::-- _-- --- --- --- --- -- Bram

8r-                                           -                                                        liver
                             ------::---;:-::---:::::::.-~______                                 ~ ~~~;us
7f-

6f-

5r-                                                               - ........ ...........

41-                                                                                       ----'----- Diaphragm

3 II   II                    I I I I ' I II                       I  J                            .1
 8 10        20
                             30 40 50 60 80 100                      200                         300 400

                                                 Body weight in g

Fig. 73. Q02 (l-'102/mg dry wt./hr.) of several rat tissues. Only regression
lines are shown in this and the following figures; for complete data see
originals. (After von Bertalanffy & Pirozynski, 1953.)

                                                Table 7.3

Intraspecific and interspecific allometry (constants 0;) in organs of mammals.
                       (After VON BERTALANFFY & PIROZYNSKI 1952)

          rat                cat        dog monkey cattle                                 horse    adult
                                                                                                 mammals
       B. & P. BRODY                    various authors
                                                                                                   inter-
                                                                                                  specific

brain  0.20   0.17                      0.25     0.62    0.30                             0.24   0.66

                                                                                                 0.69

                                                                                                 0.58

                             ~ 0.92                                                              0.54

heart  0.82   0.80                      1.00     0.69    0.93                                    0.83

                                  0.82 0.86                                                      0.82

                                        0.93                                                     0.85

                                                                                                 0.84

lungs                                                                                            0.98

       0.73   0.75                      0.82     0.92                                     0.58   0.98

       I. Cycle: I. C,·c1e:                                                                      0.99

liver  1.26   1:14                      0.71             0.70                             0.61   0.87

       2. Cycle: 2. C"c!e                                                                        0.88

       0.67   0:68                                                                               0.92

kidners 0.80  0.82           ~ 0.65     0.70                                              0.66   0.85

                                  0.61                                                           0.87

                                                                                                 0.76

taken as if Q02 were a constant characteristic of the tissue under
consideration. This is by no means the case. Variations appear,
for exampl~, with different bases of reference, such as fresh
weight, dry weight, N-content, etc. (Locker, 1961 b). The simplest
    168       GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

Baad (W{ntu)

kld(S~J')

              10 40  60 80 100  ,.0 "'.

Fig. 7.4. Size dependence of metabolic rates in rat under basal and non-
basal conditions. Animals fasted for 18 hrs. prior to experiment (small
animals less); determinations at 29°-30·C; conditions of muscular rest.

A break in the regression lines is assumed at a body weight of no gm.,

corresponding with many physiological changes (d. Fig. 7.11). "Basal
Summer" determinations were made with a climatization period of 15-18
hours at thermoneutrality preceding experiment; "Basal 'Winter" without
ciimatization; "Nonbasal conditions" with 10 hours fasting, followed by

a meal 45-60 minutes prior to experiment. a~ , b ~ (Unpublished
data by Racine & von Bertalanffy.)

demonstration is change of the medium. Not only-as every
experimenter knows-does the absolute 'magnitude of Q02 vary
greatly depending, e.g., on whether saline or medium with
metabolites is used; the same is true of size dependence or the
parameter (J. (FlG. 7.7). Locker's rule, as mentioned previously,
again is verified; its confirmations by the experiments sum-
marized in Figures 7.4, 7.5 and 7.7 are particularly impressive
because they were obtained independent of and prior to statement
of the rule. The variation of Q02 in different media indicates
that different partial processes in respiration are measured.

   This is the reason why I doubt that total metabolism or B.M.R.
can be obtained by so-called summated tissue respiration (Martin
and Fuhrmann, 1955). Which Q02 of the individual tissues
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology  k 169

15  23 25 33

  Fig. 7.5. Size dependence of metabolic rates in mice. Determinations at
   29 0 and 21 0 C: previous fasting and c1imatization. In the experiments
  with muscular activity, the scattering of values is considerable owing to
  the difficulty in keeping the performed work constant. Therefore the
  qualitative statement that the slope of the regression lines decreases is
  well established, but no particular significance should be attached to
   the numerical values of a. (Unpublished data by Racine & von Bertalanffy.)

should be summated? The Q02 as obtained, say, in Ringer solu-
tion or that obtained with metabolites which may be twice as
high? How do the different a's of the various tissues add up to
the 2/3 or 3/4 observed in B.M.R. of the entire animal? Similarly,
Locker (1962) has shown that also the component processes of
Q02' such as carbohydrate and fat respiration, may have different
regressions.

   Before leaving this topic, I would like to make another remark
on principle. We have to agree that the allometric equation is,
at best, a simplified approximation. Nevertheless, it is more than
a convenient way of plotting data. Notwithstanding its simplified
170                                      GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

                200 mm~O. hr.                        a

                          100

                      80

20

10

5 ~~-----r----~--r--r-------r--~r---r-_m_g~.

    10  20                     30 40 50  100 200 300

Fig. 7.6. 02 consumption of larvae of Tenebrio molitor (20°C). a: larvae
fed; b: starved for two days. In b, Muller's and Teissier's values com-
bined. (After von Bertalanffy & Muller, 1943.)

    20.--------------------------------------,

                                                                                                                       a

                                                           Body Weight in Gra~s

Fig. 7.7. Size dependence of Q02 of diaphragm in different media. a:
Krebs-Ringer phosphate solution; b: Krebs medium II, type A, with
glucose; c: Same medium, with glucose and metabolites. (After von
Bertalanffy & Estwick, 1953.)
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology

character and mathematical shortcomings, the principle of al-
lometry is an expression of the interdependence, organization and
harmonization of physiological processes. Only because processes
are harmonized, the organism remains alive and in a steady
state. The fact that many processes follow simple allometry,
indicates that this is a general rule of the harmonization of
processes (Adolph, 1949): "Since so many properties have been
found to be adequately interrelated by equations of one form, it
seems very unlikely that other properties would be related ac-
cording to a radically different type of equation. For if they were,
they would be incompatible with the properties reviewed."

   Furthermore, although we encounter a wide range of values
of allometry constants, these certainly are not accidental. At least
to a wide extent, they depend on biotechnical principles. It is
a truism in engineering that any machine requires changes in
proportion to remain functional if it is built in different size,
e.g., if a small-scale model is increased to the' desired working
size. To an extent, it can be understood why certain types of
allometry, such as dependence on surface, body mass, etc., obtain
in particular cases. The studies by Gunther and Guerra (1955)
and Guerra and Gunther (1957) on biological similarity, the rela-
tions of birds' wings (Meunier, 1951), pulse rate (von Bertalanffy,
1960b) and brain weight (von Bertalanffy and Pirozynski, 1952)
to body size are examples of functional analysis of allometry
which, I believe, will become an important field for further
research.

Theory of Animal Growth

   The last model I wish to discuss is the model of growth,
honorifically called the Bertalanffy equations (von Bertalanffy,
1957b, 1960b); basic ideas go back to the great German physi-
ologist Putter (1920). Here, too, I am not primarily concerned
with details or even the merits and shortcomings of the model; I
rather wish to use it to make clear some principles in quantita-
tive metabolism research.

   We all know, firstly, that the process of growth is of utmost
complexity; and secondly, that there is a large number of formulas
on the market which claim satisfactorily to represent observed
growth data and curves. The general procedure was that some
172                           GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

more or less complex and more or less plausible equation was

proposed. Then the investigator sat down to calculate a number

of growth curves with that formula, and was satisfied if a sufficient

approximation of empirical data was obtained.

Here is a first illusion we have to destroy. It is a mathematical

rule of thumb that almost every curve can be approximated if

three or more free parameters are permitted-i.e., if an equation

contains three or more so-called constants that cannot be verified

otherwise. This is true quite irrespective of the particular form

of the equation chosen; the simplest equation to be applied is

a power series (y   + + !x.o  !X.2X2  +     ...) developed to, say,
                    !X.IX

the cubic term. Such calculation is a mere mathematical exercise.

Closer approximation can always be obtained by permitting

further terms.

The consequence is that curve-fitting may be an indoor sport

and useful for purposes of interpolation and extrapolation.

However, approximation of empirical data is not a verification of

particular mathematical expressions used. We can speak of

verification and of equations representing a theory only if (1) the

parameters occurring can be confirmed by independent experi-

ment; and if (2) predictions of yet unobserved facts can be derived

from the theory. It is in this sense that I am going to discuss

the so-called Bertalanffy growth equations because, to the best

of my knowledge, they are the only ones in the field which try

to meet the specifications just mentioned.

The argument is very simple. If an organism is an open system,

its increase or growth rate (G.R.) may, quite generally, be ex-

pressed by a balance equation of the form:

                dw G.R. = Synth. - Deg. + .      (7.4)
                dt

i.e., growth in weight is represented by the difference between

processes of synthesis and degeneration of its building materials,

plus any number of indeterminate factors that may influence the

process. "Without loss of generality, we may further assume that

the terms are some undefined functions of the variables concerned:

                G.R. = jl(W, t) h (w, t) + ....  (7.5)

Now we see immediately that time t should not enter into the
equation. For at least some growth processes are equifinal, i.e.,
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology

the same final values can be reached at different times (FIG. 6.1).
Even without strict mathe.natical proof, we can see intuitively
that this would not be possible if growth rate directly depends
on time; for if this were the case, different growth rates could
not occur at given times as is sometimes the case.

   Consequently, the terms envisaged will be functions of body
mass present:

                                                                                                     (7.6)

if we tentatively limit the consideration to the simplest open-
system scheme. The simplest assumption we can make is that
the terms are power functions of body mass. And, indeed, we
know empirically that quite generally the size dependence of
physiological processes can well be approximated by allometric
expressions. Then we have:

dw                                        (7.7)

          1/W"

dt

where 1/ and K are constants of anabolism and catabolism, re-
spectively, corresponding to the general structure of allometric
equations.

   Mathematical considerations show furthermore that smaller
deviations of the exponent m from unity do not much influence
the shape of the curves obtained. Thus, for further simplification

let us put m = l. This makes things much easier mathematically,

and appears to be justified physiologically, since physiological
experience-limited it is true-seems to show that catabolism of
building materials, especially proteins, is roughly proportional to
body mass present.

   Now let us make a big leap. Synthesis of building materials
needs energy which, in aerobic animals, is provided by processes
of cell respiration and ultimately the ATP system. Let us assume
there are correlations between energy metabolism of an animal
and its anabolic proceb,cs. This is plausible insofar as energy
metabolism must, in one way or the other, provide the energies
that are required for synthesis of body components. We there-
fore insert for size dependence of anabolism that of metabolic
rates (n = a.) and arrive at the simple equation:

dw                                        (7.8)

- = 1/W" - KW.

dt
174                                GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY
The solution of this equation is:

w = {: (:                          (7.9)

with Wo = weight at time t O.
   Empirically, we find that resting metabolism of many animals

is surface-dependent, i.e., that they follow Rubner's rule. In this

= case, we set (J. 2/3. There are other animals where it is directly

= dependent on body mass, and then (J. 1. Finally, cases are found

where metabolic rate is in between surface and mass propor-

tionality, that is 2/3 < (J. < 1. Let us tentatively refer to these

differences in size-dependence of metabolic rate as "metabolic
types."

   Now if we insert the different values for (J. into our basic
equation, we easily see that they yield very different curves of
growth. Let us refer to them as "growth types." These are sum-
marized in Table 7.4; corresponding graphs, showing the differ-
ences in metabolic behavior and concomitant differences of growth
curves, are presented in Figure 7.8. Detailed discussions of the
theory have been given elsewhere. It has been shown that the
above derivations apply in many cases; no less than fourteen
different arguments in verification of the theory can be presented
(Table 7.5, FIGS. 7.9, 7.10). We shall limit the present discussion to
a few remarks on principle.

   All parameters of the growth equations are verifiable experi-
mentally. (J., the size dependence of metabolic rate, determines
the shape of the growth curve. This correlation has been con-
firmed in a wide range of cases, as seen in Table 7.4 K, constant
of catabolism, can in first approximation be identified with turn-
over of total protein (r) as determined by isotope tracers and
other techniques. For example, from the growth curves catabolic
rates of 0.045/day for the rat, and 1.165 g. protein/kg. body
wt./day for man were calculated (von Bertalanffy, 1938). De-
terminations of protein catabolism then available did not agree
with these predictions: protein loss determined by minimum
N-excretion was 0.00282/day for the rat after Terroine, and
some 0.4-0.6 g. protein/kg. body wt./day for man, according
to the conceptions then prevailing in physiology (von Bertalanffy,
1942, pp. 180ff., 186-188). It was therefore a striking confirmation
Some Aspects ot System Theory in Biology                                   '175

                                      Table 7.4

Metabolic types and growth     types. w,        l: Weight, length at time t; wO' 10:
                                                weight, length; 'l], k: constants of
  initial weight, length; w·,  /.; final

                       anabolism and catabolism.

                       (After VON BERTALANFFY 1942)

   Metabolic                  Growth
  I. Respiration
                       (a) Linear growth curve: d7L'o'dt '1w't. xu'
     surface-          attaining (without in- a) ! 1"-(1"-10).,...,'3
     proportional
                       flexion a steady state.    3           I3
 II. Respiration       (b) Weight gro""h curve: b)w=[Vw* -IV;;;;-
     weight-           sigmoid, attaining) with
     proportional                                             wO)e-x '/3p
                       inflexion at c. 1/3 of
III. Respiration
     intermediate      final weight, a steady
     between surface-
     and ,.'eig!,t-    state
     proportion.,lity
                       Linear and weight          dU'!dt = 'lw HW          Cw Insect larvae,

                       growth curves exponen- a) 1 loe"/3                       Orthoptera,
                       tial, no steady state                                     Helicidae .
                                                  b)w = woe"
                       attained, but growth

                       intercepted by meta-

                       morphosis or seasonal

                       cycles

                       (a) Linear growth curve:   d""/'d:t,<n'l<W'1 HOW;   Planorbidae
                       attaining with inflexion

                       a steady state.            dll dt =!l' 13··1· !:.I
                                                  3           3
                       (b) Weight growth curve:
                       sigmoid, similar to I (b)

of the theory when later on determinations using the isotope
method (Sprinson and Rittenberg, 1949, Table 6.2) yielded turn-
over rates of total protein (r) of 0.04/day for the rat, and of 1.3 g.
protein/kg. body wt./day for man in an amazing agreement be-
tween predicted and experimental values. It may be noted in
passing that an estimate of the turnover time of the human
organism similar to that found in isotope experiments (r Pel 0.009,
t % 110 days) can be obtained in different ways, e.g., also from

calorie loss in starvation (t = 100 days: Dost, 1962a). 11, constant

of anabolism, is dimensionally complex. It can, however, be
checked by comparison of growth curves of related organisms:
according to theory, the ratio .of metabolic rates should cor-
respond to the ratio of l1'S of the animals concerned. This also
has been confirmed (FIG. 7.10).
176                                                                    GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

  ·                                  }'I',! .                                              ·              yo.~

1                 i J- ,

              ,,                                                                        ,       !! 1...1" : ! :

        I I I 1 ili                                                                .r:

                                                   11<5 J040 eo 80100 200 JOO      '" - <v! .             ,.

                        , .- 00                        'Ntight in mil             E             ,,,II  I
                           ,40
                           ,                           (Ter.briO)                                      I I ;~
                           ,
·                                                  ·~                                      1O~101OO 200

          ,                                                        ,~                   ,·             ,              -
                                                                               I
   lJ ..-                                          4                                            I      A' if'    I
                                                             IY
  l---}                                                      II                         ,,- 8   I

                                                   3   . .1                                     ;:

1/ I;                                              2         L                                  'I
                                                                                                t,
                                               40  ,V                                                            ..,

     I                  'k 20                                I !...                             II

     0                  I   I12 o                                                          J'-  I

               4     e  10                             20 40 O<l                        g~-'-II~ '? 16 20 24

                  Time in~

                  I                                    I                                               m

Fig. 7.S. Metabolic and growth types. Type I: Lebistes reticulatus; type
II: insect larvae; type III: Planorbis sp. a: dependence of metabolic rate
on body size; b: growth curves. (After von Bertalanffy, 1942.)

   The theory, therefore, fulfills the first postulate indicated above,
i.e., verification of calculated parameters in independent experi-
ments. As has been shown elsewhere, it also fulfills the second
postulate: Predictions from the theory were made which came
as "surprises," i.e., were unknown at the time, but later on
confirmed.

   Discussion of some typical objections is in place because it may
contribute to better understanding of mathematical models in
general.

   (1) The main reproach against models and laws for physiologi-
cal phenomena is that of "oversimplification." In a process such as
animal growth there is, at the level of cells, a microcosm of in-
numerable processes of chemical and physical nature: all the
reactions in intermediary metabolism as well as factors like cell
permeability, diffusion, active transport and innumerable others.
                                                               ,.  177

Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology

                                    Table 7.5
Growth of Acipenser stellatus (After VON BERTALANFFY 1942)

 time                         length in em               I
in
                  obsflrofla                calculatea  0.062
   1                                                    0.062
    2              21.1                      21.1       0.061
    3              32.0                      34.3       0.061
    4              42.3                      41.5       0.061
   5                                         50.8       0.060
    6              51.4                      59.5       0.060
    7              60.1                      67.8       0.059
    8              68.0                      75.5       0.059
    9              75.3                      82.8       0.059
  10               82.3                      89.7       0.060
  11               89.0                      96.2       0.059
  12               95.3                     102.3       0.05'
                  101.6                     108.0       0.058
   13             107.6                     113.4       0.059
  14              112.7                     118.5       0.059
  15              117.7                     122.5       0.059
  16              122.2                     127.9       0.060
  17              126.5                     132.2       0.061
  18              130.9                     136.2       0.061
  19              135.3                     140.0       0.061
  20              140.2                     143.5
  21              H5.0                      146.9
                  148.6                     150.0
  22              152.0

Growth equation:  201.1 - (201.I - 21.1) -0·06'. Owing to the

regularity of growth curves, the BERTALANFFY equations are most suitable

for calculation of growth in fish. In this example, the growth constant

k ( k /3) was calculated in a way similar to calculation of reaction

constants in chemical reactions. Variations of this parameter are minimal,

so showing the adequacy of the equation.

On the level of organs, each tissue behaves differently with respect
to cell renewal and growth; besides multiplication of cells, forma-
tion of intercellular substances is included. The organism as a
whole changes in composition, with alterations of the content in
protein, deposition of fat or simple intake of water; the specific
weight of organs changes, not to speak of morphogenesis and
differentiation which presently elude mathematical formulation.
Is not any simple model and formula a sort of rape of nature,
pressing reality into a Procrustean bed and recklessly cutting off
what doesn't fit into the mold? The answer is that science in
178      GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

     ·E
     .S

     ofltmanmmtm~J !! 200j++++2 ( ) ( ). .

                                ~

     .!

  Fig. 7.9. Calculation of growth of the white rat. Many physiological
  processes in the rat show discontinuities at about 100 gm. body weight,
  i.e., in the prepubertal stage (a). Such "cycle" also appears in metab·
  olism (Fig. 7.4), metabolic rates in animals under 100 gm. increasing
  more, and in animals above this size much less than would correspond
  to the surface rule. However, if regression is calculated over the whole
  weight range, a value near 2/3 results as gross average. Hence, in the
  calculation of the growth curve (I) two "cycles" separated at "" 100 gm.
  should appear, and (2) in first approximation, rat growth should be
  calculable with the equations of "Type I", i.e. a. "'" 2/3. Calculation of
  growth data made previous to the physiological determinations (b)
  verifies both expectations. The catabolic constant (k) results, for the
  second (postpubertal) cycle, as kenle''''' 0.045/day, in close correspondence
  with protein turnover determined by isotope tracers (r=O.04/day). (After
  von Bertalanffy, 1960b.)

general consists to a large extent of oversimplifications in the
models it uses. These are an aspect of the idealization taking
place in every law and model of science. Already Galileo's stu·
dent, Torricelli, bluntly stated that if balls of stone, of metal,
etc., do not follow the law, it is just too bad for them. Bohr's
model of the atom was one of the most arbitrary simplifications
ever conceived-but nevertheless became a cornerstone of modern
physics. Oversimplifications progressively corrected in subsequent
development are the most potent or indeed the only means toward
conceptual mastery of nature. In our particular case it is not
quite correct to speak of oversimplification. 'What is involved
are rather balance equations over many complex and partly un·
known processes. The legitimacy of such balance expressions is
established by routine practice. For example, if we speak of
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology      ,179

eo                                        8e

50                                        50

3Il                                       30

m                                         20

                                  10

(~-I) in mm.

                        ,. ::;;

                                                                                                      '0

                                                         Time in weeks

  Fig. 7.10. Growth of Lebistes reticulatus. Upper lines: ,J, lower lines: t
  o weight, · length. In the Guppy, growth in females and males shows
  considerable difference, the females reaching a multiple of body weight
  of the males. Data are logarithmically plotted according to the integral
  of Equation 7.8; the close fit shows that the growth curves are correctly
  reproduced. The growth equations so obtained give a ratio of I: 1.5
  for the anabolic constants '1 in females and males. According to theory,
  metabolic rates in females and males should stand in the same ratio,
  I: 1.5 as is actually found (Fig. 7.8,1). (After von Bertalanffy, 1938, 1960b.)

B.M.R.-and are, in fact, able to establish quantitative relation-
ships such as the "surface law"-it is balances we express which
nevertheless are important both theoretically and practically (e.g.,
diagnostic use of B.M.R.). The regularities so observed cannot
be refuted by "general considerations" of oversimplification, but
only empirically and by offering better explanations. It would
be easy to make the growth model seemingly more realistic and
to improve fitting of data, by introducing a few more parameters.
180  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

However, the gain is spurious as long as these parameters cannot
be checked experimentally; and for the reasons mentioned, a
closer fit of data tells nothing about the merits of a particular
formula if the number of "free constants" is increased.

   (2) Another question is the choice of parameters. It has been
noted above that metabolic rate under basal and nonbasal condi-
tions changes not only in magnitude but also with respect to
allometry expressing its relation to body size. What is the justifi-
cation of taking "resting metabolism" as standard and to range
various species into "metabolic" and "growth types" accordingly?
The answer is that among available measures of metabolism-
none of them ideal-resting metabolism appears to approach best
those natural conditions which prevail during growth. The
B.M.R. standard (i.e., thermoneutrality of environment, fasting
and muscular rest) makes the values so determined a laboratory
artifact, because at least the first condition is unnatural; although
it is most useful because B.M.R. values show the least dispersion.
In cold-blooded animals, B.M.R. cannot be used as standard
because there is no condition of thermoneutrality, and the fasting
condition often cannot be exactly established. Activity metab-
olism, on the other hand, changes with the amount of muscular
action (FIG. 7.4), and the growing animal is not under conditions
of hard muscular work all the time. Hence resting metabolic
rate is comparatively the best approximation to the natural state;
and choice of this parameter leads to a useful theory.

   (3) The most important criticism becomes apparent from the
above discussion. It was said that there appear to be so-called
metabolic types and growth types and correlations between both.
However, earlier it has been emphasized that the parameters
implied, especially the relation of metabolic rate to body size
expressed in the exponent a, can be altered and shifted with
experimental conditions (FIGS. 7.4-7.7). Similarly, also growth
curves are not fixed. Experiments on the rat have shown that the
shape of the growth curve, including location and existence of
a point of inflection, can be changed by different nutrition (L.
Zucker et al., 1941a, 1941b, 1942; T.F. Zucker et al., 1941; Dunn
et al., 1947; Mayer, 1948). None of the characteristics is rigid-
and, incidentally, within my own biological concepts, I would
be the last to presuppose rigidity in the dynamic order of
physiological processes. According to my whole biological outlook,
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology  lSI

I am rather committed to the ancient Heraclitean concept that
what is permanent is only the law and order of change.

   However, the apparent contradiction can well be resolved when
we remain faithful to the spirit of the theory. What is really
invariable is the organization of processes expressed by certain
relationships. This is what the theory states and experiments
show, namely, that there are functional relationships between
certain metabolic and growth parameters. This does not imply
that the parameters themselves are unchangeable-and the ex-
periments show that they are not. Hence, without loss of gen-
erality, we may understand "metabolic" and "growth types" as
ideal cases observable under certain conditions, rather than as
rigid species characteristics. "Metabolic" and "growth types"
appear in the respective groups of animals if certain standard
conditions are met. However, it is clearly incorrect that "the
reduction of metabolic rates is a fundamental magnitude, not
changing in different external conditions" (Lehmann, 1956).
Under natural or experimental conditions, the relationships can
be shifted, and then a corresponding alteration of growth curves
should take place. There are indications that this is actually the
case; it is a clear-cut problem for further investigation.

   A case to the point are seasonal changes. Berg (1959, 1961),
while in general confirming previous data, found that the size-
metabolism relation varies seasonally in snails: "Thus the
relation, oxygen consumption to body size, is not a fixed, un-
changeable quantity characteristic of all species as supposed by
Bertalanffy.... If (Bertalanffy's theory) were true, then the ob-
served seasonal variation in metabolic type would imply a sea-
sonal variation in the type of growth rate."

   As a matter of fact, precisely this has been found in our labora-
tory long ago (von Bertalanffy and Milller, 1943). Seasonal
variations of metabolic rate in snails have been described (FIG.
7.11a). But correspondingly, also the growth curve (exponential
in this case because these snails belong to "Type II") shows
breaks and cycles (FIG. 7.llb). Therefore, this certainly is a
problem deserving more detailed investigation; however, the
data available are a hint toward confirmation rather than refu-
tation of the theory.

   I would have been much surprised, indeed suspicious, if this
first crude model would have provided a conclusive theory. Such
     182                              GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

--                        -..

...                                       .....'""".,,,

..                                                                          \
...
                      WEIGHT
..

... ...... .· ,. >II

          W[JCIHT     ~HS

Fig. 7.11. Metabolism and growth in land snails. a: Seasonal variations
in metabolic rates. The regression lines show, from bottom to top, resting
metabolism of Cepaea vindobonensis inactive shortly after hibernation at
20°C, same at 28°C, and in activity period at 20°C. (Weight in gm.)
Other conditions being equal, resting metabolism is considerably higher
in the active compared to the inactive season.

   b: Growth in a related species (Eulota fruticum). The growth curve
is exponential (Type II with a """ 1), but shows seasonal fluctuations.
(After von Bertalanffy & Mtiller, 1943)

things just do not happen, as is witnessed by many examples
from history of science. Mendel's laws were the beginnings of
genetics but-with linkage, crossing-over, position effect arid what
not-it is only a minute part of genetic experience that is de-
scribed by the classical laws. Galileo's law is the beginning of
physics, but only highly idealized cases-such as bodies falling
in vacuo-actually follow the simple law. It is a long way
from Bohr's simple model of the hydrogen atom to present atomic
physics, and so on. It would be fantastically improbable if this
were different with a proposed model of growth. The most we
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology  '183

can say about it is that it is backed by a considerable amount
of experimental evidence, has proved to have explanatory and
predictive capacities, and offers clear-cut problems for further
research.

   It is obvious that the theory has been developed for a limited
number of cases only, owing to the limited number of good data
and the time-consuming nature both of observation and calcula-
tion of growth. Hemmingsen (1960) has made this clear: "With n
varying as much as the examples show, within any group with
allegedly (or at least first allegedly) uniform growth type, it seems
impossible to accept Bertalanffy's generalizations unless a sta-
tistically significant correlation between n and growth type can
be demonstrated on a much larger number of examples than the
few ones which Bertalanffy has repeatedly published." I entirely
agree with this criticism; many more data would be desirable,
although one should not cavalierly bypass those offered in con-
firmation of the theory, even if they are some 20 years old. I
would amend Hemmingsen's criticism by suggesting reexamina-
tion on a broader basis. This should include at least the following
items: analysis of a large number of growth data, now made
possible by electronic computers; concurrent determination of
size-dependence of resting metabolism (constant a) in these cases;
determinations of protein catabolism (constant K ); determination,
in related species, of the ratios between allometry exponents of
metabolic rates and the theoretically identical ratios of the ana-
bolic constants (TJ). These are all interesting and somewhat
neglected research problems; and if the model does no more than
bring them to the fore, it has proved its usefulness.

   Such investigation may bring additional confirmation of the
model; it may lead to its modification and elaboration by taking
into account additional factors; or it may lead to abandoning
the model altogether and replacing it with a better one. If the
latter should happen, I would be in no way disappointed. This
is exactly what models are for-to serve as working hypotheses
for further research.

   What I have tried to show in the models discussed are general
ways of analysis of quantitative data. I wanted to make clear
both the usefulness and the limitations of such models. Any
model should be investigated according to its merit with a view
at the explanations and predictions it is able to provide. General
184  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

criticism does not help, and the decision whether or not a model
is suitable, exclusively rests with facts of observation and experi-
ment. On the other hand, no model should be taken as conclu-
sive; at best it is an approximation to be progressively worked
out and corrected. In close interaction between experiment and
conceptualization, but not in confinement to experimentation or
construction of purely speculative models, lies the further develop-
ment of a field like quantitative biology of metabolism.

Summary

1. The theories of open systems, feedback, allometry and growth
    according to Bertalanffy are reviewed with respect to their experi-
    mental applications.

2. The models of both open system and feedback apply to a wide range
    of phenomena in physiology, and represent essential expansions of
    physical theory. The two conceptions should be clearly distinguished;
    the feedback model (homeostasis) should not be considered a
    cover-all for physiological regulation in general or identified with
    "systems theory."

3. The allometric equation represents the simplest possible relation
     between body size and metabolic processes. It is of a wide appli-
    cability and expresses the harmonization of processes in living sys-
    tems. However, there is no "surface" or "3 j4-power law" or "law of
    progressive reduction of metabolic rates." The allometric relationship
    greatly varies in physiological phenomena.

4. Variations of the relation between body size and metabolic rate
    may occur (a) in different tissues or in different species; (b) due to
    changes of physiological conditions; (c) due to different experi-
    mental designs. Among the conditions altering this relation are such
    factors as physiological activities, sex, season, previous acclima-
    tion, etc.

5. The size-dependence of total metabolism in mammals is different
    under basal conditions, in a nonthermoneutral environment, and
    under conditions of muscular activity. The variations follow Locker's
    rule, i.e., with an absolute increase of metabolic rate (expressed by
    the constant b of the allometric equation), regression with respect
     to body size (expressed by the slope of the allometric line, II) tends
     to decrease.

6. The growth equations after Bertalanffy represent a highly simplified
    model which, however, covers many phenomena and regularities
    found in the physiology of metabolism and growth. The parameters
    occuring in these equations have been verified by physiological
    experiments in many cases.

7. In view of the changes of the size·metabolism relation mentioned
    under (5), Bertalanffy's so·called metabolic and growth types should
Some Aspects of System Theory in Biology  185

    be considered as ideal cases realizable under certain standard condi-
    tions, rather than as invariable characteristics of the species or
    group of species concerned.
8. Seasonal variations of metabolic rates and growth rates seem to
    show correspondence.
9. Urgent problems for further research with respect to each of the
    basic models are outlined.
  8 The System Concept in the

        Sciences of Man

The Organismic Revolution
   In a famous passage of his Critique of Practical Reason, Kant

stated that there are two things that fill him with indescribable
awe-the starry sky above him and the moral law within him.
Kant's time was the height of German classicism. Within a few
decades before and after 1800 the great German poets, writers
and philosophers were clustered, and Kant's philosophy was the
culminating synthesis of physical science as it had developed
since Galileo and Newton.

   Pondering Kant's statement, we wonder. Among the things he
could have found objects of awe, he might well have included
a third. Kant did not mention life-in its aspects both as the
miraculous organization of the living organism and as the
microcosm of mind which comprehends the physical universe.

   It is not difficult to understand Kant's omission. Physics was
nearing one of its culminating points to which Kant himself,
in his work on the origin of the solar system, had contributed;
the moral law had a long history in the Greek and Judeo-Christian
tradition. In contrast, the development of the sciences of biology
and psychology had scarcely begun.

  The 180 years or so since Kant's writing have seen the Indus-
 The System Concept in the Sciences of Man

trial Revolution and, in the near past, the Atomic Revolution,
the Revolution of Automation and the Conquest of Space. But
there appears to be a break. The breathtaking technological
development and the affiuent society, realized at least in some
parts of the globe, have left us with anxiety and meaninglessness.
Physics, with all its stupendous modern insights, is not the crystal-
clear structure Kant believed it to be. Kant's moral imperative,
even if not eroded, would be much too simple for a complex
world. Even apart from the menace of physical annihilation,
there is the feeling that our world vision and our system of values
are breaking down in the advent of Nihilism which Nietzsche
prophetically forecast at the turn of our century.

   Considered in the light of history, our technology and even
our society are based on a physicalistic world picture which
found an early synthesis in Kant's work. Physics is still the paragon
of science, the basis of our idea of society and our image of man.

   In the meanwhile, however, new sciences have arisen-the life,
behavioral, and social sciences. They demand their place in a
modern world view, and should be able to contribute to a basic
reorientation. Less advertised than the contemporary revolutions
in technology but equally pregnant of future possibilities is a
revolution based on modern developments in biological and
behavioral science. For short, it may be called the Organismic
Revolution. Its core is the notion of system-apparently a pale,
abstract and empty concept which nevertheless is full of hidden
meaning, ferment and explosive potentialities.

   The bearing of this new conception can be epitomized in a
short statement. The 19th and first half of the 20th century con-
ceived of the world as chaos. Chaos was the oft-quoted blind play
of atoms which, in mechanistic and positivistic philosophy, ap-
peared to represent ultimate reality, with life as an accidental
product of physical processes, and mind as an epiphenomenon.
It was chaos when, in the current theory of evolution, the living
world appeared a product of chance, the outcome of random
mutations and survival in the mill of natural selection. In the
same sense, human personality, in the theories of behaviorism
as well as of psychoanalysis, was considered a chance product of
nature and nurture, of a mixture of genes and an accidental
sequence of events from early childhood to maturity.

   Now we are looking for another basic outlook on the world-
188  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

the world as organization. Such a conception-if it can be sub-
stantiated-would indeed change the basic categories upon which
scientific thought rests, and profoundly influence practical at-
titudes.

   This trend is marked by the emergence of a bundle of new
disciplines such as cybernetics, information theory, general system
theory, theories of games, of decisions, of queuing and others; in
practical application, systems analysis, systems engineering, opera·
tions research, etc. They are different in basic assumptions, mathe-
matical techniques and aims, and they are often unsatisfactory
and sometimes contradictory. They agree, however, in being con-
cerned, in one way or the other, with "systems," "wholes" or
"organization"; and in their totality, they herald a new approach.

The Image of Man in Contemporary Thought

   What can these developments contribute toward the Sciences
of Man? The unsatisfactory status of contemporary psychological
theory is common knowledge. It seems a hodgepodge of con-
tradicting theories ranging from behaviorism, which sees no
difference between human behavior and that of laboratory rats
(and, more important, engineers pattern human behavior after
the model of rat behavior), to existentialism, for which the human
situation is beyond scientific understanding. The variety of con-
ceptions and approaches would be quite healthy, were it not for
one disturbing fact. All these theories share one "image of man"
which originated in the physical-technological universe; which
is taken for granted by otherwise antagonistic theories such as
those of behaviorism, computer models of cognitive processes and
behavior, psychoanalysis and even existentialism; and which is
demonstrably false. This is the robot model of human behavior.

   It is, of course, true that there are a considerable number of
trends toward new conceptions, urged on by 'the insight that
the robot model is theoretically inadequate in view of empirical
fact and is practically dangerous in its application to "behavioral
engineering." Nevertheless, while robotic concepts are frequently
denounced overtly and covertly, they remain dominant in psy-
chological research, theory, and engineering. They therefore de-
serve brief crmsideration even now.

   One leading concept is the stimulus-response scheme, or S-R
The System Concept in the Sciences of Man  189

scheme for short. Behavior, animal and human, is considered to
be response to stimuli coming from outside. In part, stimulus-
response is based upon inherited neural mechanisms, as in re-
flexes and instinctive behavior. The more important part, so far
as human behavior is concerned, are acquired or conditioned
responses. This may be classical conditioning by way of repetition
of the sequence of conditional and unconditional stimuli accord-
ing to Pavlov. It may be operant conditioning by reinforcement
of successful responses according to Skinner. It may be early
childhood experience according to Freud, beginning with toilet
training and other procedures whereby socially acceptable be-
havior is reinforced, but psychopathological complexes may also
be formed. This, then, dominates psychological engineering.
Scholastic learning is best carried through by teaching machines
constructed according to the Skinnerian principles. Conditioning
with psychoanalytic background keeps the wheels of free enter-
prise going. Advertising, motivation research, radio and television
are ways of conditioning or programming the human machine
so that it buys what it should: the washing powder wrapped in
the most brilliant color, the biggest refrigerator as symbol of
the maternal womb, or the political candidate commanding the
most efficient party machine.

   The point is that the rules found by learning theorists in
animal experiments are supposed to cover the total of human
behavior. To Skinner, for example, the "verbal behavior" of the
child is supposedly acquired in the same process of operant con-
ditioning as Skinner's rats and pigeons learn their little tricks by
being gratified with small parcels of food for correct responses.
As a witty critic (Chomsky, 1959) noted, parents supposedly teach
their child to walk and to speak because their teaching behavior
is reinforced by gratification, probably so that the child later on
may make some money by delivering newspapers, or can call
his parents to the telephone. More sophisticated versions of the
scheme do not alter its essence.

  A second principle is that of environmentalism which states,
in accordance with the S-R scheme, that behavior and personality
are shaped by outside influences. The famous expression is that
by Watson: Give me a bunch of kids, (said the founder of be-
haviorism), taken as they come-and I will make them doctors,
lawyers, merchant men, beggars and thieves, solely by the power
190  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

of conditioning. It is the same principle when psychoanalysis
says that personality is formed by early childhood experience,
especially of a sexual nature. In more general formulation, the
human brain is a computer that can be programmed at will.
The practical consequence is that human beings are born not
only with equal rights but with equal capabilities. Hence our
almost pathological concern with the abnormal, the mentally ill
and outright criminal who, by suitable reconditioning, should be
brought back into the flock-often to the detriment of considera-
tion given the healthy, normal or superior. Hence also the belief
that money buys everything: when the Russians build better space
vehicles, a few more billions spent on education will produce the
crop of young Einsteins needed for closing the gap.

   The third is the equilibrium principle. In Freudian formula-
tion, this is the "principle of stability": the basic function of the
mental apparatus consists in maintaining homeostatic equilibrium.
Behavior essentially is reduction of tensions, particularly those
of a sexual nature. Hence, let them release their tensions by way
of promiscuity and other tension reduction, and you will have
normal and satisfied human beings.

   Fourthly, behavior is governed by the principle of economy.
It is utilitarian and should be carried through in the most
economic way, that is, at minimum expense of mental or vital
energy. In practice, the economic principle amounts to the
postulate of minimum demands: for example, reduce scholastic
demands to the minimum necessary to become an executive,
electronics engineer or plumber-otherwise you warp personality,
create tensions, and make an unhappy being.

   The present crisis of psychology (which, however, has already
lasted for some 30 years) can be summarized as the slow erosion
of the robot model of man which up to recent years dominated
psychology, particularly in the United States.

   Two points deserve to be reemphasized. First, the model of
man as robot was germane to all fields of psychology and psycho-
pathology, and to theories and systems otherwise different or
antagonistic: to the S-R theory of behavior; to cognitive theory
in what has been called the "dogma of immaculate perception,"
i.e. the organism as a passive receptor of stimuli; to learning'
theories, Pavlovian, Skinnerian, or with intervening variables;
to diverse personality theories; to behaviorism, psychoanalysis,
The System Concept in the Sciences of Man  191

cybernetic concepts in neurophysiology and psychology, and so
on. Furthermore, "man as robot" was both expression and motor
force of the zeitgeist of a mechanized· and commercialized society;
it helped to make psychology the handmaiden of pecuniary and
political interests. It is the goal of manipulating psychology to
make humans ever more into robots or automata, this being en-
gineered by mechanized learning, advertising techniques, mass
media, motivation research and brainwashing.

   Nevertheless, these basic presuppositions are spurious. That i~
to say, conditioning and learning theories correctly describe an
important part or aspect of human behavior, but taken as a
nothing-but theory they become ostensibly false and self-defeating
in their application. The image of man as robot is metaphysics
or myth, and its persuasiveness rests only in the fact that it so
closely corresponds to the mythology of mass society, the glorifi-
cation of the machine, and the profit motive as sole motor of
progress.

   Unbiased observation easily shows the spuriousness of these
basic assumptions. The S-R scheme leaves out the large part of
behavior which is expression of spontaneous activities such as
play, exploratory behavior and any form of creativity. Environ-
mentalism is refuted by the elementary fact that not even fruit
flies or Pavlovian dogs are equal, as any student of heredity or
behavior should know. Biologically, life is not maintenance or
restoration of equilibrium but is essentially maintenance of
disequilibria, as the doctrine of the organism as open system
reveals. Reaching equilibrium means death and consequent decay.
Psychologically, behavior not only tends to release tensions but
also builds up tensions; if this stops, the patient is a decaying
mental corpse in the same way a living organism becomes a
body in decay when tensions and forces keeping it from equilib-
rium have stopped. Juvenile delinquents who commit crime for
fun, a new psychopathology resulting from too much leisure,
the fifty percent mental cases in our hospitals-all this is proof
that the scheme of adaptation, adjustment, conformity, psycho-
logical and social equilibrium doesn't work. There is a wide
range of behavior-and, presumably also of evolution-which
cannot be reduced to utilitarian principles of adaptation of the
individual and survival of the species. Greek sculpture, Renais-
sance painting. German music-indeed, any aspect of culture-
192  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

has nothing to do with utility, or with the better survival of in-
dividuals or nations. Mr. Babbitt is in every utilitarian respect
better off than Beethoven or Michelangelo.

   Also the principle of stress, so often invoked in psychology,
psychiatry and psychosomatics, needs some reevaluation. As
everything in the world, stress too is an ambivalent thing. Stress
is not only a danger to life to be controlled and neutralized by
adaptive mechanisms; it also creates higher life. If life, after
disturbance from outside, had simply returned to the so-called
homeostatic equilibrium, it would never have progressed beyond
the amoeba which, after all, is the best adapted creature in the
world-it has survived billions of years from the primeval ocean
to the present day. Michelangelo, implementing the precepts of
psychology, should have followed his father's request and gone
in the wool trade, thus sparing himself lifelong anguish although
leaving the Sistine Chapel unadorned.

   Selye wrote: "The secret of health and happiness lies in success-
ful adaptation to the ever-changing conditions of the globe; the
penalties for failure in this great process of adaptation are disease
and unhappiness" (1956, p. VII). He speaks for the worldly-wise
and in a sense he is correct. But, taken literally, he would negate
all creative activity and culture which, to an extent, have made
him more than the beasts of the jungle. Considered as adaptation,
creativity is a failure, a disease and unhappiness; the Vienna
historian of culture, Egon Friedell (1927-31) has a brilliant analy-
sis of this point. The maxim of adjustment, equilibrium and
homeostasis cannot be followed by anyone who brings one single
idea to the earth, including Selye himself, who certainly has
paid for doing so.

   Life is not comfortable settling down in pre-ordained grooves
of being; at its best, it is elan vital, inexorably driven towards
higher form of existence. Admittedly, this is metaphysics and
poetic simile; but so, after all, is any image we try to form of
the driving forces in the universe.

System- Theoretical Re-orientation

   It is along such lines that a new model or image of man
seems to be emerging. We may briefly characterize it as the model
of man as active personality system. This, it appears, is the com-
The System Concept in the Sciences of Man

mon denominator of many otherwise different currents such as
developmental psychology after Piaget and Werner, various neo-
Freudian schools, ego psychology, the "new look" in perception,
recent theory of cognition, personality theories such as those of
G. Allport and Maslow, new approaches in education, existential
psychology and others.

   This implies a holistic orientation in psychology. It used to
be the general trend of psychology to reduce mental happenings
and behavior into a bundle of sensations, drives, innate and
learned reactions, or whatever ultimate elements are theoretically
presupposed. In contrast, the system concept tries to bring the
psychophysiological organism as a whole into the focus of the
scientific endeavor.

   Thus a new "model of man" appears necessary and, in fact,
is slowly emerging in recent trends of humanistic and organismic
psychology. Emphasis on the creative side of human beings, on
the importance of individual differences, on aspects that are non-
utilitarian and beyond the biological values of subsistence and
survival-this and more is implied in the model of the active
organism. These notions are basic in the re-orientation of psy-
chology which is going on presently; hence the increasing interest
general system theory is encountering in psychology and especially
psychiatry.

   In contrast to the model of the reactive organism expressed
by the S-R scheme-behavior as gratification of needs, relaxation
of tensions, reestablishment of homeostatic equilibrium, its utili-
tarian and environmentalistic interpretations, etc.-we come rather
to consider the psychophysical organism as a primarily active
system. I think human activities cannot be considered otherwise.
I, for one, am unable to see how, for example, creative and
cultural activities of all sorts can be regarded as "response to
stimuli," "gratification of biological needs," "reestablishment of
homeostasis" or the like. It does not look particularly "homeo-
static" when a businessman follows his restless activities in spite
of the ulcers he is developing; or when mankind goes on invent-
ing super-bombs in order to satisfy "biological needs."

   The concept applies not only to behavioral, but also to the
cognitional aspects. It will be correct to say that it is the general
trend in modern psychology and psychiatry, supported by bio-
logical insight, to recognize the active part in the cognitive
194  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

process. Man is not a passive receiver of stimuli coming from
an external world, but in a very concrete sense creates his universe.
This, again, can be expressed in many ways: in Freud's recon-
struction of the building-up of the "world" in the child; in terms
of developmental psychology according to Piaget, Werner or
Schachtel; in terms of the "new look in perception" emphasizing
attitudes, affective and motivational factors; in psychology of
cognition by analysis of "meaningful learning" after Ausubel; in
zoological context by referring to von Uexktill's species-specific
llmwelt; philosophically and linguistically, in Cassirer's "symbolic
forms" and culture-dependent categories; in von Humboldt's and
Whor{'s evidence of linguistic (i.e. symbolic and cultural) factors
in the formation of the experienced universe. "The world as we
experience it is the product of perception, not the cause of it."
(Cantril, 1962).

   Such a list, in no way complete, illustrates different approaches
to throw light on various aspects or facets which eventually
should be synthesized. But there is consensus in the general con-
ception. Indeed, if the organism were a camera and cognition
a kind of photographic image of the outside world, it would be
hard to understand why the cognitive process takes the circuitous
route admirably described by Arieti (1965) via fantasmic, mythical
and magical universes, only finally and lately to arrive at the
supposedly "objective" world outlook of the average American
and of Western science.

   Such a new "image of man," replacing the robot concept by
that of system, emphasizing immanent activity instead of outer-
directed reactivity, and recognizing the specificity of human cul-
ture compared to animal behavior, should lead to a basic
reevaluation of problems of education, training, psychotherapy,
and human attitudes in general.

Systems in the Social Sciences

   Finally, we should look for the application of the systems con-
ception to the widest perspective, i.e., human groups, societies,
and humanity as a whole.

   For purposes of discussion, let us understand "social science"
in a broad sense, including sociology, economics, political science,
sodal psychology, cultural anthropology, linguistics, a good part
The System Concepts in the Sciences of Man

of history and the humanities, etc. Let us understand "science"
as a nomothetic endeavor, i.e. not a description of singularities
but an ordering of facts and elaboration of generalities.

   Presupposing these definitions, it may, in my opinion, be stated
quite confidently: Social science is the science of social systems.
For this reason, it will have to use the approach of general
systems science.

   This appears to be an almost trivial statement, and it can hardly
be denied that "contemporary sociological theories" (Sorokin,
1928, 1966) and even their development through history, followed
this program. However, RE_<?P!!!._st);l<;fy. 2~§oci(lL ~y~t~!!I:~S:Q!1tr.'!~ts
wit:lLJ:W.Q.,.wkl~J.;>!ea<;L..fQ!lgJ11igm:.. _tit§J.1....:wh!L._'!lQIDi&iL.w.w:ep-

tio.m.~J!~(;l}.!1~gJ~<:~ .. :~~!t~y, <:>~ .:'E~l.~t,i,<.ms::; .. ~e.<:Q~.<i.!Y!... "'{.i!!l. . 52!!.:..__..

c~PJ!QI1~_}~~g!~~~i.;l,g,.tllS, . sR.~Ei§s;$,~X.()f,tl1~~rp~~ .(;0!1~!11~4_~l!dl

as a '.',soci.al phy~i(;~:' .<l~.:W'!§ .oftell. attempte.<i i.ll_ 31. regtJctionist

spirit. This requires some comment.
   Research into systems of organisms is extensive. It forms an

important part of biology, in the study of communities and
societies of animals and plants, their growth, competition, struggle
for existence, etc., both in the ecological and genetic aspects.
Certain aspects of human societies offer themselves for similar
considerations; not only aspects so obvious as the growth of
human populations but also armament races and warlike conflicts
which, according to Richardson and others, can be elaborated in
differential equations similar to those used in ecology and, though
oversimplified, provide an amount of explanation and even pre-
diction. The spread of rumors can be described by generalized
diffusion equations; the flow of automobile traffic can be analyzed
in considerations formally corresponding to kinetics and thermo-
dynamics. Such cases are rather typical and straightforward
applications of general system theory. However, this is only part
of the problem.

   Sociology with its allied fields is essentially the study of human
groups or systems, from small groups like the family or working
crew, over innumerable intermediates of informal and formal
organizations to the largest units like nations, power blocks and
international relations. The many attempts to provide theoretical
formulations are all elaborations of the concept of system or
some synonym in this realm. Ultimately the problem of human
history looms as the widest possible application of the systems idea.
196  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

         Concepts and theories provided by the modern systems ap-
      proach are being increasingly introduced into sociology, such
      as the concept of general system, of feedback, information,
      communication, etc.

         Present sociological theory largely consists in attempts to define
       the sociocultural "system," and in discussion of functionalism, i.e.,
      consideration of social phenomena with respect to the "whole"
      they serve. In the first respect, Sorokin's characterization of socio-
      cultural system as causal-logical-meaningful (as the present author
      would loosely transcribe it, the biological, the symbolic and value
      levels) seems best to express the various complexly interconnected
      aspects.

         Functionalist theory has found various expressions as repre-
      sented by Parsons, Merton, and many others; the recent book
      by Demerath and Peterson (1968) gives excellent insight into the
      various currents. The main critique of functionalism, particularly
      in Parsons' version, is that it overemphasizes maintenance, equilib-
      rium, adjustment, homeostasis, stable institutional structures, and
      so on, with the result that history, process, sociocultural change,
      inner-directed development, etc., are underplayed and, at most,
      appear as "deviants" with a negative value connotation. The
      theory therefore appears to be one of conservatism and con-
      formism, defending the "system" (or the megamachine of present
      society, to use Mumford's term) as is, conceptually neglecting and
      hence obstructing social change. Obviously, general system theory
../ in the form here presented is free of this objection as it incorpor-
      ates equally maintenance and change, preservation of system
      and internal conflict; it may therefore be apt to serve as logical
      skeleton for improved sociological theory (d. Buckley, 1967).

         The practical application, in systems analysis and engineering,
      of systems theory to problems arising in business, government,
      international politics, demonstrates that the approach "works"
      and leads to both understanding and predictions. It especially
      shows that the systems approach is not limited to material entities
      in physics, biology and other natural sciences, but is applicable
      to entities which are partly immaterial and highly heterogeneous.
      Systems analysis, for example, of a business enterprise encompasses
      men, machines, buildings, inflow of raw material, outflow of
      products, monetary values, good will and other imponderables;
      it may give definite answers and practical advice.
The System Concept in the Sciences of Man  ,197

   The difficulties are not only in the complexity of phenomena
but in the definition of entities under consideration.

   At least part of the difficulty is expressed by the fact that the
social sciences are concerned with "socio-cultural" systems. Human
groups, from the smallest of personal friendships and family to
the largest of nations and civilizations, are not only an outcome
of social "forces" found, at least in primitive form, in subhuman
organisms; they are part of a man-created universe called culture.

   Natural science has to do with physical entities in time and
space, particles, atoms and molecules, living systems at various
levels, as the case may be. Social science has to do with human
beings in their self-created universe of culture. The cultural
universe is essentially a symbolic universe. Animals are surrounded
by a physical universe with which they have to cope: physical
environment, prey to catch, predators to avoid, and so forth.
Man, in contrast, is surrounded by a universe of symbols. Starting
from language which is the prerequisite of culture, to symbolic
relationships with his fellows, social status, laws, science, art,
morals, religion and innumerable other things, human behavior,
except for the basic aspects of the biological needs of hunger
and sex, is governed by symbolic entities.

   We may also say that man has values which are more than
biological and transcend the sphere of the physical world. These
cultural values may be biologically irrelevant or even deleterious:
It is hard to see that music, say, has any adaptive or survival
value; the values of nation and state become biologically nefarious
when they lead to war and to the killing of innumerable human
beings.

A System-Theoretical Concept of History

   In contrast to biological species which have evolved by way
of genetic transformation, only mankind shows the phenomenon
of history, which is intimately linked with culture, language and
tradition. The reign of nature is dominated by laws progressively
revealed in science. Are there laws of history? In view of the fact
that laws are relations in a conceptual model or theory, this
question is identical with another one: apart from description of
happenings, is a theoretical history possible? If this is possible
at all, it must be an investigation of systems as suitable units
198  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

of research-of human groups, societies, cultures, civilizations, or
whatever the appropriate objects of research may be.

   A widespread conviction among historians is that this is not so.
Science is essentially a nomothetic endeavor-it establishes laws,
based on the fact that events in nature are repeatable and recur-
rent. In contrast, history does not repeat itself. It has occurred
only once, and therefore, history can only be idiographic-i.e.,
a description of events which have occurred in a near or distant
past.

   Contrary to this opinion, which is the orthodox one of his-
torians, heretics have appeared who held the opposite view and,
in one way or another, tried to construct a theoretical history
with laws applying to the historical process. This current started
with the Italian philosopher Vico in the early 18th century, and
continued in the philosophical systems and the investigations by
Hegel, Marx, Spengler, Toynbee, Sorokin, Kroeber and others.
There are great and obvious differences between these systems.
They all agree, however, that the historical process is not com-
pletely accidental but follows regularities or laws which can
be determined.

   As already said, the scientific approach is undisputedly ap-
plicable to certain aspects of human society. One such field is
statistics. We can, and do, formulate many statistical laws or at
least regularities for social entities. Population statistics, mortality
statistics-without which insurance companies would go bankrupt
-Gallup polls, predictions of voting behavior or of the sale of
a product show that statistical methods are applicable to a
wide range of social phenomena.

   Moreover, there are fields where the possibility of a hypothetico-
deductive system is generally accepted. One such field is mathe-
matical economics or econometries. The correct system of
economics may be disputed, but such systems exist and, as .in
every science, it is hoped that they will be improved. Mathematical
economics also is a case in point of general systems theory which
does not concern physical entities. The many-variables problems,
different models and mathematical approaches in economics offer
a good example of model building and the general systems
approach.

   Even for those mysterious entities, human values, scientific
theories are emerging. In fact, information theory, game theory,
and decision theory provide models to deal with aspects of human
The System Concept in the Sciences of Man  '199

and social behavior where the mathematics of classical science
is not applicable. Works like Rapoport's Fights) Games, Debates
(1960) and Boulding's Conflict and Defence (1962) present detailed
analyses of phenomena such as armament races, war and war
games, competition in the economic and other fields, treated by
such comparatively novel methods.

   It is of particular interest that these approaches are concerned
with aspects of human behavior which were believed to be outside
of science: values, rational decisions, information, etc. They are
not physicalistic or reductionist. They do not apply physical laws
or use the traditional mathematics of the natural sciences. Rather,
new developments of mathematics are emerging, intended to deal
with phenomena not encountered in the world of physics.

   Again there are uncontested laws with respect to certain im-
material aspects of culture. For example, language is not a
physical object, but a product or rather aspect of that intangible
entity we call human culture. Nevertheless, linguistics tells about
laws allowing description, explanation and prediction of ob-
served phenomena. Grimm's laws of the consonant mutations in
the history of Germanic languages is one of the simpler examples.

   In somewhat vaguer form, a lawfulness of cultural events is
generally accepted. For example, it appears to be a quite general
phenomenon that art goes through a number of stages of archaism,
maturity, baroque, and dissolution found in the evolution of art
in far-away places and times.

   Thus statistical regularities and laws can be found in social
phenomena; certain specific aspects can be approached by recent
approaches, models and techniques which are outside and dif-
ferent from those of the natural sciences; and we have some ideas
about intrinsic, specific and organizational laws of social systems.
This is no matter of dispute.

   The bone of contention comes in with "theoretical history,"
the great visions or constructs of history, as those of Vico, Hegel,
Marx, Spengler, Toynbee, to mention only some prominent ex-
amples. Regularities in "microhistory," i.e., happenings in limited
spaces, time-spans, and fields of human activity, certainly are
vague, needy of exploration, and far from being exact statements;
but their existence is hardly disputable. The attempts at finding
regularities in "macrohistory" are almost unequivocally rejected
by official history.

  Taking away romanticism, metaphysics and moralizing, the
200  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

"great systems" appear as models of the historical process, as
Toynbee, somewhat belatedly, recognized in the last volume of
his Study. Conceptual models which, in simplified and therefore
comprehensible form, try to represent certain aspects of reality,
are basic in any attempt at theory; whether we apply the New-
tonian model in mechanics, the model of corpuscle or wave in
atomic physics, use simplified models to describe the growth of a
population, or the model of a game to describe political decisions.
The advantages and dangers of models are well known. The
advantage is in the fact that this is the way to create a theory
-i.e., the model permits deductions from premises, explanation
and prediction, with often unexpected results. The danger is
oversimplification: to make it conceptually controllable, we have
to reduce reality to a conceptual skeleton-the question remaining
whether, in doing so, we have not cut out vital parts of the
anatomy. The danger of oversimplification is the greater, the
more multifarious and complex the phenomenon is. This applies
not only to "grand theories" of culture and history but to models
we find in any psychological or sociological journal.

   Obviously, the Great Theories are very imperfect models.
Factual errors, misinterpretations, fallacies in conclusion are
shown in an enormous critical literature and need not concern
us here. But taking this criticism for granted, a number of ob-
servations still remain.

   One thing the various systems of "theoretical history" appear
to have demonstrated is the nature of the historical process.
History is not a process in an amorphous humanity, or in Homo
sapiens as a zoological species. Rather it is borne by entities or
great systems, called high cultures or civilizations. Their number
is uncertain, their delimitations vague, and their interactions
complex. But whether Spengler has counted eight great civiliza-
tions, Toynbee some 20, Sorokin applies still other categories,
or recent research has unveiled so many lost cultures, it appears
to be a fact that there was a limited number of cultural entities
bearing the historical process, each presenting a sort of life cycle
as indeed smaller socio-cultural systems such as businesses, schools
in art and even scientific theories certainly do. This course is
not a predetermined life span of a thousand years as Spengler
maintained (not even individual organisms have a fixed life span
but may die earlier or later); nor does it run in splendid isolation.
The System Concept in the Sciences of Man  '201

The extent of cultural diffusion became impressive when archae-
ologists explored the prehistoric Amber Road or the Silk Road
which dated from the beginning of the Christian era or even
earlier, or when they found an Indian Lakshmi statuette in
Pompeii and Roman trade stations at the Indian coasts. Expan-
sion undreamed of by Spengler and yet by Toynbee, as well
as new problems, became apparent in relatively recent years.
Certainly the culture of the Khmer, the Etruscans or the pre-
Roman Celts deserve their place in the scheme; what was the
megalithic culture expanding over the edges of the Mediterranean,
the Atlantic and the Baltic Sea, or the Iberian culture which
produced as early as 500 B.C. such astonishing work as the Prado's
Lady of Elche? Nevertheless, there is something like an Egyptian,
Greco-Roman, Faustian, Magic, Indian culture (or whatever
nomenclature we may prefer), each unique in its "style" (i.e.,
the unity and whole of its symbolic system), even when absorbing
and assimilating culture traits from others and interacting with
cultural systems contemporaneous and past.

   Furthermore, the ups and downs in history (not exactly cycles
or recurrences, but fluctuations) are a matter of public record.
As Kroeber (1957) and Sorokin (1950) emphasized, there remains,
after subtracting the errors and idiosyncrasies of the philosophers
of history, a large area of agreement: and this consists of well-
known facts of history. In other words, the disagreements among
the theorists of history, and with official history, are not so much
a question of data as of interpretation, that is of the models
applied. This, after all, is what one would expect according to
history of science; for a scientific "revolution," the introduction
of a new "paradigm" of scientific thinking (Kuhn, 1962), usually
manifests itself in a gamut of competing theories or models.

   In such a dispute, the influence of semantics pure and simple
should not be underrated. The meaning of the concept of culture
itself is a matter of dispute. Kroeber and Kluckhohn (1952)
collected and discussed some 160 definitions without coming out
with a definitive one. In particular, the anthropologist's and the
historian's notions are different. For example, Ruth Benedict's
Patterns of Cu/tuYe of New Mexico, British Columbia and
Australia inhabitants is essentially timeless; these patterns existed
since times unrecorded, and if they underwent minor changes in
the past, these are outside the scope and methods of the cultural
202  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

anthropologist. In contrast, the culture or more properly civiliza-
tion (to follow idiomatic English) with which the historian is
concerned, is a process in time: the evolution of the Greco-Roman
culture from the Ionian city states to the Roman Empire, of its
plastic art from archaic statuary to Hellenism, of German music
from Bach to Strauss, of science from Copernicus to Einstein, and
so forth. So far as we know, only a limited number of "high
cultures" had and made history-i.e., showed major change in
time, while the hundreds of cultures of the anthropologist re-
mained stationary at their stone and bronze age levels, as the
case may be, before the European impact. In this respect, Spengler
is certainly right, with his concept of culture as a dynamic and
self-evolving entity, against anthropologists to whom one "culture"
-be it of Australian aborigines, of Greece or of the Western
world-is as good as the other, all belonging to one stream of
amorphous humanity with accidental and environment-caused
eddies, rapids and standstills.

   Incidentally, such verbal distinctions are more than scholasticism
and have political impact. In Canada, we presently have the
fight about Biculturalism (or of Two Nations, English and
French, in another version). What do we mean? Do we under-
stand culture in the anthropological sense and wish to fight about
tribal differences as they exist between savage peoples in Africa
or Borneo and cause endless warfare and bloodshed? Or do we
mean culture as the French culture and German Kultur-i.e.,
creative manifestations which still have to be proved, and to be
proved as different between English- and French-Canadians?
Clearly, political opinions and decisions will largely depend on
the definition. The concept of nation in the U.N. has been based
on the "anthropological" notion (if not on arbitrary frontiers left
from the Colonial period); the result has been somewhat less
than encouraging.

   Another semantic problem is implied in "organismic" theories
of sociology and history. Spengler called the great civilizations
organisms with a life cycle including birth, growth, maturity,
senescence and death; an enormous host of critics proved the
obvious, namely, that cultures are not organisms like animals
or plants, individual entities well-bounded in time and space.
In contrast, the organismic conception is rather well-treated in
sociology because its metaphorical character is understood. A
business firm or manufacturing plant is a "system" and therefore
The System Concept in the Sciences of Man

shows "organismic" features; but the difference of a "plant" in
the botanist's and industrialist's sense is too obvious to present
a problem. The fight would hardly have been possible in the
French language where it is good usage to speak of the organisme
of an institution (say the postal service), of a commercial firm or
a professional association; the metaphor is understood and, there-
fore, not a subject of dispute.

   Instead of emphasizing the shortcomings of the cyclic historians
which are rather natural in an embryonic stage of the science, it
seems more profitable to emphasize their agreement in many
respects. One point of agreement makes the issue into more than
an academic question. This issue has, as it were, touched a raw
nerve, and gained for Toynbee and Spengler both popular ac-
claim and an emotional reaction otherwise uncommon in aca-
demic debate. It is the thesis expressed in Spengler's title, The
Decline of the West, the statement that in spite or perhaps be-
cause of our magnificent technological achievements, we live in
a time of cultural decay and impending catastrophe.

The Future in System-Theoretical Aspect

   The dominance of mass man and the suppression of the in-
dividual by an ever extending social machinery; the breakdown
of the traditional system of values and its replacement by pseudo-
religions, ranging from nationalism to the cult of status symbols,
to astrology, psychoanalysis and Californian sectarianism; the
decay of creativity in art, music and poetry; the willing submis-
sion of the mass to authoritarianism, be it a dictator or an
impersonal elite; the colossal fights between a decreasing number
of super-states: these are some of the symptoms recurring in our
days. "We note the psychological change in those classes of
society which had been up till then the creators of culture.
Their creative power and creative energy dry up; men grow
weary and lose interest in creation and cease to value it; they are
disenchanted; their effort is no longer an effort toward a creative
ideal for the benefit of humanity, their minds are occupied either
with material interests, or with ideals unconnected with life on
earth and realized elsewhere." This is not an editorial of yester-
day's newspaper, but a description of the decay of the Roman
Empire by its well-known historian, Rostovtzeff.

   However, against these and other symptoms catalogued by the
204  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

prophets of doom, there are two factors in which our civilization
obviously is unique in comparison to those that have perished
in the past. One is the technological development which permits
a control of nature never before achieved and would open a way
to alleviate the hunger, disease, overpopulation, etc. to which
humanity was previously exposed. The other factor is the global
nature of our civilization. Previous ones were limited by geo-
graphical boundaries, and comprised only limited groups of
human beings. Our civilization comprises the whole planet and
even reaches beyond in the conquest of space. Our technological
civilization is not the privilege of comparatively small groups
such as the citizens of Athens or of the Roman Empire, of
Germans or French, or of white Europeans. Rather it is open
to all human beings of whatever color, race or creed.

   These are indeed singularities which explode the cyclic scheme
of history and seem to place our civilization at a different level
from previous ones. Let us try an admittedly tentative synthesis.

   I believe the "decline of the west" is not a hypothesis or a
prophesy-it is an accomplished fact. That splendid cultural
development which started in the European countries around
the year 1000 and produced Gothic cathedrals, Renaissance art,
Shakespeare and Goethe, the precise architecture of Newtonian
physics and all the glory of European culture-this enormous
cycle of history is accomplished and cannot be revivified by
artificial means.

   We have to reckon with the stark reality of a mass civilization,
technological, international, encompassing the earth and all of
mankind, in which cultural values and creativity of old are
replaced by novel devices. The present power struggles may, in
their present explosive phase, lead to universal atomic devasta-
tion. If not, the differences between West and East probably will,
one way or the other, become insignificant because the similarity
of material culture in the long run will prove stronger than
ideological differences.
                                                   ..

  9 General System Theory in

         Psychology and Psychiatry

The Quandary of Modern Psychology
   In recent years the concept of "system" has gained increasing

influence in psychology and psychopathology. Numerous investi-
gations have referred to general system theory or to some part of
it (for example, F. Allport, 1955; G. W. Allport, 1960; Anderson,
1957; Arieti, 1962; Brunswik, 1956; Biihler, 1959; Krech, 1950;
Lennard & Bernstein, 1960; Menninger, 1957; Menninger et aI.,
1958; Miller, 1955; Pumpian-Mindlin, 1959; Syz, 1963). Gordon
W. Allport ended the reedition of his classic (1961) with "Per-
sonality as System"; Karl Menninger (1963) based his system of
psychiatry on general system theory and organismic biology;
Rapaport (1960) even spoke of the "epidemiclike popularity in
psychology of open systems" (p. 144). The question arises why
such a trend has appeared.

   American psychology in the first half of the 20th century was
dominated by the concept of the reactive organism, or, more
dramatically, by the model of man as a robot. This conception
was common to all major schools of American psychology, clas-
sical and neobehaviorism, learning and motivation theories, psy-
choanalysis, cybernetics, the concept of the brain as a computer,
and so forth. According to a leading personality theorist,
206  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

Man is a computer, an animal, or an infant. His destiny is
completely determined by genes, instincts, accidents, early
conditionings and reinforcements, cultural and social forces.
Love is a secondary drive based on hunger and oral sensations
or a reaction formation to an innate underlying hate. In the
majority of our personological formulations there are no pro-
visions for creativity, no admitted margins of freedom for
voluntary decisions, no fitting recognitions of the power of
ideals, no bases for selfless actions, no ground at all for any
hope that the human race can save itself from the fatality that
now confronts it. If we psychologists were all the time, con-
sciously or unconsciously, intending out of malice to reduce
the concept of human nature to its lowest common denomin-
ator, and were gloating over our success in so doing, then we
might have to admit that to this extent the Satanic spirit was
alive within us. (Murray, 1962, pp. 36-54)

   The tenets of robot psychology have been extensively criticized;
for a survey of the argumept, the reader may consult Allport's
well-balanced evaluations (1955, 1957, 1961) and the recent his-
torical outline by Matson (1964) which is both brilliantly written
and well documented. The theory nevertheless remained domi-
nant for obvious reasons. The concept of man as robot was both
an expression of and a powerful motive force in industrialized
mass society. It was the basis for behavioral engineering in com-
mercial, economic, political, and other advertising and propa-
ganda; the expanding economy of the "affluent society" could
not subsist without such manipulation. Only by manipulating
humans ever more into Skinnerian rats, robots, buying automata,
homeostatically adjusted conformers and opportunists (or, bluntly
speaking, into morons and zombies) can this great society follow
its progress toward ever increasing gross national product. As
a matter of fact (Henry, 1963), the principles of academic psy-
chology were identical with those of the "pecuniary conception
of man" (p. 45ff.).

   Modern society provided a large-scale experiment in manipula-
tive psychology. If its principles are correct, conditions of tension
and stress should lead to increase of mental disorder. On the other
hand, mental health should be improved when basic needs for
food, shelter, personal security, and so forth, are satisfied; when
General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry  &' 207

repression of infantile instincts is avoided by permissive training
in bodily functions; when scholastic demands are reduced so as
not to overload a tender mind; when sexual gratification is pro-
vided at an early age, and so on.

   The behavioristic experiment led to results contrary to ex-
pectation. World War II-a period of extreme physiological and
psychological stress-did not produce an increase in neurotic
(Opler, 1956) or psychotic (Llavero, 1957) disorders, apart from
direct shock effects such as combat neuroses. In contrast, the
affluent society produced an unprecedented number of mentally
ill. Precisely under conditions of reduction of tensions and
gratification of biological needs, novel forms of mental disorder
appeared as existential neurosis, malignant boredom, and retire-
ment neurosis (Alexander, 1960), i.e., forms of mental dysfunction
originating not from repressed drives, from unfulfilled needs, or
from stress but from the meaninglessness of life. There is the
suspicion (Arieti, 1959, p. 474; von Bertalanffy, 1960a) (although
not substantiated statistically) that the recent increase in schizo-
phrenia may be caused by the "other-directedness" of man in
modern society. And there is no doubt that in the field of char-
acter disorders, a new type of juvenile delinquency has appeared:
crime not for want or passion, but for the fun of it, for "getting a
kick," and born from the emptiness of life (Anonymous, Crime
and Criminologists, 1963; Hacker, 1955).

   Thus theoretical as well as applied psychology was led into
malaise regarding basic principles. This discomfort and the trend
toward a new orientation were expressed in many different ways
such as in the various neo-Freudian schools, ego psychology,
personality theories (Murray, Allport), the belated reception of
European developmental and child psychology (Piaget, Werner,
Charlotte Biihler), the "new look" in perception, self-realization
(Goldstein, Maslow), client-centered therapy (Rogers), phenom-
enological and existential approaches, sociological concepts of
man (Sorokin, 1963), and others. In the variety of modern
currents, there is one common principle: to take man not as
reactive automaton or robot but as an active personality system.

   The reason for the current interest in general system theory
therefore appears to be that it is hoped that it may contribute
toward a more adequate conceptual framework for normal and
pathological psychology.
208  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

System Concepts in PsychopatholoffY

   General system theory has its roots in the organismic concep-
tion in biology. On the European continent, this was developed
by the present author (1928a) in the 1920's, with parallel develop-
ments in the Anglo-Saxon countries (Whitehead, Woodger, Cog-
hill and others) and in psychological gestalt theory (W. Kohler).
It is interesting to note that Eugen Bleuler (1931) followed with
sympathetic interest this development in its early phase. A similar
development in psychiatry was represented by Goldstein (1939).

ORGANISM AND PERSONALITY

   In contrast to physical forces like gravity or electricity, the
phenomena of life are found only in individual entities called
organisms. Any organism is a system, that is, a dynamic order
of parts and processes standing in mutual interaction (Bertalanffy,
1949a, p. 11). Similarly, psychological phenomena are found only
in individualized entities which in man are called personalities.
"Whatever else personality may be, it has the properties of a
system" (G. Allport, 1961, p. 109).

   The "molar" concept of the psychophysical organism as system
contrasts with its conception as a mere aggregate of "molecular"
units such as reflexes, sensations, brain centers, drives, reinforced
responses, traits, factors, and the like. Psychopathology clearly
shows mental dysfunction as a system disturbance rather than as
a loss of single functions. Even in localized traumas (for example,
cortical lesions), the ensuing effect is impairment of the total
action system, particularly with respect to higher and, hence,
more demanding functions. Conversely, the system has consider-
able regulative capacities (Bethe, 1931; Goldstein, 1959; Lashley,
1929).

THE ACllVE ORGANISM

   "Even without external stimuli, the organism is not a passive
but an intrinsically active system. Reflex theory has presupposed
that the primary element of behavior is response to external
stimuli. In contrast, recent research shows with increasing clarity
that autonomous activity of the nervous system, resting in the
system itself, is to be considered primary. In evolution and
General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry  ~09

development, reactive mechanisms appear to be superimposed
upon primitive, rhythmic-locomotor activities. The stimulus (i.e., a
change in external conditions) does not cause a process in an
otherwise inert system; it only modifies processes in an autono-
mously active system" (Bertalanffy, 1937, pp. 133 fr.; also 1960).

   The living organism maintains a disequilibrium called the
steady state of an open system and thus is able to dispense exist-
ing potentials or "tensions" in spontaneous activity or in response
to releasing stimuli; it even advances toward higher order and
organization. The robot model considers response to stimuli,
reduction of tensions, reestablishment of an equilibrium disturbed
by outside factors, adjustment to environment, and the like, as
the basic and universal scheme of behavior. The robot model,
however, only partly covers animal behavior and does not cover
an essential portion of human behavior at alL The insight into
the primary immanent activity of the psychophysical organism
necessitates a basic reorientation which can be supported by any
amount of biological, neurophysiological, behavioral, psychologi-
cal, and psychiatric evidence.

   Autonomous activity is the most primitive form of behavior
(von Bertalanfry, 1949a; Carmichael, 1954; Herrick, 1956; von
Holst, 1937; Schiller, 1957; H. Werner 1957a); it is found in
brain function (Hebb, 1949) and in psychological processes. The
discovery of activating systems in the brain stem (Berlyne, 1960;
Hebb, 1955; Magoun, 1958) has emphasized this fact in recent
years. Natural behavior encompasses innumerable activities be-
yond the S-R scheme, from exploring, play, and rituals in animals
(Schiller, 1957) to economic, intellectual, esthetic, religious, and
the like pursuits to self-realization and creativity in man. Even
rats seem to "look" for problems (Hebb, 1955), and the healthy
child and adult are going far beyond the reduction of tensions or
gratification of needs in innumerable activities that cannot be
reduced to primary or secondary drives (G. Allport, 1961, p. 90).
All such behavior is performed for its own sake, deriving gratifica-
tion ("function pleasure," after K. Buhler) from the performance
itself.

  For similar reasons, complete relaxation of tensions as in
sensory-deprivation experiments is not an ideal state but is apt
to produce insufferable anxiety, hallucinations, and other psy-
chosislike symptoms. Prisoner's psychosis, or exacerbation of symp-
210  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

toms in the closed ward, and retirement and weekend neurosis
are related clinical conditions attesting that the psychophysical
organism needs an amount of tension and activity for healthy
existence.

   It is a symptom of mental disease that spontaneity is impaired.
The patient increasingly becomes an automaton or S-R machine,
is pushed by biological drives, obsessed by needs for food, elimi-
nation, sex gratification, and so on. The model of the passive
organism is a quite adequate description of the stereotype be-
havior of compulsives, of patients with brain lesions, and of the
waning of autonomous activity in catatonia and related psy-
chopathology. But by the same token, this emphasizes that normal
behavior is different.

HOMEOSTASIS

   Many psychophysiological regulations follow the principles of
homeostasis. However, there are apparent limitations (d. pp.
160ff.). Generally, the homeostasis scheme is not applicable (1) to
dynamic regulations-i.e., regulations not based upon fixed mech-
anisms but taking place within a system functioning as a whole
(for example, regulative processes after brain lesions); (2) to
spontaneous activities; (3) to processes whose goal is not reduction
but is building up of tensions; and (4) to processes of growth,
development, creation, and the like. We may also say that homeo-
stasis is inappropriate as an explanatory principle for those human
activities which are nonutilitarian-i.e., not serving the primary
needs of self-preservation and survival and their secondary deriva-
tives, as is the case with many cultural manifestations. The
evolution of Greek sculpture, Renaissance painting, or German
music had nothing to do with adjustment or survival because
they are of symbolic rather than biological value (Bertalanffy,
1959; also 1964c) (compare below). But even living nature is by
no means merely utilitarian (von Bertalanffy, 1949a, pp. I06ff).

   The principle of homeostasis has sometimes been inflated to a
point where it becomes silly. The martyr'S death at the stake is
explained (Freeman, 1948) "by abnormal displacement" of his
internal processes so that death is more "homeostating" than
continuing existence (pp. 142ff.); the mountain climber is sup-
posed to risk his life because "losing valued social status may be
General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry  ffI

                                                     211

more upsetting" (Stagner, 1951). Such examples show to what
extremes some writers are willing to go in order to save a scheme
which is rooted in economic-commercial philosophy and sets a
premium on conformity and opportunism as ultimate values.
It should not be forgotten that Cannon (1932), eminent physiolo-
gist and thinker that he was, is free of such distortions; he
explicitly emphasized the "priceless unessentials" beyond homeo-
stasis (p. 323) (d. also Frankl, 1959b; Toch and Hastorf, 1955).

   The homeostasis model is applicable in psychopathology be-
cause nonhomeostatic functions, as a rule, decline in mental
patients. Thus Karl Menninger (1963) was able to describe the
progress of mental disease as a series of defense mechanisms,
settling down at ever lower homeostatic levels until mere preserva-
tion of physiological life is left. Arieti's (1959) concept of pro-
gressive teleological regression in schizophrenia is similar.

DIFFERENTIATION

   "Differentiation is transformation from a more general and
homeogeneous to a more special and heterogeneous condition"
(Conklin after Cowdry, 1955, p. 12). "Wherever development
occurs it proceeds from a state of relative globality and lack of
differentiation to a state of increasing differentiation, articulation,
and hierarchic order" (H. Werner, 1957b).

   The principle of differentiation is ubiquitous in biology, the
evolution and development of the nervous system, behavior,
psychology, and culture. We owe to Werner (1957a) the insight
that mental functions generally progress from a syncretic state
where percepts, motivation, feeling, imagery, symbols, concepts,
and so forth are an amorphous unity, toward an ever clearer
distinction of these functions. In perception the primitive state
seems to be one of synesthesia (traces of which are left in the
human adult and which may reappear in schizophrenia, mescaline,
and LSD experience) out of which visual, auditional, tactual,

chemical, 'and other experiences are separated.* In animal

and a good deal of human behavior, there is a perceptual-

  ·Cf. rec~ntly J. J. Gibson, The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems,

(Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1966); the model of neural hologram in brain
physiology (K. H. Pribram, "Four R's of Remembering" in The Neuro-
/Ihysiological and Biochemical Bases of Learning, Cambridge, Harvard Uni-
versity Press), and so on.
212  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

emotive-motivational unity; perceived objects without emotional-
motivational undertones are a late achievement of mature,
civilized man. The origins of language are obscure; but insofar
as we can form an idea, it seems that "holophrastic" (\\T. Hum-
boldt, d. Werner, 1957a) language and thought-i.e., utterances
and thoughts with a broad aura of associations-preceded separa-
tion of meanings and articulate speech. Similarly, the categories
of developed mental life such as the distinction of "I" and
objects, space, time, number, causality, and so forth, evolved
from a perceptual-conceptual-motivational continuum represented
by the "paleologic" perception of infants, primitives, and schizo-
phrenics (Arieti, 1959; Piaget, 1959: Werner, 1957a). Myth was
the prolific chaos from which language, magic, art, science,
medicine, mores, morals, and religion were differentiated (Cassirer,
1953-1957).

   Thus "I" and "the world," "mind" and "matter," or Descartes's
"res cogitans" and "res extensa" are not a simple datum and
primordial antithesis. They are the final outcome of a long
process in biological evolution, mental development of the child,
and cultural and linguistic history, wherein the perceiver is not
simply a receptor of stimuli but in a very real sense creates his
world (for example Bruner, 1958; Cantril, 1962; Geertz, 1962;
Matson, 1964, pp. 181ff.). The story can be told in different ways
(for example, G. Allport, 1961, pp. 110-138; von Bertalanffy,
1964a and 1965; Cassirer, 1953-1957; Freud, 1920; Merloo, 1956,
pp. 196-199; Piaget, 1959; Werner, 1957a), but there is general
agreement that differentiation arose from an "undifferentiated
absolute of self and environment" (Berlyne, 1957), and that the
animistic experience of the child and the primitive (persisting
still in Aristotelian philosophy), the "physiognomic" outlook
(Werner, 1957a), the experience of "we" and "thou" (still much
stronger in Oriental than in Western thinking-Koestler, 1960),
empathy, etc., were steps on the way until Renaissance physics
eventually "discovered inanimate nature." "Things" and "self"
emerge by a slow build-up of innumerable factors of gestalt
dynamics, of learning processes, and of social, cultural, and
linguistic determinants; the full distinction between "public
objects" and "private self" is certainly not achieved without nam-
ing and language, that is, processes at the symbolic level; and
General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry  r  213

perhaps this distinction presupposes a language of the Indo-
Germanic type (Whorf, 1956).

   In psychopathology and schizophrenia, all these primitive
states may reappear by way of regression and in bizarre manifes-
tations; bizarre because there are arbitrary combinations of
archaic elements among themselves and with more sophisticated
thought processes. On the other hand, the experience of the
child, savage, and non-Westerner, though primitive, nevertheless
forms an organized universe. This leads to the next group of
concepts to be considered.

CENTRALIZATION AND RELATED CONCEPTS

   "Organisms are not machines; but they can to a certain extent
become machines, congeal into machines. Never completely, how-
ever; for a thoroughly mechanized organism would be incapable
of reacting to the incessantly changing conditions of the outside
world" (von Bertalanffy, 1949a, pp. 17ff.). The principle of pro-
gressive mechanization express~s the transition from undifferen-
tiated wholeness to higher func,tion, made possible by specializa-
tion and "division of labor"; this principle implies also loss of
potentialities in the components and of regulability in the whole.

   Mechanization frequently leads to establishment of leading
parts, that is, components dominating the behavior of the system.
Such centers may exert "trigger causality," i.e., in contradistinc-
tion to the principle, causa aequat efJectum, a small change in a
leading part may by way of amplification mechanisms cause large
changes in the total system. In this way, a hierm-chic order of
parts or processes may be established (cf. Chapter 3). These
concepts hardly need comment except for the one debated point.

   In the brain as well as in mental function, centralization and
hierarchic order are achieved by stratification (A. Gilbert, 1957;
Lersch, .1960; Luthe, 1957; Rothacker, 1947), i.e., by superim-
position of higher "layers" that take the role of leading parts.
Particulars and disputed points are beyond the present survey.
However, one will agree that-in gross oversimplification-three
major layers, or evolutionary steps, can be distinguished. In the
brain these are (1) the paleencephalon, in lower vertebrates, (2)
the neencephalon (cortex), evolving from reptiles to mammals,
214  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

and (3) certain "highest" centers, especially the motoric speech
(Broca's) region and the large association areas which are found
only in man. Concurrently there is an anterior shift of controlling
centers, for example, in the apparatus of vision from the colliculi
optici of the mesencephalon (lower vertebrates) to the corpora
geniculata lateralia of the diencephalon (mammals) to the regio

calcarina of the telencephalon (man).*

   In some way parallel is stratification in the mental system
which can be roughly circumscribed as the domains of instincts,
drives, emotions, the primeval "depth personality"; perception
and voluntary action; and the symbolic activities characteristic
of man. None of the available formulations (for example, Freud's
id, ego, and superego, and those of German stratification theorists)
is unobjectionable. The neurophysiological meaning of a small
portion of brain processes being "conscious" is completely un-
known. The Freudian unconscious, or id, comprises only limited
aspects and already pre-Freudian authors have given a much
more comprehensive survey of unconscious functions (Whyte,
1960). Although these problems need further clarification, it is
incorrect when Anglo-Saxon authors refuse stratification for being
"philosophical" (Eysenck, 1957) or insist that there is no funda-
mental difference between the behavior of rat and that of man
(Skinner, 1963). Such an attitude simply ignores elementary
zoological facts. Moreover, stratification is indispensable for
understanding psychiatric disturbances.

REGRESSION

   The psychotic state is sometimes said to be a "regression to
older and more infantile forms of behavior." This is incorrect;
already E. Bleuler noted that the child is not a little schizo-
phrenic but a normally functioning though primitive being.
"The schizophrenic will regress to, but not integrate at, a lower
level; he will remain disorganized" (Arieti, 1959, p. 475). Regres-
sion is essentially disintegration of personality; that is, dedifferen-
tiation and decentralization. Dedifferentiation means that there
is not a loss of meristic functions, but a reappearance of primitive
states (syncretism, synesthesia, paleologic thinking, and so forth).
Decentralization is, in the extreme, functional dysencephalization

   "'Cf. recently A. Koestler, The Ghost in the Machine, (London, Hutchin-
son, 1967).
General System Them, in Psychology and Psychiatry  It

                                                    215

in the schizophrenic (Arieti, 1955). Splitting of personality, ac-
cording to E. Bleuler, in milder form neurotic complexes (i.e.,
psychological entities that assume dominance), disturbed ego
function, weak ego, and so forth, similarly indicate loosening of
the hierarchic mental organization.

BOUNDARIES

   Any system as an entity which can be investigated in its own
right must have boundaries, either spatial or dynamic. Strictly
speaking, spatial boundaries exist only in naive observation, and
all boundaries are ultimately dynamic. One cannot exactly draw
the boundaries of an atom (with valences sticking out, as it were,
to attract other atoms), of a stone (an aggregate of molecules and
atoms which mostly consist of empty space, with particles in
planetary distances), or of an organism (continually exchanging
matter with environment).

   In psychology, the boundary of the ego is both fundamental
and precarious. As already noted, it is slowly established in evolu-
tion and development and is never completely fixed. It originates
in proprioceptive experience and in the body image, but self-
identity is not completely established before the "I," "Thou,"
and "it" are named. Psychopathology shows the paradox that
the ego boundary is at once too fluid and too rigid. Syncretic
perception, animistic feeling, delusions and hallucinations, and
so on, make for insecurity of the ego boundary; but within his
self-created universe the schizophrenic lives Hin a shell," much
in the way animals live in the "soap bubbles" of their organization-
bound worlds (Schiller, 1957). In contrast to the animal's limited
"ambient," man is "open to the world" or has a "universe"; that
is, his world widely transcends biological bondage and even the
limitations of his senses. To him, "encapsulation" (Royce, 1964)
-from the specialist to the neurotic, and in the extreme, to the
schizophrenic-sometimes is a pathogenic limitation of poten-
tialities. These are based in man's symbolic functions.

SYMBOLIC ACTIVITIES

   "Except for the immediate satisfaction of biological needs, man
lives in a world not of things but of symbols" (von Bertalanffy,
216  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

1956a). We may also say that the various symbolic universes,
material and non-material, which distinguish human cultures
from animal societies. are part, and easily the most important
part, of man's behavior system. It can be justly questioned
whether man is a rational animal; but he certainly is a symbol-
creating and symbol-dominated being throughout.

   Symbolism is recognized as the unique criterion of man by
biologists (von Bertalanffy, 1956a; Herrick, 1956), physiologists of
the Pavlovian school ("secondary signal system") (Luria, 1961),
psychiatrists (Appleby, Scher &: Cummings, 1960; Arieti, 1959;
Goldstein, 1959), and philosophers (Cassirer, 1953-1957; Langer,
1942). It is not found even in leading textbooks of psychology
in consequence of the predominant robot philosophy. But it is
precisely for symbolic functions that "motives in animals will not
be an adequate model for motives in man" (G. Allport, 1961,
p. 221), and that human personality is not finished at the age of
three or so, as Freud's instinct theory assumed.

   The definition of symbolic activities will not be discussed here;
the author has attempted to do so elsewhere (von Bertalanffy,
1956a and 1965). It suffices to say that probably all notions used
to characterize human behavior are consequences or different
aspects of symbolic activity. Culture or civilization; creative pro-
ception in contrast to passive perception (Murray, G. W. Allport),
objectivation of both things outside and the self (Thumb, 1943),
ego-world unity (Nuttin, 1957), abstract against concrete
stratum (Goldstein. 1959); having a past and future, "time-
binding," anticipation of future; true (Aristotelian) purposiveness
(d. Chapter 3). intention as conscious planning (G. Allport,
1961, p. 224); dread of death, suicide; will to meaning (Frankl,
1959b). interest as engaging in self-gratifying cultural activity
(G. Allport, 1961, p. 225), idealistic devotion to a (perhaps hope-
less) cause, martyrdom; "forward trust of mature motivation" (G.
Allport, 1961, p. 90); self-transcendence; ego autonomy, conflict-
free ego functions; essential aggression (von Bertalanffy, 1958);
conscience, superego, ego ideal, values, morals, dissimulation,
truth and lying-all these stem from the root of creative symbolic
universes and can therefore not be reduced to biological drives,
psychoanalytic instincts, reinforcement of gratifications, or other
biological factors. The distinction of biological and specific human
values is that the former concerns the maintenance of the in-
General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry  '217

dividual and the survival of the species; the latter always concern
a symbolic universe (Bertalanffy, 1959 and 1964c).

   In consequence, mental disturbances in man, as a rule, involve
disturbances of symbolic functions. Kubie (1953), appears to be
correct when, as a "new hypothesis" on neuroses, he distinguishes
"psychopathological processes which arise through the distorting
impact of highly charged experiences at an early age" from those
"consisting in the distortion of symbolic functions." Disturbances
in schizophrenia are essentially also at the symbolic level and
able to take many different forms: Loosening of associational
structure, breakdown of the ego boundary, speech and thought
disturbances, concretization of ideas, desymbolization, paleologic
thinking, and others. We refer to Arieti's (1959) and Goldstein's
(1959) discussions.

   The conclusion (which is by no means generally accepted) is
that mental illness is a specifically human phenomenon. Animals
may behaviorally show (and for all we know by empathy experi-
ence) any number of perceptional, motoric and mood disturb-
ances, hallucinations, dreams, faulty reactions, and the like.
Animals cannot have the disturbances of symbolic functions that
are essential ingredients of mental disease. In animals there
cannot be disturbance of ideas, delusions of grandeur or of
persecution, etc., for the simple reason that there are no ideas
to start with. Hence, "animal neurosis" is only a partial model of
the clinical entity (von Bertalanffy, 1957a).

   This is the ultimate reason why human behavior and psy-
chology cannot be reduced to biologistic notions like restoration
of homeostasis, conflict of biological drives, unsatisfactory mother-
infant relationships, and the like. Another consequence is the
culture-dependence of mental illness both in symptomatology
and epidemiology. To say that psychiatry has a physio-psycho-
sociological framework is but another expression of the same fact.

  For the same reason, human striving is more than self-realization;
it is directed toward objective goals and realization of values
(Frankl, 1959a, 1959b; 1960), which means nothing else than
symbolic entities which in a way become detached from their
creators~von Bertalanffy, 1956a; also 1965). Perhaps we may
venture a definition. There may be conflict between biological
drives and a symbolic value system; this is the situation of psycho-
neurosis. Or there may be conflict between symbolic universes,
218  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

or loss of value orientation and experience of meaninglessness
in the individual; this is the situation when existential or
"noogenic" neurosis arises. Similar considerations apply to "char-
acter disorders" like juvenile delinquency that, quite apart from
their psychodynamics, stem from the breakdown or erosion of the
value system. Among other things, culture is an important
psycho-hygienic factor (von Bertalanffy, 1959 and 1964c).

SYSTEM-A NEW CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

   Having gone through a primer of system-theoretical notions,
we may summarize that these appear to provide a consistent
framework for psychopathology.

   Mental disease is essentially a disturbance of system functions of
the psychophysical organism. For this reason, isolated symptoms
or syndromes do not define the disease entity (von Bertalanffy,
I 960a). Look at some classical symptoms of schiwphrenia.
"Loosening of associational structure" (E. Bleuler) and unbridled
chains of associations; quite similar examples are found in
"purple" poetry and rhetoric. Auditory hallucinations; "voices"
told Joan of Arc to liberate France. Piercing sensations; a great
mystic like St. Teresa reported identical experience. Fantastic
world constructions; those of science surpass any schizophrenic's.
This is not to play on the theme "genius and madness," but it is
apt to show that not single criteria but integration makes for the
difference.

   Psychiatric disturbances can be neatly defined in terms of system
functions. In reference to cognition, the worlds of psychotics, as
impressively described by writers of the phenomenological and
existentialist schools (for example, May et al., 1958), are "products
of their brains." But our normal world is shaped also by emo-
tional, motivational, social, cultural, linguistic, and the like
factors, amalgamated with perception proper. Illusions and delu-
sions, and hallucinations at least in dreams, are present in the
healthy individual; the mechanisms of illusion play even an
important role in constancy phenomena, without which a con-
sistent world image would be impossible. The contrast of normal-
ity to schizophrenia is not that normal perception is a plane
mirror of reality "as is," but that schiwphrenia has subjective
elements that run wild and that are disintegrated.
General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry  "'219

   The same applies at the symbolic level. Scientific notions such
as the earth running with unimaginable speed through the uni-
verse or a solid body consisting mostly of empty space interlaced
wi th tiny energy specks at astronomical distances, contradict all
everyday experience and "common sense" and are more fantastic
than the "world designs" of schizophrenics. Nevertheless the
scientific notions happen to be "true"-Le., they fit into an
integrated scheme.

   Similar considerations apply to motivation. The concept of
spontaneity draws the borderline. Normal motivation implies
autonomous activity, integration of behavior, plasticity in and
adaptability to changing situations, free use of symbolic anticipa-
tion, decision, and so forth. This emphasizes the hierarchy of
functions, especially the symbolic level superimposed upon the
organismic. Hence beside the organismic principle of "spon-
taneous activity" the "humanistic" principle of "symbolic func-
tions" must be basic in system-theoretical consideration.

   Hence the answer whether an individual is mentally sound
or not is ultimately determined by whether he has an
integrated universe consistent within the given cultural frame-
work (von Bertalanffy, 1960a). So far as we can see, this criterion
comprises all phenomena of psychopathology as compared wi th
normality and leaves room for culture-dependence of mental
norms. What may be consistent in one culture may be pathologi-
cal in another, as cultural anthropologists (Benedict, 1934) have
shown.

   This concept has definite implications for psychotherapy. If the
psychophysical organism is an active system, occupational and
adjunctive therapies are an obvious consequence; evocation of
creative potentialities will be more important than passive adjust-
ment. If these concepts are correct, more important than "digging
the past" will be insight into present conflicts, attempts at re-
integration, and orientation toward goals and the future, that is,
symbolic anticipation. This, of course, is a paraphrase of recent
trends in psychotherapy which thus may be grounded in "per-
sonality as system." If, finally, much of present neurosis is
"existential," resulting from meaninglessness of life, then "logo-
therapy" (Frankl, 1959b), i.e., therapy at the symbolic level,
will be in place.

  It therefore appears that-without falling into the trap of
220  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

"nothing-but" philosophy and disparaging other conceptions-
a system theory of personality provides a sound basis for psy-
chology and psychopathology.

Conclusion

   System theory in psychology and psychiatry is not a dramatic
denouement of new discovery, and if the reader has a deja vu
feeling, we shall not contradict him. It was our intention to show
that system concepts in this field are not speculation, are not an
attempt to press facts into the straitjacket of a theory which
happens to be in vogue, and have nothing to do with "mentalistic
anthropomorphism," so feared by behaviorists. Nevertheless, the
system concept is a radical reversal with respect to robotic theories,
leading to a more realistic (and incidentally more dignified)
image of man. Moreover, it entails far-reaching consequences for
the scientific world view which can only be alluded to in the
present outline:

   (1) The system concept provides a theoretical framework which
is psychophysically neutral. Physical and physiological terms such
action potentials, chemical transmission at synapses, neural net-
work, and the like are not applicable to mental phenomena, and
even less can psychological notions be applied to physical phe-
nomena. System terms and principles like. those discussed can
be applied to facts in either field.

   (2) The mind-body problem cannot be discussed here, and the
author has to refer to another investigation (von Bertalanffy,
1964a). We can only summarize that the Cartesian dualism be-
tween matter and mind, objects outside and ego inside, brain
and consciousness, and so forth, is incorrect both in the light of
direct phenomenological experience and of modern research in
various fields; it is a conceptualization stemming from l7th-
century physics which, even though still prevailing in modern
debates (Hook, 1961; Scher, 1962), is obsolete. In the modern view,
science does not make metaphysical statements, whether of the
materialistic, idealistic, or positivistic sense-data variety. It is a
conceptual construct to reproduce limited aspects of experience
in their formal structure. Theories of behavior and of psychology
should be similar in their formal structure or isomorphic. Pos-
sibly systems concepts are the first beginning of such "common
General System Theory in Psychology and Psychiatry  a-2l

language" (compare Piaget and Bertalanffy in Tanner and
lnhelder, 1960). In the remote future this may lead to a "unified
theory" (Whyte, 1960) from which eventually material and mental,
conscious and unconscious aspects could be derived.

   (3) Within the framework developed, the problem of free will or
determinism also receives a new and definite meaning. It is a
pseudo-problem, resulting from confusion of different levels of
experience and of epistemology and metaphysics. We experience
ourselves as free, for the simple reason that the category of
causality is not applied in direct or immediate experience.
Causality is a category applied to bring order into objectivated
experience reproduced in symbols. Within the latter, we try to
explain mental and behavioral phenomena as causally determined
and can do so with increasing approximation by taking into
account ever more factors of motivation, by refining conceptual
models, etc. Will is not determined, but is determinable, par-
ticularly in the machine-like and average aspects of behavior, as
motivation researchers and statisticians know. However, causality
is not metaphysical necessity, but is one instrument to bring order
into experience, and there are other "perspectives" (Chapter 10),
of equal or superior standing.

   (4) Separate from the epistemological question is the moral and
legal question of responsibility. Responsibility is always judged
within a symbolic framework of values as accepted in a society
under given circumstances. For example, the M'Naghten rules
which excuse the offender if "he cannot tell right from wrong,"
actually mean that the criminal goes unpunished if his symbolic
comprehension is obliterated; hence his behavior is determined
only by "animal" drives. Killing is prohibited and is punished
as murder within the symbolic framework of the ordinary state
of society, but is commanded (and refusal of the command is
punished) in the different value frame of war.
10 The Relativity of Categories

The Whorfian Hypothesis

Among recent developments in the anthropological sciences,

hardly any have found so much attention and led to so much

controversy as have the views advanced by the late Benjamin

WhorL                                .

The hypothesis offered by Whorf is,

that the commonly held belief that the cognitive processes of
all human beings possess a common logical structure which
operates prior to and independently of communication through
language, is erroneous. It is ·Whorf's view that the linguistic
patterns themselves determine what the individual perceives
in this world and how he thinks about it. Since these patterns
vary widely, the modes of thinking and perceiving in groups
utilizing different linguistic systems will result in basically
different world views (Fearing, 1954).

We are thus introduced to a new principle of relativity which
holds that all observers are not led by the same physical
evidence to the same picture of the universe, unless their
linguistic backgrounds are similar.... We cut up and organize
the spread and flow of events as we do largely because, through
The Relativity of Categories  1223

our mother tongue, we are parties of an agreement to do so,
not because nature itself is segmented in exactly that way for
all to see (Whorf, 1952, p. 21).

   For example, in the Indo-European languages substantives, ad-
jectives and verbs appear· as basic grammatic units, a sentence
being essentially a combination. of these parts. This scheme of a
persisting entity separable from its properties and active or pas-
sive behavior is fundamental for the categories of occidental
thinking, from Aristotle's categories of "substance," "attributes"
and "action" to the antithesis of matter and force, mass and
energy in physics.

   Indian languages, such at Nootka (Vancouver Island) or Hopi,
do not have parts of speech or separable subject and predicate_
Rather they signify an event as a whole. When we say, "a light
flashed" or "it (a dubious hypostatized entity) flashed," Hopi
uses a single term, "flash (occurred) ."1

   It would be important to apply the methods of mathematical
logic to such languages. Can statements in languages like Nootka
or Hopi be rendered by the usual logistic notation, or is the latter
itself a formalization of the structure of Indo-European language?
It appears that this important subject has not been investigated.

   Indo-European languages emphasize time. The "give-and-take"
between language and culture leads, according to Whorf, to keep-
ing of records, diaries, mathematics stimulated by accounting; to
calendars, clocks, chronology, time as used in physics; to the
historical attitude, interest in the past, archeology, etc. It is
interesting to compare this with Spengler's conception of the
central role of time in the occidental world picture (d. p. 234Ł.),
which, from a different viewpoint, comes to the identical con-
clusion.

   However, the-for us-self-evident distinction between past,
present, and future does not exist in the Hopi language. It makes
no distinction between tenses, but indicates the validity a state-
ment has: fact, memory, expectation, or custom. There is no
difference in Hopi between "he runs," "he is running," "he ran,"
all being rendered by wari, "running occur." An expectation is
rendered by warinki ("running occur [I] daresay"), which covers
"he will, shall, should, would run." If, however, it is a statement
of a general law, warikngwe ("running occur, characteristically")
224  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

is applied (La Barre, 1954, pp. 197 ff.). The Hopi "has no general
notion or intuition of time as a smooth flowing continuum in
which everything in the universe proceeds at an equal rate, out
of a future, through a present, into a past." (Whorf, 1952, p. 67) .
Instead of our categories of space and time, Hopi rather dis-
tinguishes the "manifest," all that which is accessible to the senses,
with no distinction between present and past, and the "un-
manifest" comprising the future as well as what we call mental.
Navaho (d. Kluckhohn and Leighton, 1951) has little develop-
ment of tenses; the emphasis is upon types of activity, and thus
it distinguishes durative, perfective, usitative, repetitive, iterative,
optative, semifactive, momentaneous, progressive, transitional,
conative, etc., aspects of action. The difference can be defined
that the first concern of English (and Indo-European language
in general) is time, of Hopi-validity, and of Navaho-type of
activity (personal communication of Professor Kluckhohn) .

   Whorf asks:

How would a physics constructed along these lines work, with
no t (time) in its equations? Perfectly, as far as I can see,
though of course it would require different ideology and per-
haps different mathematics. Of course, v (velocity) would have
to go, too (1952, p. 7).

   Again, it can be mentioned that a timeless physics actually
exists, in the form of Greek statics (d. p. 234). For us, it is
part of a wider system, dynamics, for the particular case that t
-? 0) , i.e., time approaches the infinite and drops out of the
equations.
i.e., time approaches the infinite and drops out of the equations.

   As regards space, the Indo-European tongues widely express
nonspatial relations by spatial metaphors: long, short for dura-
tion; heavy, light, high, low for intensity; approach, rise, fall for
tendency; Latin expressions like educo, religio, comprehendo
as metaphorical spatial (probably more correct: corporeal, L.v.B.)
references: lead out, tying back, grasp, etc.2

   This is untrue of Hopi where rather physical things are named
by psychological metaphors. Thus the Hopi word for "heart" can
be shown to be a late formation from a root meaning "think" or
"remember." Hopi language is, as \Vhorf states, capable of ac-
'fhe Relativity of Categories  ~25

counting for and describing correctly, in a pragmatical or ob-
Ncrvational sense, all observable phenomena of the universe.
Ilowever, the implicit metaphysics is entirely different, being
rather a way of animistic or vitalistic thinking, near to the
mystical experience of oneness.

  Thus, Whorf maintains, "Newtonian space, time and matter
are no intuitions. They are recepts from culture and language."
(1952, p. 40).

Just as it is possible to have any number of geometries other
than the Euclidean which give an equally perfect account of
space configurations, so it is possible to have descriptions of
the universe, all equally valid, that do not contain our familiar
contrast of time and space. The relativity viewpoint of modern
physics is one such view, conceived in mathematical terms, and
the Hopi 'Weltanschauung is another and quite different one,
non-mathematical and linguistic (Whorf, 1952, p. 67).

  The ingrained mechanistic way of thinking which comes into
difficulties with modern scientific developments is a consequence
of our specific linguistic categories and habits, and Whorf hopes
that insight into the diversity of linguistic systems may contribute
to the reevaluation of scientific concepts.

  La Barre (1954, p. 301) has vividly summarized this viewpoint:

Aristotelian Substance and Attribute look remarkable like
Indo-European nouns and predicate adjectives.... More
modern science may well raise the question whether Kant's
Forms, or twin "spectacles" of Time and Space (without which
we can perceive nothing) are not on the one hand mere Indo-
European verbal tense, and on the other hand human stere-
oscopy and kinaesthesis and life-process-which might be more
economically expressed in terms of the c, or light-constant, of
Einstein's formula. But we must remember all the time that

= E mc2 is also only a grammatical conception of reality in

terms of Indo-European morphological categories of speech. A
Hopi, Chinese, or Eskimo Einstein might discover via his gram-
matical habits wholly different mathematical conceptualizations
with which to apperceive reality.

   This paper is not intended to discuss the linguistic problems
posed by Whorf as was exhaustively done in a recent symposium
226  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

(Hoijer et ai., 1954). However, it has occured to the present
author that what is known as the Whorfian hypothesis is not an
isolated statement of a somewhat extravagant individual. Rather
the Whorfian hypothesis of the linguistic determination of the
categories of cognition is part of a general revision of the cog-
nitive process. It is embedded in a powerful current of modern
thought, the sources of which can be found in philosophy as
well as in biology. It seems that these connections are not re-
alized to the extent they deserve.

   The general problem posed may be expressed as follows: In
how far are the categories of our thinking modeled by and
dependent on biological and cultural factors? It is obvious that,
stated in this way, the problem far exceeds the borders of
linguistics and touches the question of the foundations of human
knowledge.

   Such analysis will have to start with the classical, absolutistic
world view which found its foremost expression in the Kantian
system. According to the Kantian thesis, there are the so-called
forms of intuition, space and time, and the categories of the
intellect, such as substance, causality and others which are uni-
versally committal for any rational being. Accordingly science,
based upon these categories, is equally universal. Physical science
using these a priori categories, namely, Euclidean space, ::"'IIew-
tonian time and strict deterministic causality, is essentially clas-
sical mechanics which, therefore, is the absolute system of knowl-
edge, applying to any phenomenon as well as to any mind as
observer.

   It is a well-known fact that modern science has long recognized
that this is not so. There is no need to belabor this point.
Euclidean space is but one form of geometry beside wQich other,
non-Euclidean geometries exist which have exactly the same
logical structure and right to exist. Modern science applies what-
ever sort of space and time is most convenient and appropriate
for describing the events in nature. In the world of medium
dimensions, Euclidean space and Newtonian time apply in the
way of satisfactory approximations. However, coming to astro-
nomical dimensions and, on the other hand, to atomic events, non-
Euclidean spaces or the many-dimensional configuration spaces
of quantum theory are introduced. In the theory of relativity,
space and time fuse in the Minkowski union, where time is
The Relativity of Categories  -227

another coordinate of a four-dimensional continuum, although
of a somewhat peculiar character. Solid matter, this most ob-
trusive part of experience and most trivial of the categories of
naive physics, consists almost completely of holes, being a void
for the greatest part, only interwoven by centers of energy which,
considering their magnitude, are separated by astronomical dis-
tances. Mass and energy, somewhat sophisticated quantifications
of the categorical antithesis of stuff and force, appear as expres-
sions of one unknown reality, interchangeable according to
Einstein's law. Similarly, the strict determinism of classical physics
is replaced in quantum physics by indeterminism or rather by
the insight that the laws of nature are essentially of a statistical
character. Little is left of Kant's supposedly a priori and absolute
categories. Incidentally, it is symptomatic of the relativity of
world views that Kant who, in his epoch, appeared to be the
great destroyer of all "dogmatism," to us appears a paradigm of
unwarranted absolutism and dogmatism.

   So the question arises-what is it which determines the cate-
gories of human cognition? While, in the Kantian system, the
categories appeared to be absolute for any rational observer, they
now appear as changing with the advancement of scientific
knowledge. In this sense, the absolutistic conception of earlier
times and of classical physics is replaced by a scientific relativism.

   The argument of the present discussion may be defined as
follows. The categories of knowledge, of everyday knowledge as
well as of scientific knowledge, which in the last resort is only a
refinement of the former, depend, first, on biological factors;
second, on cultural factors. Third, notwithstanding this all-too-
human entanglement, absolute knowledge, emancipated from
human limitations, is possible in a certain sense.

The Biological Relativity of Categories

   Cognition is dependent, firstly, on the psycho-physical organi-
zation of man. We may refer here in particular to that approach
in modern biology which was inaugurated by Jacob von Uexkiill
under th~ name of Umwelt-Lehre. It essentially amounts to the
statement that, from the great cake of reality, every living or-
ganism cuts a slice, which it can perceive and to which it can
react owing to its psycho-physical organization, i.e., the structure
228  GENERAL SYSTEM THEOR Y

of receptor and effector organs. Von Uexkiill and Kriszat (1934)
have presented fascinating pictures how the same section of nature
looks as seen by various animals; they should be compared to
Whorf's equally amusing drawings which show how the world
is modeled according to linguistic schemes. Here only a few
examples, chosen from Uexkiill's extensive behavioral studies,
can be mentioned.

   Take, e.g., a unicellular organism like the paramecium. Its
almost only way of response is the flight reaction (phobotaxis)
by which it reacts to the most diverse, chemical, tactile, thermal,
photic, etc., stimuli. This simple reaction, however, suffices safely
to guide that animal which possesses no specific sense organs,
into the region of optimal conditions. The many things in the
environment of the paramecium, algae, other infusoria, little
crustaceans, mechanical obstacles and the like, are nonexistent
for it. Only one stimulus is received which leads to the flight
reaction.

   As this example shows, the organizational and functional plan
of a living being determines what can become "stimulus" and
"characteristic" to whidl the organism responds with a certain
reaction. According to von Uexkiill's expression, any organism,
so to speak, cuts out from the multiplicity of surrounding objects
a small number of characteristics to which it reacts and whose
ensemble forms its "ambient" (Umwell). All the rest is non-
existent for that particular organism. Every animal is surrounded,
as by a soapbubble, by its specific ambient, replenished by those
characteristics which are amenable to it. If. reconstructing an
animal's ambient, we enter this soapbubble, the world is pro-
foundly changed: Many characteristics disappear, others arise,
and a completely new world is found.

   Von Uexkiill has given innumerable examples delineating the
ambients of various animals. Take, for instance, a tick lurking
in the bushes for a passing mammal in whose skin it settles and
drinks itself full of blood. The signal is the odor of butyric acid,
flowing from the dermal glands of all mammals. Following this
stimulus, it plunges .down; if it fell on a warm body-as monitored
by its sensitive thermal sense-it has reached its prey, a warm-
blooded animal, and only needs to find, aided by tactile sense,
a hair-free place to pierce in. Thus the rich environment of the
tick shrinks to metamorphize into a scanty configuration out of
'/'lie Relativity of Categories  '229

which only three signals, beaconlike, are gleaming which, how-
('ver, suffice to lead the animal surely to its goal. Or again, some
sea urchins respond to any darkening by striking together their
spines. This reaction invariably is applied against a passing
doud or boat, or the real enemy, an approaching fish. Thus,
while the environment of the sea urchin contains many different
objects, its ambient only contains one characteristic, namely,
dimming of light.

   This organizational constraint of the ambient goes even
lIluch farther than the examples just mentioned indicate (von
Bertalanffy, 1937). It also concerns the forms of intuition, con-
sidered by Kant as a priori and immutable. The biologist finds
I hat there is no absolute space or time but that they depend on
I he organization of the perceiving organism. Three-dimensional
Euclidean space, where the three rectangular coordinates are
equivalent, was always identified with the a priori space of ex-
perience and perception. But even simple contemplation shows,
and experiments in this line (von Allesch, 1931; von Skramlik,
1934, and others) prove that the space of visual and tactual per-
{'cption is in no way Euclidean. In the space of perception, the
coordinates are in no way equivalent, but there is a fundamental
difference between top and bottom, right and left, and fore and
aft. Already the organization of our body and, in the last resort,
the fact that the organism is subjected to gravity, makes for an
inequality of the horizontal and vertical dimensions. This is
readily shown by a simple fact known to every photographer. We
experience it as quite correct that, according to the laws of
perspective, parallels, such as railroad tracks, converge in the
distance. Exactly the same perspective foreshortening is, however,
experienced as being ~'Tong if it appears in the vertical dimension.
If a picture was taken with the camera tilted, we obtain "falling
lines," the edges of a house, e.g., running together. This is,
perspectively, just as correct as are the converging railroad tracks;
nevertheless, the latter perspective is experienced as being correct,
while the converging edges of a house are experienced as wrong;
the explanation being that the human organism is such as to have
an ambient with considerable horizontal, but negligible vertical
extension.8

   A similar relativity is found in experienced time. Von Uexkiill
has introduced the notion of the "instant" as the smallest unit
230  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

of perceived time. For man, the instant is about 1/18 sec., i.e.,
impressions shorter than this duration are not perceived separately
but fuse. It appears that the duration of the instant depends not
on conditions in the sense organs but rather in the central nervous
system, for it is the same for different sense organs. This flicker
fusion is, of course, the raison d'etre of movie pictures when
frames presented in a sequence faster than 18 per second fuse
into continuous motion. The duration of the instant varies in
different species. There are "slow motion-picture animals" (von
Uexkiill) which perceive a greater number of impressions per
second than man. Thus, the fighting fish (Betta) does not recog·
nize its image in a mirror if, by a mechanical device, it is pre-
sented 18 times per second. It has to be presented at least 30
times per second; then the fish attacks his imaginary opponent.
Hence, these small and very active animals consume a larger
number of impressions than man does, per unit of astronomical
time; time is decelerated. Conversely, a snail is a "rapid motion·
picture animal." It crawls on a vibrating stick if it approaches
four times per second, i.e., a stick vibrating four times per second
appears at rest to the snail.

   Experienced time is not Newtonian. Far from flowing uniformly
(aequilabiliter f/uit, as Newton has it), it depends on physio-
logical conditions. The so-called time memory of animals and
man seems to be determined by a "physiological clock." Thus
bees, conditioned to appear at a certain time at the feeding place,
will show up earlier or later if drugs which increase or decrease
the rate of metabolism are administered (e.g., von Stein.Beling,
1935; Kalmus, 1934; Wahl, 1932; and others) .

   Experienced time seems to fly if it is filled with impressions,
and creeps if we are in a state of tedium. In fever, when body
temperature and metabolic rate are increased, time seems to
linger since the number of "instants" per astronomical unit in
Uexkiill's sense is increased. This time experience is paralleled by
a corresponding increase of the frequency of the a-waves in the
brain (Hoagland, 1951). With increasing age, time appears to
run faster, i.e., a smaller number of instants is experienced per
astronomical unit of time. Correspondingly, the rate of cicatriza-
tion of wounds is decreased proportional to age, the,psychological
as well as physiological phenomena obviously being connected
rite Relativity of Categories  '231

with the slowing-down of metabolic processes in senescence (du
Nouy, 1937).

   Several attempts (Brody, 1937; Backman, 1940; von Bertalanffy,
1!151, p. 346) have been made to establish a biological as com-
pared to astronomical time. One means is the homologization of
growth curves: If the course of growth in different animals is
(~xpressed by the same formula and curve, the units of the time
scale (plotted in astronomical time) will be different, and im-
portant physiological changes presumably will appear at cor-
responding points of the curve. From the standpoint of physics,
a thermodynamic time, based upon the second principle and
irreversible processes, can be introduced as opposed to astronomi-
cal time (Prigogine, 1947). Thermodynamic time is nonlinear
hut logarithmic since it depends on probabilities; it is, for the
same reason, statistical; and it is local because determined by the
events at a certain point. Probably biological time bears an
intimate although by no means simple relation to thermodynamic
lime.

  How the categories of experience depend on physiological states,
is also shown by the action of drugs. Under the influence of
mescaline, e.g., visual impressions are intensified, and the percep-
tion of space and time undergoes profound changes (d. Anschutz,
1953; A. Huxley, 1954). It would make a most interesting study
to investigate the categories of schizophrenics, and it would prob-
ably be found that they differ considerably from those of "normal"
experience, as do indeed the categories in the experience of
dreams.

  Even the most fundamental category of experience, namely,
the distinction of ego and nonego, is not absolutely fixed. It
seems gradually to evolve in the development of the child. It is
essentially different in the animistic thinking of the primitives
(still in force even in the Aristotelian theory where everything
"seeks" its natural place), and in Western thinking since the
Renaissance which "has discovered the inanimate" (Schaxel,
1923). The object-subject separation again disappears in the
empathic world view of the poet, in mystical ecstasy and in states
of intoxication.

  There is no intrinsic justification to consider as "true" repre-
sentation of the world what we take to be "normal" experience
232  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

(i.e., the experience of the average adult European of the twen-
tieth century) , and to consider all other sorts of experience that
are equally vivid, as merely abnormal, fantastic or! at best, a
primitive precursor to our "scientific" world picture.

   The discussion of these problems could easily be enlarged,
but the point important for the present topic will have become
clear. The categories of experience or forms of intuition, to use
Kant's term, are not a universal a priori, but rather they depend
on the psychophysical organization and physiological conditions
of the experiencing animal, man included. This relativism from
the biological standpoint is an interesting parallel to the rela-
tivism of categories as viewed from the standpoint of culture and
language.

The Cultural Relativity of Categories

   We now come to the second point, the dependence of categories
on cultural factors. As already mentioned, the Whorfian thesis
of the dependence of categories on linguistic factors is part of a
general conception of cultural relativism which has developed
in the past 50 years; although even this is not quite correct, since
Wilhelm von Humboldt has already emphasized the dependence
of our world perspective on linguistic factors and the structure
of language.

   It appears that this development started in the history of art.
At the beginning of this century, the Viennese art-historian,
Riegl, published a very learned and tedious treatise on late-
Roman artcraft. He introduced the concept of Kunstwollen, a
term which may be translated as "artistic intention." The un-
naturalistic character of primitive art was conceived to be a con-
sequence not of a lack of skill or know-how, but rather as expres-
sion of an artistic intention which is different from ours, being
not interested in a realistic reproduction of nature. The same
applies to the so-called degeneration of classic art in the late
Hellenistic period. This conception later was expanded by
Worringer who demonstrated in the example of Gothic art that
artistic modes diametrically opposed to the classical canon are
an outcome not of technical impotence, but rather of a different
world view. It was not that Gothic sculptors and painters did not
know how to represent nature correctly, but their intention was
The Relativity of Categories

different and not directed towards representative art. The con-
nection of these theories with the primitivism and expressionism
in modern art needs no discussion.

   I wish to offer another example of the same phenomenon
which is instructive since it has nothing to do with the antithesis
of representative and expressionistic, objective and abstract art.
It is found in the history of the Japanese woodcut.

   Japanese pictures of the later period apply a certain kind of
perspective, known as parallel perspective, which is different from
central perspective as used in European art since the Renaissance.
It is well known that Dutch treatises on perspectives were intro-
duced into Japan in the late eighteenth century, and were eagerly
studied by the Ukiyoye (woodcut) masters. They adopted per-
spective as a powerful means to represent nature, but only to a
rather subtle limit. While European painting uses central per-
spective where the picture is conceived from a focal point and
consequently parallels converge in the distance, the Japanese
only accepted paraUel perspective; i.e., a way of proj˘Ction where
the focal point is in the infinite, and hence padUels do not
converge. We may be sure that this was not lack of skill in those
eminent Japanese artists who, like Hokusai and Hiroshige, later
exerted a profound influence on modern European art. They
certainly would have found no difficulty to adopt an artistic
means which even was handed to them ready-made. Rather we
may conjecture that they felt central perspective, dependent on
the standpoint of the observer, to be contingent and accidental
and not representing reality since it changes as the observer
moves from one place to another. In a similar way, the Japanese
artists never painted shadows. This, of course, does not mean that
they did not see shadow or go into the shade when the sun was
burning. However, they did not wish to paint it; for the shadow
does not belong to the reality of things. but is only changing
appearance.

   So the categories of artistic creation seem to be dependent on
the culture in question. It is well known that Spengler has ex-
panded this thesis to include cognitive categories. According to
him, th~ so-called a priori contains, besides a small number of
universaUy human and logically necessary forms of thinking, also
forms of thinking that are universal and necessary not for hu-
manity as a whole but only for the particular civilization in
234  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

question. So there are various and different "styles of cognition,"
characteristic of certain groups of human beings. Spengler does
not deny the universal validity of the formal laws of logic or
of the empirical verites de fait. He contends, however, the rela-
tivity of the contentual a prioris in science and philosophy. It is
in this sense that Spengler states the relativity of mathematics and
mathematical science. The mathematical formulae as such carry
logical necessity; but their visualizable interpretation which gives
them meaning is an expression of the "soul" of the civilization
which has created them. In this way, our scientific world picture
is only of relative validity. Its fundamental concepts, such as the
infinite space, force, energy, motion, etc., are an expression of
Ollr occidental type of mind, and do not hold for the world
picture of other civilizations.

   The analysis upon which Spengler's cultural relativism of the
categories is mainly based is his famous antithesis of Apollonian
and Faustian man. According to him, the primeval symbol of the
Apollonian mind of antiquity is the material and bodily existence
of individuals; that of the Faustian mind of the occident is infinite

space. Thus "space," for the Greeks, is the me on, that which is

not. Consequently, Apollonian mathematics is a theory of visual-
izable magnitudes, culminating in stereometry and geometric
construction which, in occidental mathematics, is a rather incon-
sequential elementary topic. Occidental mathematics, governed
by the primeval symbol of the infinite space, in contrast, is a
theory of pure relations, culminating in differential calculus, the
geometry of many-dimensional spaces, etc., which, in their un-
visualizability, would have been completely inconceivable to
the Greeks.

   A second antithesis is that of the static character of Greek,
and the dynamic character of occidental thought. Thus, for the
Greek physicist, an atom was a miniature plastic body; for
occidental physics, it is a center of energy, radiating actions into
an infinite space. Connected with this is the meaning of time.
Greek physics did not contain a time dimension, and this is at
the basis of its being a statics. Occidental physics is deeply con-
cerned with the time course of events, the notion of entropy
being probably the deepest conception in the system. From the
concern with time further follows the historical orientation of the
occidental mind expressed in the dominating influence of the
The Relativity of Categories  265

dock, in the biography of the individual, in the enormous per-
spective of "world history" from historiography to cultural his-
tory to anthropology, biological evolution, geological history, and
finally astronomical history of the universe. Again, the same con-
trast is manifest in the conception of the mind. Static Greek psy-
(:hology imagines a harmonic soul-body whose "parts," according
to Plato, are reason (logistikan), emotion (thymoeides), and
t:athexis (epithymetikan)_ Dynamic occidental psychology im-
agines a soul-space where pyschological forces are interacting.

   Taking exception from Spengler's metaphysics and intuitive
method, and disregarding questionable details, it will be difficult
to deny that his conception of the cultural relativity of categories
is essentially correct. It suffices to remember the first lines of the
Iliad, telling of the heroes of the Trojan war autoits te helaria
teuche kynessin, that their selves were given a prey to the hounds
and birds, the "self" being essentially the body or soma. Compare
this with Descartes' cogito ergo sum-and the contrast between
Apollonian and Faustian mind is obvious.

   While the German philosophers of history were concerned ~ith
the small number of high cultures (Hochkulturen), it is the
hallmark and merit of modern and, in particular, American
anthropology to take into account the entire field of human
"cultures" including the multiplicity exhibited by primitive
peoples. So the theory of cultural relativism wins a broader basis
but it is remarkable that the conclusions reached are very similar
to those of the German philosophers. In particular, the Whorfian
thesis is essentially identical with the Spenglerian-the one based
upon the linguistics of primitive tribes, the other on a general
view of the few high cultures of history.4

   So it appears well established that the categories of cognition
depend, first, on biological factors, and secondly, on cultural
factors. A suitable formulation perhaps can be given in the
following way.

   Our perception is essentially determined by our specifically
human, psychophysical organization. This is essentially von
Uexkiill's thesis. Linguistic, and cultural categories in general,
'will not change the potentialities of sensory experience. They
will, however, change apperception, i.e., which features of ex-
perienced reality are focused and emphasized, and which are
underplayed.
236  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

   There is nothing mysterious or particularly paradoxical in this
statement which, on the contrary, is rather trivial; nothing which
would justify the heat and passion which has often characterized
the dispute on the Whorfian, Spenglerian, and similar theses.
Suppose a histological preparation is studied under the micro-
scope. Any observer, if he is not color-blind, will perceive the same
picture, various shapes and colors, etc., as given by the application
of histological stains. However, what he actually sees, i.e., what is
his apperception (and what he is able to communicate) , depends
widely on whether he is an untrained or a trained observer. Where
for the layman there is only a chaos of shapes and colors, the
histologist sees cells with their various components, different
tissues, and signs of malignant growth. And even this depends
on his line of interest and training. A cytochemist will possibly
notice fine granulations in the cytoplasm of cells which represent
to him certain chemically defined inclusions; the pathologist
may, instead, entirely ignore these niceties, and rather "see" how
a tumor has infiltrated the organ. Thus what is seen depends
on our apperception, on our line of attention and interest which,
in turn, is determined by training, i.e., by linguistic symbols by
which we represent and summarize reality.

  It is equally trivial that the same object is something quite
different if envisaged from different viewpoints. The same table
is to the physicist an aggregate of electrons, protons, and neutrons,
to the chemist a composition of certain organic compounds, to
the biologist a complex of wood cells, to the art historian a
baroque object, to the economist a utility of certain money value,
etc. All these perspectives are of equal status, and none can claim
more absolute value than the other (d. von Bertalanffy, 1953b).
Or, take a slightly less trivial example. Organic forms can be
considered from different viewpoints. Typology considers them
as the expression of different plans of organization; the theory of
evolution as a product of a historical process; a dynamic mor-
phology as expression of a play of processes and forces for which
mathematical laws are sought (von Bertalanffy, 1941). Each of
these viewpoints is perfectly legitimate, and there is little point to
play one against the other.

   What is obvious in these special examples equally holds for
what traits of reality are noticed in our general world picture.
It is an important trend of the development of science that new
The Relativity of Categories  237

aspects, previously unnoticed, are "seen," i.e., come under the
focus of attention and apperception; and conversely, an important
obstacle that the goggles of a certain theoretical conception do
1I0t allow to realize phenomena which, in themselves, are perfectly
obvious. History of science is rich in examples of such kind. For
instance, the theoretical spectacles of a one-sided "cellular pa-
thology" simply did not allow one to see that there are regulative
relations in the organism as a whole which is more than a sum
or aggregate of cells; relations which were known to Hippocrates
and have found a happy resurrection in the modern doctrine of
hormones, of somatotypes and the like. The modern evolutionist,
guided by the theory of random mutation and selection, does
not see that an organism is obviously more than a heap of heredi-
tary characteristics or genes shuffled together by accident. The
mechanistic physicist did not see the so-called secondary qualities
like color, sound, taste, etc., because they do not fit into his
scheme of abstractions; although they are just as "real? 9-8. are
the supposedly basic "primary qualities" of mass, impenetrability,
motion and the like, the metaphysical status of which is equally
dubious, according to the testimony of modern physics.

   Another possible formulation of the same situation, but em-
phasizing another aspect, is this. Perception is universally human,
determined by man's psychophysical equipment. Conceptualiza-
tion is culture-bound because it depends on the symbolic systems
we apply. These symbolic systems are largely determined by
linguistic factors, the structure of the language applied. Technical
language, including the symbolism of mathematics, is, in the last
resort, an efflorescence of everyday language, and so will not be
independent of the structure of the latter. This, of course, does
not mean that the content of mathematics is "true" only within
a certain culture. It is a tautological system of hypothetico-
deductive nature, and hence any rational being accepting the
premises must agree to. all its deductions. But which aspects or
perspectives are mathematized depends on the cultural context.
It is perfectly possible that different individuals and cultures
have different predilections for choosing certain aspects and
neglecti~g others. 5 Hence, for example, the Greek's concern with
geometrical problems and the concern of occidental mathematics
with calculus, as emphasized by Spengler; hence the appearance
of. unorthodox fields of mathematics, such as topology, group
238  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

theory, game theory and the like, which do not fit into the popular
notion of mathematics as a "science of quantities"; hence the in-
dividual physicist's predilection for, say, "macroscopic" classical
thermodynamics or "microscopic" molecular statistics, for matrix
mechanics or wave mechanics to approach the same phenomena.
Or, speaking more generally, the analytic type of mind concerned
with what is called "molecular" interpretations, i.e., the resolu-
tion and reduction of phenomena to elementaristic components;
and the holistic type of mind concerned with "molar" interpre-
tations, i.e., interested in the laws that govern the phenomenon
as a whole. Much harm has been done in science by playing one
aspect against the other and so, in the elementaristic approach,
to neglect and deny obvious and most important characteristics;
or, in the holistic approach, to deny the fundamental importance
and necessity of analysis.

   It may be mentioned, in passing, that the relation between
language and world view is not unidirectional but reciprocal, a
fact which perhaps was not made sufficiently clear by \'\Thorf.
The structure of language seems to determine which traits of
reality are abstracted and hence what form the categories of
thinking take on. On the other hand, the world outlook de-
termines and forms the language.

   A good example is the evolution from classical to medieval
Latin. The Gothic world view has recreated an ancient language,
this being true for the lexical as well as the grammatical aspect.
Thus the scholastics invented hosts of words which are atrocities
from the standpoint of Cicero's language (as the humanists of
the Renaissance so deeply felt in their revivalistic struggle);
words introduced to cope whh abstract aspects foreign to the
corporeally-thinking Roman mind, like leonitas) quidditas and
the rest of them. Equally, although the superficial rules of gram-
mar were observed, the line of thinking and construction was
profoundly altered. This also applies to the rhetorical aspect,
as in the introduction of the end-rhyme in contrast to the classical
meters. Comparison, say, of the colossal lines of the Dies irae
with some Virgilian or Horatian stanza makes obvious not only
the tremendous gap between different "world-feelings" but the
determination of language by the latter as well.
'flte Relativity of Categories                          ~9

The Perspectivistic View

Having indicated the biological and cultural relativity of the

categories of experience and cognition, we can, on the other

hand, also indicate the limits of this relativity, and thus come

10 the third topic stated in the beginning.

Relativism has often been formulated to express the purely

mnventional and utilitarian character of knowledge, and with

the emotional background of its ultimate futility. We can, how-

ever, easily see that such consequence is not implied.

A suitable starting point for such discussion are the views on

human knowledge expressed by von Uexkiill in connection with

his Umweltlehre which we have discussed earlier. According to
him, the world of human experience and knowledge is one of

I he innumerable ambients of the organisms, in no way singular as

mmpared to that of the sea urchin, the fly or the dog. Even the

world of physics, from the electrons and atoms up to galaxies,
is a merely human product, dependent upon ~h$/flsychophysical

organization of the human species.           .

Such conception, however, appears to be incorrect. This may

be shown in view of the levels both of experience and of abstract

thinking, of everyday life and of science.

As far as direct experience is concerned, the categories of

perception as determined by the biophysiological organization of

the species concerned cannot be completely "wrong," fortuitous

and arbitrary. Rather they must, in a certain way and to a certain

extent, correspond to "reality"-whatever this means in a meta-

physical sense. Any organism, man included, is not a mere spec-

tator, looking at the world scene and hence free to adopt
.~pectades, however distorting, such as the whims of God, of

biological evolution, of the "soul" of culture, or of language

have put on his metaphorical nose. Rather he is a reactor and

actor in the drama. The organism has to react to stimuli coming

from outside, according to its innate psychophysical equipment.

There is a latitude in what is picked up as a stimulus, signal

and dlaracteristic in UexkiiIl's sense. However, its perception

must allow the animal to find its way in the world. This would

be impos$ible if the categories of experience, such as space, time,

substarice, causality, were entirely deceptive. The categories of
240  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

experience have arisen in biological evolution, and have con-
tinually to justify themselves in the struggle for existence. If they
would not, in some way, correspond to reality, appropriate reac-
tion would be impossible, and such organism would quickly be
eliminated by selection.

   Speaking in anthropomorphic terms: A group of schizophrenics
who share their illusions may get along with each other pretty
well; they are, however, utterly unfit to react and adapt them-
selves to real outside situations, and this is precisely the reason
why they are put into the asylum. Or, in terms of Plato's simile:
the prisoners in the cave do not see the real things but only their
shadows; but if they are not only looking at the spectacle, but
have to take part in the performance, the shadows must, in some
way, be representative of the real things. It seems to be the most
serious shortcoming of classic occidental philosophy, from Plato
to Descartes and Kant, to consider man primarily as a spectator,
as ens cogitans, while, for biological reasons, he has essentially
to be a performer, an ens agens in the world he is thrown in.

   Lorenz (1943) has convincingly shown that the "a priori"
forms of experience are of essentially the same nature as the
innate schemata of instinctive behavior, following which animals
respond to companions, sexual partners, offspring or parents,
prey or predators, and other outside situations. They are based
upon psychophysiological mechanisms, such as the perception of
space is based on binocular vision, parallax, the contraction of
the ciliary muscle, apparent increase or decrease in size of an
approaching or receding object, etc. The "a priori" forms of
intuition and categories are organic functions, based upon cor·
poreal and even machine-like structures of the sense organs and
the nervous system, which have evolved as adaptations in the
millions of years of evolution. Hence they are fitted to the "real"
world in exactly the same way and for the same reason, as the
equjne hoof is fitted to the steppe terrain, the fin of the fish to
the water. It is a preposterous anthropomorphism to assume that
the human forms of experience are the only possible ones, valid
for any rational being. On the other hand, the conception of the
forms of experience as an adaptive apparatus, proved in millions
of years of struggle for existence, guarantees that there is a suffi·
cient correspondence between "appearance" and "reality." Any
stimulus is experienced not as it is but as the organism reacts
'['he Relativity of Categories  2'41

to it, and thus the world-picture is determined by psychophysical
organization. However, where a paramecium reacts with its
phobotactic reaction, the human observer, though his world
outlook is quite different, also actually finds an obstacle when he
tlses his microscope. Similarly, it is well possible to indicate which
I races of experience correspond to reality, and which, comparable
to the colored fringes in the field of a microscope which is not
achromatically corrected, do not. So Pilate's question, "What is
Truth," is to be answered thus: Already the fact that animals and
human beings are still in existence, proves that their forms of
experience correspond, to some degree, with reality.

   In view of this, it is possible to define what is meant by the
intentionally loose expression used above, that experience must
correspond "in a certain way" to "reality whatever this ~9ans."
It is not required that the categories of experience futry cor-
respond to the real universe, and even less that they represent
it completely. It suffices-and that is Uexkilll's thesis-that a
rather small selection of stimuli is used as guiding signals. As
for the connections of these stimuli, i.e., the categories of experi-
ence, they need not mirror the nexus of real events but must, with
a certain tolerance allowed, be isomorphic to it. For the biological
reasons mentioned above, experience cannot be completely
"wrong" and arbitrary; but, on the' other hand, it is sufficient
that a certain degree of isomorphism exists between the experi-
enced world and the "real" world, so that the experience can
guide the organism in such way as to preserve its existence.

   Again, to use a simile: The "red" sign is not identical with the
various, hazards it indicates, oncoming cars, trains, crossing
pedestrians, etc. It suffices, however, to indicate them, and thus
"red" is isomorphic to "stop," "green" isomorphic to "go."

   Similarly, perception and experience categories need not
mirror the "real" world; they must, however, be isomorphic to
it to such degree as to allow orientation and thus survival.

   But these deductive requirements are precisely what we actually
find. The popular forms of intuition and categories, such as space,
time, matter and causality, work well enough in the world of
"mediu~ dimensions" to which the human animal is biologically
adapted. Here, Newtonian mechanics and classical physics, as
based upon these visualizable categories, are perfectly satisfactory.
They break down, however, if we enter universes to which the
242  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

human organism is not adapted. This is the case, on the one
hand, in atomic dimensions, and in cosmic dimensions on the
other.

   Coming now to the world of science, Uexkiill's conception of
the physical universe as but one of the innumerable biological
ambients, is incorrect or at least incomplete. Here a most re-
markable trend comes in which may be called the progressive
de-anthropomorphization of science (von Bertalanffy, 1937, 1953b).
It appears that this process of de-anthropomorphization takes
place in three major lines.

   It is an essential characteristic of science that it progressively
de-anthropomorphizes, that is, progressively eliminates those traits
which are due to specifically human experience. Physics neces-
sarily starts with the sensory experience of the eye, the ear, the
thermal sense, etc., and thus builds up fields like optics, acoustics,
theory of heat, which correspond to the realms of sensory experi-
ence. Soon, however, these fields fuse into such that do not have
any more relation to the "visualizable" or "intuitable": Optics
and electricity fuse into electromagnetic theory, mechanies and
theory of heat into statistical thermodynamics, etc.

   This evolution is connected with the invention of artificial
sense-organs and the replacement of the human observer by the
recording instrument. Physics, though starting with everyday
experience, soon transgresses it by expanding the universe o~
experience through artificial sense organs. Thus, for example,
instead of seeing only visible light with a wave length between
38() and 760 millimicra, the whole range of electromagnetic
radiation, from shortest cosmic rays up to radio waves of some
kilometers wave length, is disclosed.

   Thus it is one function of science to expand the observable.
It is to be emphasized that, in contrast to a mechanistic view,
we do not enter another metaphysical realm with this expansion.
Rather the things surrounding us in everyday experience, the
cells seen in a microscope, the large molecules observed by the
electron microscope, and the elementary particles "seen," in a
still more indirect and intricate way, by their traces in a Wilson
chamber, are not of a different degree of reality. It is a mechan-
istic superstition to believe that atoms and molecules (speaking
with Alice in the Wonderland of Physics) are "realer" than
The Relativity of Categories

apples, stones and tables. The ultimate particles of phYNkN are
not a metaphysical reality behind observation; they nre an ex-
pansion of what we observe with our natural senses, by way of
introducing suitable artificial sense organs.

   In any way, however, this leads to an elimination of the
limitations of experience as imposed by the specifically human
psychophysical organization, and, in this sense, to the de-
anthropomorphization of the world picture.

   A second aspect of this development is what is called the con-
vergence of research (d. Bavink, 1949). The constants of physics
have often been considered as only conventjenal means for the
most economic description of nature. Tht:jprogress of research,
however, shows a different picture. First, natural constants such
as the mechanical equivalent of heat or the charge of electrons
vary widely in the observation of individual observers. Then,
with the refinement of techniques, a "true" value is approached
asymptotically so that consecutive determinations alter the estab-
lished value only in progressively smaller digits of decimals. Not
only this: Physical constants such as Loschmidt's number and
its like are established not by one method but perhaps by 20
methods which are completely independent of each other. In
this way, they cannot be conceived as being simply conventions
for describing phenomena economically; they represent certain
aspects of reality, independent of biological, theoretical or cul-
tural biases. It is indeed one of the most important occupations
of natural science thus to verify its findings in mutually in-
dependent ways.

   However, perhaps the most impressive aspect of progressive
de-anthropomorphization is the third. First, the so-called second-
ary qualities go, that is, color, sound, smell, taste disappear from
the physical world picture since they are determined by the
so-called specific energy of the diverse and specifically human
senses. So, in the world picture of classical physics, only the
primary qualities such as mass, impenetrability, extension, etc.,
are left which, psychophysically, are characterized as being the
common ground of visual, tactual, acoustical experience. Then,
however, these forms of intuition and categories also are elimi-
nated as being all-too-human. Even Euclidean space and
Newtonian time of classical physics, as was noted previously, are
244  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

not identical with the space and time of direct experience; they
already are constructs of physics. This, of course, is true even
more of the theoretical structures of modern physics.

   Thus, what is specific of our human experience is progressively
eliminated. What eventually remains is only a system of mathe-
matical relations.

   Some time ago it was considered a grave objection against the
theory of relativity and quantum theory that it became increas-
ingly "unvisualizable," that its constructs cannot be represented
by imaginable models. In truth, however, this is a proof that
the system of physics detaches itself from the bondage of our
specifically human sensory experience; a pledge that the system
of physics in its consummate form-leaving it undecided whether
this is attained or even is attainable at all-does not belong to
the human ambient (umwelt in Uexkiill's sense) any more but
is universally committal.

   In a way, progressive de-anthropomorphization is like
Muenchhausen pulling himself out of the quagmire on his own
pigtaiL It is, however, possible because of a unique property of
symbolism. A symbolic system, an algorithm, such as that of
mathematical physics, wins a life of its own as it were. It becomes
a thinking machine, and once the proper instructions are fed in,
the machine runs by itself, yielding unexpected results that
surpass the initial amount of facts and given rules, and are thus
unforeseeable by the limited intellect who originally has created
the machine. In this sense, the mechanical chess player can out-
play its maker (Ashby, 1952a) , i.e., the results of the automatized
symbolism transcend the original input of facts and instructions.
This is the case in any algorithmic prediction, be it a formal
deduction on any level of mathematical difficulty or a physical
prediction like that of still unknown chemical elements or planets
(d. von Bertalanffy, 1956a). Progressive de-anthropomorphization,
that is, replacement of direct experience by a self-running al-
gorithmic system, is one aspect of this state of affairs.

   Thus, the development of physics naturally depends on the
psychophysical constitution of its creators. If man would not
perceive light but radium or x-rays which are invisible to us,
not only the human ambient but also the development of physics
would have been different. But in a similar way, as we have
discovered, by means of suitable apparatus and supplementing
The Relativity of Categories  !45

our sensory experience, x-rays and all the range of electromagnetic
radiations, the same would be true of beings with an entirely
different psychophysical constitution. Suppose there are intelligent
beings or "angels" on a planet of the Sirius who perceive only
x-rays; they would have detected, in a corresponding way, those
wave lengths that mean visible light to us. But not only this:
The Sirius angels would possibly calculate in quite different
systems of symbols and theories. However, since the system of
physics, in its consummate state, does not contain anything
human any more, and the corresponding thing wourd be true
of any system of physics, we must conclude that tlWse physics,
although different in their symbolic systems, have the same con-
tent, that is, the mathematical relations of one physics could be
translated by means of a suitable "vocabulary" and "grammar"
into those of the other.

   This speculation is not quite utopian, but, to a certain extent,
seen in the actual development of physics. Thus, classical thermo-
dynamics and molecular statistics are different "languages" using
different abstractions and mathematical symbolisms, but the state-
ments of one theory can readily be translated into the other.
This even has quite timely implications; thermodynamics and
the modern theory of information obviously are similarly isomor-
phic systems, and the elaboration of a complete "vocabulary"
for translation is in progress.

   1Ł, in the sense just indicated, the system of physics in its ideal
state, which can be approached only asymptotically, is absolute,
we must, however, not forget another and in some way antithetical
aspect. What traits of reality we grasp in our theoretical system
is arbitrary in the epistemological sense, and determined by
biological, cultural and probably linguistic factors.

   This, again, has first a trivial meaning. The Eskimos are said
to have some 30 different names for "snow," doubtless because
it is vitally important for them to make fine distinctions while,
for us, differences are negligible. Conversely, we call machines
which are only superficially different, by the names of Fords,
Cadillacs, Pontiac5 and 50 forth, while for the Eskimos they
would be pretty much the same. The same, however, is true
in a nOh-trivial sense, applying to general categories of thinking.

   It would be perfectly possible that rational beings of another
structure choose quite different traits and aspects of reality for
246  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

building theoretical systems, systems of mathematics and physics.
Our main concern, probably determined by the grammar of
Indo-European language, is with measurable qualities, isolable
units, and the like. Our physics neglects the so-called primary
qualities; they come in only rudimentarily in the system of
physics or in certain abstractions of physiological optics like the
color cycle or triangle. 6 Similarly, our way of thinking is con-
spicuously unfit for dealing with problems of wholeness and
form. Therefore, it is only with the greatest effort that holistic
as contrasted to elementalistic traits can be included-although
they are not less "real." The way of thinking of occidental physics
leaves us on the spot if we are confronted with problems of form
-hence this aspect, predominant in things biological, is but a
tremendous embarrassment to physics.

   It may well be that quite different forms of science, of mathe-
matics in the sense of hypothetico-deductive systems, are possible
for beings who don't carry our biological and linguistic con-
straints; mathematical "physics" that are much more fit than
ours to deal with such aspects of reality.

   The same seems even to be true of mathematical logic. So far,
it seems to cover only a relatively small segment of what can
easily be expressed in vernacular or mathematical language. The
Aristotelian logic, for millenia considered as giving the general
and supreme laws of reasoning, actually covers only tlie extremely
small field of subject-predicate relations. The all-or-none concepts
of traditional logic fall short of continuity concepts basic for
mathematical analysis (d. von Neumann, 1951, p. 16). Probably
it is only a very small field of possible deductive reasoning which
IS axiomatized even by the efforts of modern logicians.

   It may be that the structure of our logic is essentially deter-
mined by the structure of our central nervous system. The latter
is essentially a digital computer, since the neurons work accord-
ing to the all-or-nothing law of physiology in terms of yes-orono
decisions. To this corresponds the Heraclitean principle of our
thinking in opposites, our bivalent yes-orono logic, Boolean al-
gebra, and the binary system of numbers7 to which also the
practically more convenient decadic system can be reduced (and
is actually reduced in modern calculating machines). Supposing
that a nervous system were constructed not after the digital type
but as an analog computer (such as, e.g., a slide rule), it may
The Relativity of Categories  '247

be imagined that a quite different logic of continuity, in contrast
to our yes-or-no logic, would arise.

   Thus we come to a view which may be called perspectivism
(d. von Bertalanffy, 1953b). In contrast to the "reductionist" thesis
that physical theory is the only one to which all possible science
and all aspects of reality eventually should be reduced, we take
a more modest view. The system of physics is committal for any
rational being in the sense explained; that is, by a process of de-
anthropomorphization it approaches a representation of certain
relational aspects of reality. It is essentially a symbolic ~1g6iithm
suitable for the purpose. However, the choice of the symbolisms
we apply and consequently the aspects of reality we represent,
depend on biological and cultural factors. There is nothing
singular or particularly sacred about the system of physics. Within
our own science, other symbolic systems, such as those of tax-
onomy, of genetics or the history of art, are equally legitimate
although they are far from having the same degree of precision.
And in other cultures of human beings and among non-human
intelligences, basically different kinds of "science" may be pos-
sible which would represent other aspects of reality as well or
even better than does our so-called scientific world picture.

   There is, perhaps, a deep-lying reason why our mental repre-
sentation of the universe always mirrors only certain aspects or
perspectives of reality. Our thinking, at least in occidental but
possibly in any human language, is essentially in terms of op-
posites. As Heraclitus has it, we are thinking in terms of warm
and cold, black and white, day and night, life and death, being
and becoming. These are naive formulations. But it appears that
also the constructs of physics are such opposites, and that for
this very reason prove inadequate in view of reality, certain rela-
tions of which are expressed in the formulas of theoretical physics.
The popular antithesis between motion and rest becomes mean-
ingless in the theory of relativity. The antithesis of mass and
energy is superseded by Einstein's conservation law which ac-
counts for their mutual transformation. Corpuscle and wave are
both legitimate and complementary aspects of physical reality
which, in certain phenomena and respects, is to be described in
one way, in others in the second. The contrast between structure
and process breaks down in the atom as well as in tlle living
organism whose structure is at the same time the expression and
248  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

the bearer of a continuous flow of matter and energy. Perhaps
the age-old problem of body and mind is of a similar nature,
these being different aspects, wrongly hypostatized, of one and
the same reality_

   All our knowledge, even if de-anthropomorphized, only mirrors
certain aspects of reality. If what has been said is true, reality
is what Nicholas of Cusa (d. von Bertalanffy, 1928b) called the
coincidentia oppositorum. Discoursive thinking always represents
only one aspect of ultimate reality, called God in Cusa's ter-
minology; it can never exhaust its infinite manifoldness. Hence
ultimate reality is a unity of opposites; any statement holds from
a certain viewpoint only, has only relative validity, and must be
supplemented by antithetic statements from opposite points of
view.

   Thus, the categories of our experience and thinking appear to
be determined by biological as well as cultural factors. Secondly,
this human bondage is stripped by a process of progressive de-
anthropomorphization of our world picture. Thirdly, even though
de-anthropomorphized, knowledge only mirrors certain aspects or
facets of reality. However, fourthly, ex omnibus partibus relucet
totum, again to use Cusa's expression: Each such aspect has,
though only relative, truth. This, it seems, indicates the limita-
tion as well as the dignity of human knowledge.

Notes

1. This and other examples in Whorl's argument are criticized by
    Whatmough (19M). "As Brugmann showed (Syntax des einfachen
    Satzes, 1925, pp. 17-24), fulget, pluit, tonat are simple old ti-stems
     (nouns 'lightning there, rain there, thunder there') and Whorf was
    quite wrong when he said that tonat (he used that· very word) is
    structurally and logically unparalleled in Hopi." Similarly, "the
    Hopi for 'prepare: we are told, is 'to try-for, to practise-upon: But
    this is exactly prae-paro." "It will not do to say that Hopi physics
    could not have had concepts such as space, velocity, and mass, or
    that they would have been very different from ours. Hopi has no
    physics because the Hopi are hindered by taboo or magic from
    experimental investigation." Although one has to surrender to the
    linguist's authority, it seems amply demonstrated that the style of
    thinking is different in the several civilizations even though Whorl's
    supposition that this is more or less solely due to linguistic factors,
    is open to critieism.
The Relativity of Categories

2. It is interesting to note that exactly the same viewpoint was stated
    by Lorenz (1943) in terms of the biological determination of
    categories: "The terms which language has formed for the highest
    functions of our rational thinking stilI bear so dearly the stamp
    of their origin that they might be taken from the 'professional
    language' of a chimpanzee. We 'win insight' into intricate connec-
     tions, just as the ape into a maze of branches, we found no better
    expression for our most abstract ways to achieve goals than 'method;
    meaning detour. Our tactile space still has, as it were from time to
    non-jumping lemurs, a particular preponderance over the visual.
    Hence we have 'grasped' (erfasst) a 'connection' (Zusammenhang)
    only if we can 'comprehend' (begreifen, i.e., seize) it_ Also the
    notion of object (Gegenstand, that which stands against us) origi-
    nated in the haptic perception of space.... Even time is represented,
    for good or wrong, in terms of the visualizable model of space
     (p. 344) .... Time is absolutely unvisualizable and is, in our
    categorical thinking, made visualizable always [?; perhaps a Western
    prejudice, L. v. B.] only by way of spatio-temporal processes....
    The 'course of time' is symbolized, linguistically and certainly also
    conceptually, by motion in space (the stream of time). Even our
    prepositions 'before' and 'after; our nouns 'past, present and future'
    originally have connotations representing spatio-temporal configura-
    tions of motion. It is hardly possible to eliminate from them the
    element of motion in space" (pp. 351 ff.).

3. As far as can be seen, this simple demonstration of the non-
    Euclidean structure of the visual space was first indicated by von
    Bertalanffy (1937, p. 155), while "curious enough, no reference
    whatever is found in the literature on the physiology of perception"
     (Lorenz, 1943. p. 335).

4. An excellent analysis on the culture-dependence of perception, cogni-
    tion, affect, evaluation, unconscious processes, normal and abnormal
    behavior, etc., is given in Kluckhohn (1954). The reader is referred
    to this paper for ample anthropological evidence.

5. I find that Toynbee (1954, pp. 699 ff.) , in his otherwise not overly
    friendly comment on Spengler's theory of types of mathematical
    thinking, arrives at an identical formulation. He speaks of a different
    "penchant" of civilizations for certain types of mathematical reason-
    ing, which is the same as the above-used notion of "predilection."
    The present writer's interpretation of Spengler was, in the essentials,
    given in 1924, and he has seen no reason to change it.

6. This perhaps can lead to a fairer interpretation of Goethe's "Theory
    of Colors." Goethe's revolt against Newtonian optics which is a
    scandal and completely devious within the history of occidental
    physics, can be understood in this way: Goethe, an eminently
    eidetic and intuitive mind, had the feeling (which is quite correct)
    that Newtonian optics purposely neglects, and abstracts from, exactly
    those qualities which are most prominent in sensory experience. His
250  GENERAL SYSTE-M THEORY

    Farbenlehre, then, is an attempt to deal with those aspects of reality
    which are not covered by conventional physics; a theoretical enter-
    prise which remained abortive.
7. Notice the theological motive in Leibniz's invention of the binary
    system. It represented Creation since any number can be produced
    by a combination of "something" (1) and "nothing" (0). But has
    this antithesis metaphysical reality, or is it but an expression of
    linguistic habits and of the mode of action of our nervous system?
        Appendix: The Meaning
         and Unity of Science*

   At a time of universal crises such as we are experiencing today,
the question of the meaning and purpose of natural sciences
arises. That science is to be blamed for the miseries of our time
is a reproach frequently heard; it is believed that men have been
enslaved by machines, by technology at large, and eventually have
been driven into the carnage of the world wars. We do not
haye the power to substantially influence the course of history;
our only choice is to recognize it or to be overrun by it.

   A renowned scholar, Professor Dr. Ludwig von Bertalanffy,
addressed a crowded audience in the Department of Forensic
Medicine within the framework, of a scientific lecture series spon-
sored by FaST (Freie asterreichische Studentenschaft). He
spoke on vital present-day questions in connection with the
problem of the special position of man in nature.

   In contrast to the animal which has an "ambient" (Umwelt)
determined by its organization, man himself creates his world,
which we call human culture. Among the presuppositions for its
evolution are two factors, language and formation of concepts,
which are closely related to each other. "Language" as appeal or
command can already be observed in the animal world; examples
for this are the singing of birds, the warning whistle of moun-
tain chamois, etc. Language as representation and communica-

   "Review of a lecture at the University of Vienna, 1947.
252  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

tion of facts, however, is man's monopoly. Language, in the
wider sense of the word, comprises not only oral speech but also
script and the symbolic system of mathematics. These are systems
not of inherited but of freely created and traditional symbols.
First of all, this explains the specificity of human history in con-
trast to biological evolution: Tradition in contrast to hereditary
mutations which occur only over a long period of time. Secondly,
physical trial-and-error, largely characteristic of animal behavior,
is replaced by mental experimentation-i.e., one with conceptual
symbols. For this reason, true goal-directedness becomes possible.
Goal-directedness and teleology in a metaphorical sense-Le.,
regulation of happenings in the sense of maintenance, production
and reproduction of organic wholeness, is a general criterion of
life. True purposiveness, however, implies that actions are carried
out with knowledge of their goal, of their future final results;
the conception of the future goal does already exist and influences
present actions. This applies to primitive actions of everyday
life as well as to the highest achievements of the human intellect
in science and technology. Furthermore, the symbolic world
created by men gains a life of its own, as it were; it becomes more
intelligent than its creator. The symbol system of mathematics,
for example, is embodied in an enormous thinking machine
which, fed with a statement, produces in return a solution on
the basis of a fixed process of concatenation of symbols, which
could hardly be anticipated. On the other hand, however, this
symbolic world becomes a power which can lead to grave dis-
turbances. If it comes to a conflict between the symbolic world-
which in human society has emerged in moral values and social
conventions-and biological drives, which are out of place in
cultural surroundings, the individual is confronted with a situa-
tion prone to psychoneurosis. As a social power the symbolic
world, which makes man human, at the same time produces the
sanguinary course of history. In contrast to the naive struggle for
existence of organisms, human history is largely dominated by
the struggle of ideologies-i.e., of symbolisms, which are the more
dangerous, the more they disguise primitive instincts. We cannot
revoke the course of events, which has produced what we call
"man"; it is up to him, however, whether he applies his power of
foresight for his enhancement or for his own annihilation. In
this sense the question of what course the scientific world-
Appendix: The Meaning and Unity of Science  253

conception will take is at the same time a question of the destiny
of mankind.

   A survey of scientific developments reveals a strange phenom-
enon. Independently of each other, similaT geneml pTinciples
start to take shape in the various fields of science. As such, the
lecturer emphasized especially the aspects of organization, whole-
ness, and dynamics, and sketched their influence in the various
sciences. In physics, these conceptions are characteristic of modern
in contrast to classical physics. In biology, they are emphasized by
the "oTganismic conception" represented by the lecturer. Similar
conceptions are found in medicine, psychology (gestalt psychology,
theory of stratification) and in modem philosophy.

   This results in a tremendous perspective, the prospect of a
unity of the world-view hitherto unknown. How does this unity
of general principles come about? Dr. von Bertalanffy answers·
this question by demanding a new field in science which he calls
"General System Theory" and which he attempted to found. This
is a logico-mathematical field, whose task is the formulation- and
derivation of those general principles that are applicable to
"systems" in generaL In this way, exact formulations of terms
such as wholeness and sum, differentiation, progressive mechani-
zation, centralization, hierarchical order, finality and equifinality,
e~c., become possible, terms which occur in all sciences dealing with
"systems" and imply their logical homology.

   Last century's mechanistic world picture was closely related to
the domination of the machine, the theoretical view of living
beings as machines and the mechanization of man himself. Con-
cepts, however, which are coined by modern scientific develop-
ments, have their most obvious exemplification in life itself. Thus,
there is a hope that the new world concept of science is an
expression of the development toward a new stage in human
culture.
                                       REFERENCES

 ACKOFF, R. L., "Games, Decisions and Organization," General Sys-
      tems, 4 (1959), 145-150.

- - - , "Systems, Organizations, and Interdisciplinary Research," Gen-
      eral Systems, 5 (1960), 1-8.

ADAMS, H., The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma, New York,
       Macmillan, 1920.

 ADOLPH, E.F., "Quantitative Relations in the Physiological Consti-
       tution of Mammals," Science, 109 (1949), 579-585.

AFANASJEW, W. G., "Ober Bertalanffy's 'organismische' Konzeption,"
      Deutsche Zeitschrift fur Philosophie, 10 (1962), 1033-1046.

ALEX.I\NDER, FRANZ, The Western }yfind in Transition: An Eye.
      witness Story, New York, Random House, 1960.

ALLESCH, G. J. von, Zur Nichteuklidischen Struktur des phdmomenalen
      Raumes, Jena, Fischer, 1931.

ALLPORT, FLOYD, Theories of Perception and the Concept of
      Structure, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1955.

ALLPORT, GORDON W., Becoming: Basic Considerations for a
      Psychology of Personality, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1955.

- - - , "European and American Theories of Personality, Perspectives
      in Personality Theory, Henry David and Helmut von Bracken,
      editors, London, Tavistock, 1957.

- - - , "The Open System in Personality Theory," Journal of Ab-
      normal and Social Psychology, 61 (1960), 301-310. (Reprinted in
      Personality and Social Encounter, Boston, Beacon Press, 1960).

- - - , Pattern and Growth in Personality, New York, Holt, Rinehart
      & Winston, 1961.

ANDERSON, HAROLD, "Personality Growth: Conceptual Considera-
      tions,'" Perspectives in Personality Theory, Henry David· and
      Helmut von Bracken, editors, London, Tavistock, 1957.

ANON., "Crime and Criminology," The Sciences, 2 (1963). 1--4.
ANSCHOTZ, G., Psychologie, Hamburg, Meiner, 1953.

APPLEBY, LAWRENCE, J. SCHER and J. CUMMINGS, editors,

      Chronic Schizophrenia, Glencoe, Ill., The Free Press, 1960.
ARIETI, SILVANO, Interpretation of Schizophrenia, New York,

      Robert Brunner, 1955.
- - - . "Schizophrenia," American Handbook of Psychiatry. S. Arieti,

      editor. vol. 1, New York, Basic Books, 1959.
- - - , "The Microgeny of Thought and Perception," Arch. of Gen.

      Psychiat. 6 (1962), 454--468.
- - - , "Contributions to Cognition from Psychoanalytic Theory,"

      Science and Psychoanalysis, G. Masserman (ed.) , Vol. 8, New
      York, Grune & Strutton, 1965.

ARROW, K. J., "Mathematical Models in the Social Sciences," Gen-

      eral Systems, I (1956), 29--47.
References  ~55

. ASHBY, W. R., "Can a Mechanical Chess-Player Outplay its Designer?"
       British Journal of Philos. Science, 3 (1952a), 44.

 - - - , Design for a Brain, London, Chapman &: Hall, 1952b.
 - - - , "General Systems Theory as a New Discipline," General

       Systems, 3 (1958a), 1-6.
 - - - , An Introduction to Cybernetics, 3rd. edition, New York, John

       Wiley &: Sons, 1958b.
 - - - , "Principles of the Self-Organizing System," Principles of Self-

       Organization, H. von Foerster and G. W. Zopf, Jr., editors, New
       York, Pergamon Press, 1962.
 - - - , "Constraint Analysis of Many-Dimensional Relations," Tech-
       nical Report #2, May 1964, Urbana, Electrical Engineering Re-
       search Laboratory, University of Illinois.
 ATTNEAVE, F., Application of Information Theory to Psychology,
       New York, Holt, Rinehart &: Winston, 1959.
 BACKMAN, G., "Lebensdauer und Entwicklung," Roux' Arch., 140
       (1940), 90.
 BAVIN K, B., Ergebnisse und Probleme der N aturwissenschaften, 8th
       ed., Leipzig, Hirzel, 1944; 9th ed., Zurich, Hirzel, 1949.
 BAYLISS, L. E., Living Control Systems, San Francisco, Freeman, 1966.
 BEADLE, G. W., Genetics and Modern Biology, Philadelphia, Amer-
       ican Philosophical Society, 1963.
 BECKNER, M., The Biological Way of Thought, New York, Colum-
       bia University Press, 1959.
 BEER, S., "Below the Twilight Arch-A Mythology of Systems," General
       Systems, 5 (1960), 9-20.
 BEIER, W., Biophysik, 2 Aufi., Leipzig, Thieme, 1962.
 - - . - , Einfiihrung in die theoretische Biophysik, Stuttgart, Gustav
       Fischer, 1965.
 BELL, E., "Oogenesis," C. P. Raven, review, Science, 135 (1962), 1056.
 BENDMANN, A., "Die 'organismische Auffassung' Bertalanffys,"
       Deutsche Zeitschrift fur Philosophie, 1l(1963), 216-222.
 - - - , L. von BertalanfJys organismische AufJassung des Lebens in
       ihren philosophischen Konsequenzen, Jena, G. Fischer, 1967.
 BENEDICT, RUTH, Patterns of Culture, New York, (1934) Mentor
       Books, 1946.
 BENTLEY, A. F., "Kenetic Inquiry," Science, 112 (1950), 775.
 BERG, K., and K. W. OCKELMANN, "The Respiration of Fresh-
       water Snails," ]. Exp. Bioi., 36 (1959), 690-708.
 - - - , "On the Oxygen Consumption of Some Freshwater Snails,"
       Verh. Int. Ver. Limnol., 14 (1961), 1019-1022.
 BERLIN, SIR ISAIAH, Historical Inevitability, London, New York,
       Oxford University Press, 1955.
BERLYNE, D. E., "Recent Developments in Piaget's Work," Brit. J.
      of Educ. Psychol. 27 (1957), 1-12.

 - - - , Conflict, Arousal and Curiosity, New York, McGraw-Hill,
       1960.
256  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

BERNAL, J. D., Science in Hi.~tory, London, Watts, 1957.

BERTALANFFY, F. D., and C. LAU, "Cell Renewal," Int. Rev. Cytol.,
      13 (1962), 357-366.

BERTALANFFY, LUDWIG von, "Einftihrung in Spengler's Werk,"
      Literaturblatt Kolnische Zeitung (May, 1924).

- - - , Kritische Theorie der Formbildung, Berlin, Borntraeger, 1928a.
      English: Modern Theories of Development (1934), New York,
      Harper Torchbooks, 1962.

- - - , Nikolaus von Kues, Munich, G. Milller, 1928b.
- - - , Theoretische Biologie, Bd. J, II, Berlin, Borntraeger, 1932,

      1942 (2nd ed. Bern, A. Francke AG., 1951).
- - - , "Untersuchungen fiber die Gesetzlichkeit des Wachstums,"

      Roux' Archiv, 131 (1934),613-652.
- - - , Das Gefilge des Lebens, Leipzig, Teubner, 1937.
---, "II. A Quantitative Theory of Organic Growth," Human

      Biology 10 (1938), 181-213.
- - - , "Der Organismus als physikalisches System betrachtet," Die

      Naturwissenschaften, 28 (1940a), 521-531. Chapter 5.
- - - , "Untersuchungen liber die Gesetzlichkeit des Wachstums," III,

      Quantitative Beziehungen zwischen Darmoberflache und Korper-
      grosse bei Planaria Maculata," Roux' Arch., 140 (1940b), 81-89.
- - - , "Probleme einer dynamischen Morphologie,"· Biologia Gen-
      eralis, 15 (1941), 1-22.
- - - , "Das Weltbild der Biologie"; "Arbeit~kreis Biologie," Weltbild
      und Menschenbild, S. Moser, editor (Alpbacher Hochshulwochen
      1947), Salzburg, Tyrolia Verlag, 1948a.
- - - , "Das organische Wachs tum und seine Gesetzmassigkeiten,"
      Experientia (Basel), 4 (1948b).
- - - , Das biologische Weltbild, Bern, A. Francke AG, 1949a. English:
      Problems of Life, New York, Wiley, 1952; New York, Harper
      Torchbooks, 1960. Also in French, Spanish, Dutch, Japanese.
- - - , "Problems of Organic Growth," Nature, 163 (1949b), 156.
- - - , "Zu einer allgemeinen Systemlehre," Bliitter filr deutsche
      Ph ilosoph ie, 3/4 (1945), (Extract in Biologia Generalis, 19 (1949),
      114-129).
- - - , "The Theory of Open Systems in Physics and Biology,"
      Science, III (1950a) , 23-29.

- - - , "An Outline of General System Theory," Brit. J. Philos. Sci.

      1 (1950b), 139-164.
- - - , "Theoretical Models in Biology and Psychology," Theoretical

      Models and Personality Theory, D. Krech and G. S. Klein, editors,
      Durham, Duke University Press, 1952. .
- - - , Biophysik des Fliessgleichgewichts, translated by W. H. West-
      phal, Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1953a. (Revised edition with W. Beier
      and R. Laue in preparation) .

- - - , "Philosophy of Science in Scientific Education," Scient.
      Monthly, 77 (1953b), 233.
References  !57

- - - , "General System Theory." Main Currents in Modern Thought,
      ] 1 (1955a), 75-83. Chapter 2.

- - - , "An Essay on the Relativity of Categories," Philosophy of
      Science, 22 (I955b), 243-263. Chapter 10.

- - - , "A Biologist Looks at Human Nature," Scientific M.onthly,
      82 (1 956a) , 33-41. Reprinted in Contemporary. Readings in Psy-
      chology, R. S. Daniel, editor, 2nd edition, Boston, Houghton
      Mifflin Company, 1965. Also in Reflexes to Intelligence, A Reader

     in Clinical Psychology, S. J. Beck and H. B. Molish, editors, New

      York, Glencoe (Ill.): The Free Press, 1959.
- - - , "Some Considerations on Growth in its Physical and Mental

      Aspects," Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 3 (1956b), 13-23.
- - '-, The Significance of Psychotropic Drugs for a Theory of Psy-

      chosis, World Health Organization. AHP, 2, 1957a. (Mimeograph).
- - - , "Wachstum.'" Kilkenthal's Handb. d. Zoologie. Bd. 8. 4 (6),

      Berlin: De Gruyter, 1957b.
- - - , "Comments on Aggression," Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic.

      22 (1958), 50-57.

- - - , "Human Values in a Changing 'World," New Knowledge in
      Human Values, A. H. Maslow, editor, New York, Harper &
      Brothers, 1959.

---, "Some Biological Considerations on the Problem of Mental

    Illness," Chronic Schizophrenia, L. Appleby. J. Scher, and J.

      Cummings, editors, Glencoe (111.): The Free Press, I960a. Re-
      printed in Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 23 (1959), 41-51.
---, "Principles and Theory of Growth," Fundamental Aspects of
      Normal and Malignant Growth, W. W. Nowinski, editor, Amster-
     . dam, Elsevier, 1960b.
- - - , "General System Theory-A Critical Review," General Sys-
      tems, 7 (1962), 1-20. Chapter 4.
- - - , "The Mind-Body Problem: A New View," Psychosom. Med.,
      24 (1964a) 29-45.
---, "Basic Concepts in Quantitative Biology of Metabolism,"
      Quantitative Biology of Metabolism-First International Sympo-
      sium, A. Locker, editor. Helgoliinder wissenschaftliche Meeresun-
      tersuchungen, 9 (1964b). 5-37.
- - - , "The World of Science and the '\Vorld of Value," Teachers
      College Record, 65 (1964c), 496-507.
- - - , "On the Definition of the Symbol," Psychology and the Sym-

    bol: An Interdisciplinary Symposium, J. R. Royce, editor, New

      York, Random House, 1965.
- - - , "General System Theory and Psychiatry," American Hand-

      book of Psychiatry, vol. 3, S. Arieti, editor, New York, Basic Books,
      1966. Chapter 9.
- - - , Robots, Men and Minds, New York, George Braziller, 1967.
---, and R. R. ESTWICK. "Tissue Respiration of Musculature in
      Relation to Body Size," Amer. ]. Physiol. 173 (1953), 58-60.
258  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

 - - - , C. G. HEMPEL, R. E. BASS and H. JONAS, "General System
       Theory: A New Approach to Unity of Science," I-VI, Hum. Bioi.,

       23 (1951), 302-361.
 ---, and I. MOLLER, "Untersuchungen tiber die Gesetzlichkeit

       des Wachstums, VIII, Die Abhangigkeit des Stoffwechsels von der
       Korpergrosse und der Zusammenhang von Stoffwechseltypen und
      Wachstumstypen," Riv. Bioi., 35 (1943), 48-95.
- - - , and W. J. P. PIROZYNSKI, "Ontogenetic and Evolutionary
       Allometry," Evolution, 6 (1952), 387-392.
- - - , "Tissue Respiration, Growth and Basal Metabolism," Biol.
      Bull., 105 (1953), 240-256.
 BETHE, ALBERT, "Plastizitat und Zentrenlehre," Handbuch der
       normalen und pathologischen Physiologie, vol. XV /2, Albert Bethe,
       editor, Berlin, Springer, 1931.

BEVERTON, R. J. H., and S. J. Holt, "On the Dynamics of Ex-

       ploited Fish Populations," Fishery Investigation, Ser. II, vol. XIX,
       London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1957.
BLANDINO, G., Problemi e Dottrine di BiologŁa teorica, Bologna,
       Minerva Medica, 1960.
BLASIUS, W., "Erkenntnistheoretische und methodologische Grund-
      lagen der Physiologic," in Landois-Rosemann, Lehrbuch der Phys-
      lologie des Menschen, 28. AufI., Munich, Berlin, Urban & Schwarzen-
      berg, 1962,990-1011.
BLEULER, EUGEN, Mechanismus-Vitalismus-Mnemismus, Berlin,
      Springer, 1931.
BODE, H., F. MOSTELLER, F. TUKEY, and C. WINSOR, "The
      Education of a Scientific Generalist," Science, 109 (1949), 553.
BOFFEY, PHILIP M., "Systems Analysis: No Panacea for Nation's
      Domestic Problems," Science, 158 (1967).1028-1030.
BOGUSLAW, W., The New Utopians. Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall,
      1965.
BOULDING, K. K, The Organizational Revolution, New York, Harper
      & Row, 1953.
- - - , "Toward a General Theory of Growth," General Systems, I
       (1956a), 66-75.
- - - , The Image, Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1956b.
- - - , Conflict and Defence. New York: Harper, 1962.
BRADLEY, D. F., and M. CALVIN, "Behavior: Imbalance in a Net-
      work of Chemical Transformation," General Systems, I (1956),
      56-65.
BRAY, H. G., and K. WHITE, Kinetics and Thermodynamics in Bio-
      chemistry, New York, Academic Press, 1957.

BRAY, J. R., "Notes toward an Ecology Theory," Ecology. 9 (1958),

      770-776.
BRODY, S., "Relativity of Physiological Time and Physiological

      Weight," Growth, I (60), 1937.
- - - , Bioenergetics and Growth, New York, Reinhold, 1945.
References  #

             259

BRONOWSKI, J., Review of "Brains, Machines and Mathematics" by

       M. A. Arbib, Scientific American, (July 1964), 130-134.
 BRUNER, JEROME, "Neural Mechanisms in Perception," in The

       Brain and Human Behavior, H. Solomon, editor, Baltimore, Wil-
       liams and Wilkins, 1958.
 BRUNNER, R., "Das Fliessgleichgewicht als Lebensprinzip," Mitteil-
       ungen der Versuchsstation fur das Giirungsgewerbe (Vienna), 3-4
       (1967), 31-35.
BRUNSWIK, EGON, "Historical and Thematic Relations of Psy-
       chology to Other Sciences," Scientific Monthly, 83 (1956), 151-161.
 BUCKLEY, W'o Sociology and Modern Systems Theory, Englewood
       Cliffs, N. J., Prentice-Hall, 1967.
BOHLER, C., "Theoretical Observations about Life's Basic Tenden-

     cies," Amer. J. Psychother., 13 (1959), 561-581.

- - - , Psychologie im Leben unserer Zeit, Munich & Zurich, Knaur,
       1962.

BURTON, A. C., "The Properties of the Steady State Compared to
       those of Equilibrium as shown in Characteristic Biological Be-

     havior," J. Cell. Compo Physiol., 14 (1939), 327-349.

BUTENANDT, A., "Neuartige Probleme und Ergebnisse der. biolo-
      gischen Chemie," Die Naturwissenschaften, 42 (1955), 141-149.

- - - , "Altern und Tod als biochemisches Problem," Dt. Med. Wschr.,
      84 (1959), 297-300.

CANNON, W. B., "Organization for Physiological Homeostasis," Phys-
      iological Review, 9 (1929), 397.

- - - , The Wisdom of the Body, New York, W. W. Norton Co.,
      1932.

CANTRIL, HADLEY, "A Transaction Inquiry Concerning Mind,"
      Theories of the Mind, Jordan Scher, editor, New York, The Free
      Press, 1962.

CARMICHAEL, LEONARD, editor, Manual of Child Psychology (2nd
      edition), New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1954.

CARNAP, R., The Unity of Science, London, 1934.
CARTER, L. J., "Systems Approach: Political Interest Rises," Science,

      153 (1966), 1222-1224.

CASEY, E. J.. Biophysics, New York, Reinhold, 1962.

CASSIRER, ERNST, The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, 3 vols., New
      Haven, Yale University Press, 1953-1957.

CHANCE, B., R. W. ESTABROOK & J. R. WILLIAMSON (eds.),

      Control of Energy Metabolism, New York, London, Academic
      Press, 1965.

CHOMSKY, N., "'Verbal Behavior' by B. f'. Skinner," Language, 35
      (1959), 26-58.

CHORLEY. R. J., Geomorphology and General Systems Theory, Gen-

      eral Systems, 9 (1964). 45-56.

COMMONER, B., "In Defense of Biology," Science, 133 (1961), 1745-
      1748.
260  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

COWDRY, EDMUND, Cancer Cells, 2nd edition, Philadelphia, W. B.
      Saunders, 1955.

 (DAMUDE, E.) , "A Revolution in Psychiatry," The Medical Post, May
      23, 1967.

D'ANCONA, V., Der Kampf urns Dasein, Berlin, Borntrager, 1939.

    English translation, The Struggle for Existence, Leiden, E. J.

      Brill, 1954.
DENBIGH, K. G., "Entropy Creation in Open Reaction Systems,"

      Trans. Faraday. Soc., 48 (1952), 389-394.
DE-SHALIT, A., "Remarks on Nuclear Structure," Science, 153 (1966),

      1063,...1067.
DOBZHANSKY, T., "Arc Naturalists 0Id·Fashioned?" American

      Naturalist. 100 (1966), 541-550.
DONNAN, F. G., "Integral Analysis and the Phenomenon of Life,"

      Acta Biotheor, 1937.
DOST, F. H., Der Blutspiegel: Kinetik der Konzentrationsabliiufe in

      der Korperfliissigkeit, Leipzig, Thieme, 1953.
            "Ober ein einfaches statistisches Dosis·U msatz-Gesetz," Klin.

      Wschr., 36 (1958), 655-657.

- - - , "Beitrag zur Lehre vom Fliessgleiehgewicht (steady state) aus
      der Sieht der experimenteUen Medizin," Nova Acta Leopoldina,
      4,-5 (1958-59), 143-152.

- - - , "Fliessgleichgewichte im stromenden Blut," Dt. med. Wschr.,
      87 (1962a), 1833-1840.

- - - , "Ein Verfahren zur Ermittlung des absoluten Transportver-
      m5gens des Blutes im Fliessgleiehgewicht, Klin. Wschr., 40 (1962b),
      732-733.

DRISCHEL, H., "Formale Theorien der Organisation (Kybernetik
      und verwandte DiszipIinen)," Nova Acta Leopoldina (Halle,
      Germany), (1968).

DRUCKREY, H., and K. KUPFMOLLER, Dosis und Wirkung: Die
     Pharmazie, 8 Beiheft, 1, Erg.-Bd., Auleiidorf (Wiirtt.) Editio Can-
      tor GmbH., 1949, 513-595.

DUBOS, R., "Environmental Biology," BioScience, 14 (1964), 11-14.

- - - , "We are Slaves to Fashion in Research!", Scientific Research
      Gan. 1967), 36-37, 54.

DUNN, M. S., E. A. MURPHY and L. B. ROCKLAND, "Optimal
     Growth of the Rat," Physiol. Rev., 27 (1947), 72-94.

EGLER, F. E., "Bertalanffian Organismicism," Ecology, 34 (1953),
      443--446.

ELSASSER, W. M., The Physical Foundation of Biology, New York,
      Pergamon Press, 1958.

- - - , Atom and Organism, Princeton, Princeton University Press,
      1966.

EYSENCK, HANS, "Characterology, Stratification Theory and Psycho-
      analysis; An Evaluation," Perspectives in Personality Theory,
References  !61

       Henry David and Helmut von Bracken, editors, London, Tavi-
      stock, 1957.
FEARING, F., "An Examination of the Conceptions of Benjamin
      Whorf in the Light of Theories of Perception and Cognition,"
      Language in Culture, H. Hoijer, editor, American Anthropologist,
      56 (1954), Memoir No. 79, 47.
FLANNERY, Kent V., "Culture History v. Cultural Process: A Debate
      in American Archaeology," Sci. Amer., 217 (1967), 119-122.
FOERSTER, H. von and G. W. ZOPF, Jr. (eds.), Principles of Self-
      Organization, New York, Pergamon Press, 1962.
FOSTER, C., A. RAPOPORT and E. TRUCCO, "Some Unsolved
      Problems in the Theory of Non-Isolated Systems," General Sys-
      tems, 2 (1957), 9-29.
FRANK, L. K., G. E. HUTCHINSON, W. K. LIVINGSTONE,
      W. S. McCULLOCH, and N. WIENER, Teleological Mechan-
      isms, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 50 (1948).

FRANKL, VICTOR, "Das homoostatische Prinzip und die dynamische
      Psychologie," Zeitschrift fur Prychotherapie und Medizinische Pry-
      chologie, 9 (1959a), 41-47.

            From Death-Camp to Existentialism, Boston, Beacon Press,
      1959b.

- - - , "Irrwege see1enarztlichen Denkens (Monadologismus, Poten-
      tialismus und Ka1eidoskopismus)," Nervenarzt, 31 (1960), 385-392.

FRANKS, R. G. E., Mathematical Modeling in Chemical Engineering.
      New York, Wiley. 1967.

FREEMAN, GRAYDON, The Energetics of Human Behavior, Ithaca,
      Cornell University Press, 1948.

FREUD, SIGMUND, A Generallntroduction to Psychoanalysis, (1920)
      New York, Permabooks, 1953.

FRIEDELL, E., Kulturgeschichte der Neuzeit, Miinchen, C. H. Beck,
      1927-31.

GARAVAGLIA, C., C. POLVANI and R. SILVESTRINI, "A Collec-
      tion of Curves Obtained With a Hydrodynamic Model Simulating
      Some Schemes of Biological Experiments Carried Out With
     Tracers," Milano, CISE, Report No. 60 (1958), 45 pp.

GAZIS, DENOS C., "Mathematical Theory of Automobile Traffic,"
      Science, 157 (1967), 273-281.

GEERTZ, CLIFFORD, "The Growth of Culture and the Evolution of
      Mind," Theories of the Mind, Jordan Scher, editor, New York,
      The Free Press, 1962.

GESSNER, F., "Wieviel Tiere bevolkern die Erde?" Orion (1952),
      33-35.

GEYL, P., Napoleon For and Against, London, Jonathan Cape. 1949.
      (1957)

- - - , Debates With Historians. New York, Meridian Books, 1958.
GILBERT, ALBIN, "On the Stratification of Personality," Perspectives
262  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

      in Personality Theory, Henry David and Helmut von Bracken,
      editors, London, Tavistock, 1957.
GILBERT, E. N., "Information Theory After 18 Years," Science, 152
      (1966), 320-326.
GLANSDORFF, P. and ]. PRIGOGINE, "On a General Evolution
      Criterion in Macroscopic Physics," Physica 30 (1964), 351-374.
GOLDSTEIN, KURT, The Organism, New York, American Book
      Company, 1939.
- - - , "Functional Disturbances in Brain Damage," American Hand-
      book of Psychiatry, vol. 1, Silvano Arieti, editor, New York, Basic
      Books, 1959.
GRAY, W., N. D. RIZZO and F. D. DUHL (eds.), General Systems
      Theory and Psychiatry, Boston, Little, Brown and Company, (in
      press).
GRINKER, R. R. (ed.), Toward a Unified Theory of Human Be-
      havior, 2nd edition, New York, Basic Books, 1967.
GRODIN, F. S., Control Theory and Biological Systems, New York,
      Columbia University Press, 1963.
GROSS, ]., "Die Krisis in der theoretischen Physik und ihre Bedeutung
      fUr die Biologie," Biologisches Zentralblatt, 50 (1930).
GUERRA, E. and B. GtrNTHER. "On the Relationship of Organ
      Weight, Function and Body Weight," Acta. Physiol. Lat. Am., 7
      (1957), 1-7.
GtrNTHER, B. and E. GUERRA, "Biological Similarities," Acta.
      Physiol. Lat. Am., 5 (1955), 169-186.
HACKER, FREDERICK, "Juvenile Delinquency," Hearings before
      the U. S. Senate Subcommittee Pursuant to S. Res. No. 62, Wash-
      ington, U.S. Government Printing Office, June 15-18, 1955.
HAHN, ERICH, "Aktuelle Entwicklungstendenzen der sozio1ogischen
      Theorie," Deutsche Z PhUos., 15 (1967), 178-191.
HAIRE, M., "Biological Models and Empirical Histories of the Growth
      of Organizations," Modern Organization Theory, M. Haire, editor,
      New York, John Wiley &: Sons, 1959, pp. 272-306.
HALL, A. D., and R. E. FAGEN, "Definition of System," General
      Systems, I (1956), 18-29.
- - - , A Methodology for Systems Engineering, Princeton, Van
      Nostrand, 1962.
HALL, C. S., and G. LINDZEY, Theories of Personality, New York,

      John Wiley &: Sons, 1957.
HART, H., "Social Theory and Social Change," in L. Gross, editor,

      Symposium on Sociological Theory, Evanston, Row, Peterson,
      1959, pp. 196-238.
HARTMANN, M., Allgemeine Biologie, Jena, 1927.
HARTMANN, N., "Neue Wege der Ontologie," Systematische Philos-
     ophie, N. Hartmann, editor, Stuttgart, 1942.

HAYEK, F. A., "Degrees of Explanation," Brit. ]. Philos. Sci., 6 (1955),
      209-225.
References

HEARN, G., Theory Building in Social Work, Toronto, University of
      Toronto Press, 1958.

HEBB, DONALD 0., The Organization of Behavi(}1', New York, John
      Wiley & Sons, 1949.

- - - , "Drives and the C.N.S. (Conceptual Nervous System) ," Psychol.
      Rev., 62 (1955), 243-254.

HECHT, S., "Die physikalische Chemie und die Physiologie des
      Sehaktes," Erg. Physiol., 32 (1931).

HEMMINGSEN, A. M., "Energy Metabolism as Related to Body Size
      and Respiratory Surfaces, and its Evolution," Reps. Steno Mem.
      Hasp., part 2, 9 (1960).

HEMPEL, C. G., Aspects of Scientific Explanation and other Essays in
      the Philosophy Of Science, New York, The Free Press, 1965.

HENRY, JULES, Culture Against Man, New York, Random House,
      1963.

HERRICK, CHARLES, The Evolution of Human Nature, New York,
      Harper Torchbooks, 1956.

HERSH, A. H., "Drosophila and the Course of Research," Ohio J. Sci.,

      42 (1942), 198-200.
HESS, B., "Fliessgleichgewichte der Zellen," Dt. Med. Wschr., 88 (1963),

      668-676.

- - - , "Modelle enzymatischer Prozesse," Nova Acta Leopoldina
       (Halle, Germany), 1969.

HESS, B., and B. CHANCE, "Ober zelluliire Regulationsmechanismen
      und ihr mathematisches Modell," Die Naturwissenschatten, 46
      (1959) , 248-257.

HESS, W. R., "Die Motorik als Organisationsproblem," Biologisches
      Zentralblatt, 61 (1941), 545-572.

- - - , "Biomotorik als Organisationsproblem," I, II, Die Naturwis-
      senschaften, 30 (1942), 441-448, 537-541.

HILL, A. V., "Excitation and Accommodation in Nerve," Proc. Roy.
      Soc. London, 11 (1936).

HOAGLAND, H., "Consciousness and the Chemistry of Time," Trans-
    . actions of the First Conference, H. A. Abramson, editor, New
      York, J. Macy Foundation, 1951.

HoBER, R., Physikalische Chemie der Zelle und der Gewebe, 6. Aufi.,
      Berlin, 1926.

HOIJER, H., editor, Language in Culture, American Anthropologist,
      Memoir No. 79, (1954).

HOLST, ERICH von, "Vom Wesen der Ordnung im Zentralnerven-
      system," Die Naturwissenschaften, 25 (1937), 625-631, 641-647.

HOLT, S. J., "The Application of Comparative Population Studies to
      Fisheries Biology-An Exploration," in The Exploitation of Na-
      tural Animal Populations, E. D. LeCren and M. W. Holdgate,
      editors. Oxford, Blackwell, n.d.

HOOK, SIDNEY, editor, Dimensions of Mind, New York, Collier
      Books. 1961.
264  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

 HUMBOLDT, W. VON, Gesammelte Schriften, VII, I, Berlin, Preuss.
       Akademie, n.d.

 HUXLEY, A., The Doors of Perception, New York, Harper & Row,
       1954.

 HUXLEY, J., Problems of Relative Growth, London, Methuen, 1932.
 JEFFRIES, L. A. (ed.), Cerebral Afechanisms in Behavior, The Hixon

       Symposium, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1951.
JONES, R. W., and J. S. GRAY, System Theory and Physiological

       Processes," Science, 140 (1963), 461-466.
 JUNG, F., "Zur Anwendung der Thermodynamik auf Biologische und

       Medizinische Probleme," Die Naturwissenschaften, 43 (1956), 73-
       78.
 KALMUS, H., "Dber die Natur des Zeitgedachtnisses der Bienen,"
      Zeitschr. Vergl. Phniol., 20 (1934), 405.
 KAMARYT, ]., "Die Bedeutung der Theorie des offenen Systems in
      der gegenwartigen Biologie," Deutsche Z. fur Philosophie, 9 (1961),
       2040-2059.
- - - , "Ludwig von Bertalanffy a synteticke sm-ery v zapadne
      biologii," in Filosoficke problt!my moderni biologie, J. Kamaryt,
      editor, Prague, Ceskoslovensk;!. Akademie, VED, 1963, pp. 60-105.
 KANAEV, I. I., Aspects of the History of the Problem of the Morpho-
      logical Type from Darwin to the Present (in Russian), Moscow,
       NAUKA, 1966, pp. 193-200.
KEITER, F., "Wachstum und Reifen im Jugendalter," Kainer Z. fur
      Soziologie, 4 (1951-1952), 165-174.
KLEIBER, M., The Fire of Life, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1961.
KLUCKHOHN, C., and D. LEIGHTON, "The Navaho," The Tongue
      of the People, Cambridge (Mass.), Harvard University Press, 1951.
- - - , "Culture and Behavior," in Handbook of Social Psychology,
      vol. 2, G. Lindzey, editor, Cambridge, Addison-Wesley Publishing
      Company, 1954.
KMENT, H., "Das Problem biologischer Regelung und seine Ge-
      schichte in medizinischer Sicht," Munch. Med. Wschr., 99 (1957),
      475-478, 517-520.
- - - , "The Problem of Biological Regulation and Its Evolution in
      Medical View," General Systems, 4 (1959), 75-82.
KOESTLER, ARTHUR, The Lotus and the Robot, London, Hutchin-
      son, 1960.
- - - , The Ghost in the Machine, London, Hutchinson, 1967.
- - - , "The Tree and the Candle," in Unity and Diversity of Sys-
      tems: Festschrift for L. von Bertalanffy, R. G. Jones, editor, in
      prepara tion.

KoHLER, W., Die physischen Gestalten in Ruhe und im stationiiren
      Zustand, Erlangen, 1924.

- - - , "Zum Problem der Regulation," Raux's Arch, 112 (1927).
KOTTJE, F., "Zum Problem der vitalen Energie," Ann. d. Phil. u. phil.

      Kritik, 6 (1927).
References  265

KRECH, DAVID, "Dynamic Systems as Open Neurological Systems,"
      Psychological Review, 57 (1950), 283-290. Reprinted in General
      Systems, I (1956), 144-154.

KREMYANSKIY, V. I., "Certain Peculiarities of Organisms as a
      'System' from the Point of View of Physics, Cybernetics, and
      Biology," General Systems, 5 (1960). 221-230.

KROEBER, A. L., The Nature of Culture, Chicago, The University of
      Chicago Press, 1952.

- - - , Style and Civilizations, Ithaca, N. Y., Cornell U. Press, 1957.
- - - , and C. KLUCKHOHN, Culture. A Critical Review of Con-

      cepts and Definitions (1952), New York, Vintage, 1963.
KUBIE, LAWRENCE, "The Distortion of the Symbolic Process in

      Neurosis and Psychosis," ,. Amer. Psychoanal. Ass., I (1953),59-86.
KU'qN, T. S., The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago. Uni·

      versity of Chicago Press, 1962.
LABARRE. W., The Human Animal, Chicago, U. of Chicago Press,

      1954.
LANGER, S., Philosophy in a New Key (1942), New York, Mentor

      Books, 1948.
LASHLEY, K., Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence (1929), New York,

      Hafner, 1964.
LECOMTE DU NOVY, P., Biological Time, New York, Macmillan,

      1937.
LEHMANN, G., "Das Gesetz der Stoffwechselreduktion," in Kilken-

      thals Handbuch det Zoologie, 8, 4(5). Berlin, De Gruyter & Co.,
      1956.
LENNARD, H., and A. BERNSTEIN, The Anatomy of Psychotherapy,
      New York, Columbia U. Press, 1960.
LERSCH, P., and H. THOMAE, editors, Handbuch der Psychologie,
      Vol. 4: Personlichkeitsforschung und Personlichkeitstheorie.
      Gottingen, Hogrefe, 1960.

LEWADA, J., "Kybernetische Methoden in der Soziologie," (in Rus-

      sian) Kommunist (Moscow, 1965), 14, 45.
LLAVERO, F., "Bemerkungen zu einigen Grundfragen der Psychi-

      atrie," Der Nervenarzt, 28 (1957), 419-420.
LOCKER, A., "Das Problem der Abhangigkeit des Stoffwechsels von

      der KorpergrOsse," Die Naturwissenschaften, 48 (1961a), 445-449.
- - - , "Die Bedeutung experimenteller Variabler fiir die Abhangig-

      keit der Gewebsatmung von der Korpergrosse. II. Die Bezugs-
      basis," Pfliigers Arch. ges. Physial., 273 (1961b), 345-352.

- - - , "Reaktionen metaboIisierender Systeme auf experimentelle
      Beeinflussung, Reiz und Schadigung," Helgaliinder wissenschaft-
      liche Meeresuntersuchungen, 9 (1964), 38-107.

- - - , "Elemente einer systemtheoretischen Betrachtung des Stoff-
     wechsels," Helgoliinder wissenschaftliche lvleeresuntersuchungen,
      14 (1966a), 4-24.

- - - , "Aktuelle Beitrage zur systemtheoretischen Behandlung des
266  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

      Stoffwechse1s. Netzwerk-, graphentheoretische und weitere Ver-
      fahren," Studia biophysica, 1 (1966b), 405-412.
- - - and R. M. LOCKER, "Die Bedeutung experimenteller Vari-
      abler fur die Abhangigkeit der Gewebsatmung von der Korper-
      grosse, III, Stimulation der Atmung und AuŁtrennung in Sub-
      stratanteile," P/lugers Arch. ges. Physiol., 274 (1962), 581-592.
LOEWE, S., "Die quantitativen Probleme der Pharmakologie, Erg.
      Physiol., 27 (1928).
LORENZ, K., "Die angeborenen Formen mog1icher Erfahrung," Z.
      Tierpsychologie, 5 (1943), 235.

LOTKA, A. J., Elements of Physical Biology, (1925), New York, Dover,

      1956.
LUMER, H., "The Consequences of Sigmoid Growth Curves for Rela-

      tive Growth Functions," Growth, I (1937).
LURIA, ALEKSANDR, The Role of Speech in the Regulation of

      Normal and Abnormal Behavior, New York, Pergamon Press, 1961.
LUTHE, WOLFGANG, "Neuro-humora1 Factors and Personality,"

      Perspectives in Personality Theory, Henry David and Helmut von
      Braken, editors, London, Tavistock, 1957.
MACCIA, E. STEINER, and G. S. MACCIA, Development of Educa-
      tional Theory Derived from Three Educational Theory Models,
      Project 5-0638, Columbus, Ohio, The Ohio State Research Foun-
      dation, 1966.
MAGOUN, HORACE, The Waking Brain, Springfield, Illinois,
      Charles C. Thomas, 1958.
MALEK, E. et aI., Continuous Cultivation of Microorganisms. Prague:
      Czech. Acad. Sci., 1958, 1964.
MANNING, HON. E. C., Political Realignment-A Challenge to
      Thoughtful Canadians, Toronto/Montreal, McClelland Be Steward,
      Ltd., 1967.
MARTIN, A. W., and F. A..FUHRMAN, "The Relationship Between
      Summated Tissue Respiration and Metabolic Rate in the Mouse
      and Dog," Physiol. Zool., 28 (1955), 18-34.
Mathematical Systems Theory, edited by D. Bushaw et al., New York:
      Springer, since 1967.
MATHER, K. F., "Objectives and Nature of Integrative Studies,"
     1\;Iain Currents in Modern Thought, 8 (1951) 11.
MATSON, FLOYD, The Broken Image, New York, George Braziller,
      1964.
MAY, ROLLO, ERNEST ANGEL and HENRI ELLENBERGER,
     editors, Existence: A New Dimension in Psychiatry and Psychology,
      New York, Basic Books, 1958.

MAYER, J., "Growth Characteristics of Rats Fed a Synthetic Diet,"

      Growth, 12 (1948), 341-349.

McCLELLAND, C. A., "Systems and History in International Rela-
      tions-Some Perspectives for Empirical Research and Theory,"
     General Systems, 3 (1958), 221-247.
References  # 267

 McNEILL, W., The Rise of the West, Toronto, The University of
      Toronto Press, 1963.

MEIXNER, J. R., and H. G. REIK, "Thermodynamik der irreversiblen
      Prozesse," Handbuch der Physik, Bd. Ill/2, S. Fliigge. editor, Berlin,
      Springer Verlag, 1959, pp. 413-523.

MENNINGER, KARL, "The Psychological Aspects of the Organism
      Under Stress," General Systems, 2 (1957), 142-172.

---, HENRI ELLENBERGER, PAUL PRUYSER, and MARTIN
      MAYMAN, "The Unitary Concept of Mental Illness," Bull. Men-
      ninger Clin. 22 (1958), 4-12.

- - - , MARTIN MAYMAN and PAUL PRUYSER, The Vital
      Balance, New York, The Viking Press, 1963.

MERLOO, JOOST, The Rape of the Mind, Cleveland, The World
      Publishing Company, 1956.

MESAROVIC. M. D., "Foundations for a General Systems Theory,"
      Views on General Systems Theory, M. S. Mesarovic, editor, New
      York, John Wiley & Sons, 1964. 1-24.

METZGER, W., "Psychologie," Wissenschaftliche Forschungsberichte,
      Naturwissenschaftliche Reihe, 52 (1941).

MEUNIER, K., "Korre1ation und Umkonstruktion in den Grossen-
      beziehungen zwischen Vogelfliigel und Vogelkorper," Bioi. Gen.,
      19 (1951), 403-443.

MILLER, J. G. et aI., "Symposium: Profits and Problems of Homeo-

      static Models in the Behavioral Sciences," Chicago Behavioral
      Sciences Publications, 1 (1953).

MILLER, JAMES, "Towards a General Theory for the Behavioral
      Sciences," Amer. Psychol., 10 (1955), 513-531.

MILSUM, J. H., Biological Control Systems Analysis, New York,
      McGraw-Hill, 1966.

MINSKY, MARVIN L., Computation, Finite and Infinite Machines,
      Englewood Cliffs, N. J., Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1967.

MITTASCH, A., Von der Chemie zur Philosophie-Ausgewlihlte
      Schriften und Vortriige, Ulm, 1948.

MITTELSTAEDT, H., "Regelung in der Biologie," Regelungstechnik,
      2 (1954), 177-181.

- - - , editor, Regelungsvorgiinge in der Biologie, Oldenbourg, 1956.

MORCHIO, R., "Gli Organismi Biologici Come Sistemi Aperti Stazio-
      nari Nel Modello Teorico di L. von Bertalanffy," Nuovo Cimento,
      10, Suppl., 12 (1959), 1l0-119.

MOSER, H. and O. MOSER-EGG, "Physikalisch-chemische Gleich-
      gewichte im Organismus," Einzeldarstellungen a.d. Gesamtgeb. d.
     Biochemie (Leipzig), 4 (1934).

MUMFORD, L., The Myth of the l\Jachine, New York, Harcourt,
     Brace, 1967.

MURRAY, HENRY, "The Personality and Career of Satan," Journal
      of Social Issues, 18 (1962), 36-54.
268  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

NAGEL, E., The Structure of Science, London, Routledge & Kegan
      Paul, 1961.

NAROLL, R. S., and L. VON BERTALANFFY, "The Principle of
      Allometry in Biology and the Social Sciences," General Systems
      1 (1956), 76-89.

NEEDHAM, J., "Chemical Heterogony and the Groundplan of Animal

      Growth," BioI. Rev., 9 (1934), 79.
NETTER, H., "Zur Energetik der stationaren chemischen Zustande in

      der Zelle," Die Naturwissenschaften, 40 (1953), 260-267.
- - - , Theoretische Biochemie, Berlin, Springer, 1959.

NEUMANN, J. von, "The General and Logical Theory of Automata,"

      Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior, L. A. Jeffries, editor, New
      York, Wiley, 1951.
- - - , and O. MORGENSTERN, Theory of Games and Economic
      Behavior, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1947.
NUTTIN, JOSEPH, "Personality Dynamics," in Perspectives in Per-
      sonality Theory, Henry David and Helmut von Bracken, editors,
      London, Tavistock, 1957.
OPLER, MARVIN, Culture, Psychiatry and Human Values, Spring-
      field, Ill., Charles C. Thomas, 1956.

OSTERHOUT, W. J. V., "The Kinetics of Penetration," J. Gen.

      Physiol., 16 (1933).
- - - , "Bericht Ober Vortrage auf dem 14. Internationalen Kon-

      gress fUr Physiologie, Rom 1932," Die Naturwissenschaften (1933).
- - - , and W. M. STANLEY, "The AccuITlUlation of Electrolytes,"

     J. Gen. Physiol., 15 (1932).

PARETO, V., Cours de l'economie politique, Paris, 1897.
PATTEN, B. C., "An Introduction to the Cybernetics of the Eco-

      system: The Trophic-Dynamic Aspect," Ecology, 40 (1959), 221-
      231.
PIAGET, JEAN, The Construction of Reality in the Child, New York,
      Basic Books, 1959.
PRIGOGINE, I., Etude thermodynamique des phenomenes irrevers-
      ibles, Paris, Dunod, 1947.
- - - , "Steady States and Entropy Production," Physica, 31 (1965),
      719-724.
PUMPIAN-MINDLIN, EUGENE, "Propositions Concerning Energetic·
      Economic Aspects of Libido Theory," Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., 76
      (1959), 1038-1052.
POTTER, A., "Studien zur Theorie der Reizvorgange," I-VII, Pfliigers
      Archiv 171, 175, 176, 180 (1918-20).
- - - , "Studien fiber physiologische Aehnlichkeit, VI. Wachstumsiihn-
      lichkeiten," Pfliigers Arch. ges. Physiol., 180 (1920), 298-340.
QUASTLER, H. (ed.) , Information Theory in Biology, Urbana, The
      University of Illinois Press, 1955.
RACINE, G. E., "A Statistical Analysis of the Size-Dependence of
      Metabolism Under Basal and Non-Basal Conditions," Thesis, Uni-
      versity of Ottawa, Canada, 1953.
References

RAPAPORT, D., The Structure of Psychoanalytic Theory, Psycho!.
      Issues, Monograph 6, 2 (1960), 39-64.

RAPOPORT, A., "Outline of a Probabilistic Approach to Animal
      Sociology," 1·111, Bull. Math. Biophys., 11 (1949), 183-196,273-281;
      12 (1950), 7-17.

- - - , "The Promise and Pitfalls of Information Theory," Behav.
      Sci., I (1956), 303-315.

- - - , "Lewis F. Richardson's Mathematical Theory of War," Gen-
      eral Systems, 2 (1957), 55-91.

- - - , "Critiques of Game Theory," Behav. Sci., 4 (1959a), 49-66.
- - - , "Uses and Limitations of Mathematical Models in Social Sci·

      ences," Symposium on Sociological Theory, L. Gross, editor, Evans-
      ton, Illinois, Row, Peterson, 1959b. pp. 348-372.
- - - , Fights, Games and Debates, Ann Arbor, University of Michi-
      gan Press, 1960.
- - - , "Mathematical Aspects of General Systems Theory," General
      Systems, 11 (1966), 3-11.

- - - , and W. J. HORVATH, "Thoughts on Organization Theory

      and a Review of Two Conferences," General Systems, 4 (1959),
      87-93.
RASHEVSKY, N., Mathematical Biophysics, Chicago, The University
      of Chicago Press, 1938. 3rd. ed. 1960.
- - - , Mathematical Biology of Social Behavior, The University of
      Chicago Press, 1951.
- - - , "The Effect of Environmental Factors on the Rates of Cul-
      tural Development," Bull. Math. Biophys., 14 (1952), 193-201.
- - - , "Topology and Life: In Search of General Mathematical
      Principles in Biology and Sociology," General S)'stems, I (1956),
      123-138.
REIK, H. G., "Zur Theorie irreversibler Vorgange," Annalen d. Phys.,
      11 (1953), 270-284, 407-419, 420-428.; 13 (1953), 73-96.
RENSCH, B., Neuere Probleme der Abstammungslehre, 2nd edition,
      Stuttgart, 1954.
--'-, "Die Evolutionsgesetze der Organismen in naturphilosophischer
     Sieht," Philosophia Naturalis, 6 (1961), 288-326.
REPGE, R., "Grenzen einer informationstheoretischen Interpretation
      des Organismus," Giessener Hochschulbliitter, 6 (1962).
RESCIGNO, A., "Synthesis for Multicompartmental Biological Mod-
     els," Biochem. Biophys. Acta., 37 (1960), 463-468.
- - - , and G. SEGRE, Drug and Tracer Kinetics, Waltham, Massa-
      chusetts, Blaisdell, 1966.
RIEGL, A., Die Spatromische Kunstindustrie, Nach den Funden in
      6sterreich-Ungarn. Wien, Hof- und Staatsdruekerei, 1901.
ROSEN, R., "A Relational Theory of Biological Systems," General
      Systems, 5 (1960), 29-44.
- - - , Optimality Principles in Biology, London, Butterworths, 1967.
ROSENBROCK, H. H., "On Linear System Theory," Proceedings
      lEE, 114 (1967), 1353-1359.
270  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

ROTHACKER, ERICH, Die Schichten der Personlichkeit, 3rd edition,
      Leipzig, Barth, 1947.

ROTHSCHUH, K. E., Theorie des Organismus, 2nd edition, Miin-
      chen, UrbanjSchwarzenberg, 1963.

ROYCE, JOSEPH, R., The Encapsulated Man, New York, Van
      Nostrand, 1964.

RUESCH, J., "Epilogue," Toward a Unified Theory of Human Be-
      havior, 2nd edition, R. R. Grinker, editor, New York, Basic
      Books, 1967.

RUSSELL, B., Human Knowledge> Its Scope and Limits, London,
      1948.

SCHAFFNER, KENNETH F., "Antireductionism and Molecular Biol-
      ogy," Science, 157 (1967), 644-647.

SCHAXEL, ]., Grundzuge der Theorienbildung in der Biologie, 2nd
      edition, Jena, Fischer, 1923.

SCHER, JORDAN, editor, Theories of the Mind, New York, The
      Free Press, 1962.

SCHILLER, CLAIRE, editor and translator, Instinctive Behavior,
      London, Methuen & Co., 1957.

SCHOENHEIMER, R., The Dynamic State of Body Constituents,
      2nd edition, Cambridge, (Mass.) Harvard University Press, 1947.

SCHULZ, G. V., "Ober den makromolekularen Stoffwechsel der Or-
      ganismen," Die Naturwissenschaften, 37 (1950), 196-200, 223-229.

- - - , "Energetische und statistische Voraussetzungen fUr die Syn-
      these der Makromoleki.ile im Organismus," Z. Elektrochem. angew.
      physikal Chem., 55 (1951), 569-574.

SCOTT, W. G., "Organization Theory: An Overview and an Ap-
      praisal," in Organizations: Structure and Behavior, J. A. Litterer,
      editor, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1963.

SELYE, H., The Stress of Life, New York, McGraw.Hill, 1956.
SHANNON, CLAUDE, and WARREN WEAVER, The Mathematical

      Theory of Communication, Urbana, University of Illinois Press,
      1949.
SHAW, LEONARD, "System Theory," Science, 149 (1965), 1005.
SIMON, H. A., "The Architecture of Complexity," General Systems, 10
      (1965), 63-76.
SKINNER, B. F., "The Flight From the Laboratory," Theories in
      Contemporary Psychology, Melvin Marx, editor, New York, The
      Macmillan Company, 1963.
SKRABAL, A., "Von den Simultanreaktionen," Berichte der deutschen
      chemischen Gesellschaft (A), 77 (1944), 1-12.
- - - , "Die Kettenreaktionen anders gesehen," Monatshefte fur
      Chemie, 80 (1949), 21-57.

SKRAMLIK. E. von, "Die Grundlagen der haptischen Geometrie,"
     Die Naturwissenschaften, 22 (1934), 601.

SMITH, VINCENT E. (ed.), Philosophical Problems in Biology, New
      York, St. John'S University Press, 1966.
References  '271

SOROKIN, P. A., Contemporary Sociological Theories, (1928), New
      York, Harper Torchbooks, 1964.

- - - . Modern Historical and Social Philosophies (1950), New York,
      Dover, 1963.

- - - . "Reply to My Critics," Pitirim A. Sorokin in Review, Philip
      Allen, editor, Durham, Duke University Press, 1963.

- - - , Sociological Theories of Today, New York/London, Harper
      & Row, 1966.

SPENGLER, 0., Der Untergang des Abendlandes, vol. 1, Munich,
       Beck, 1922.

 SPIEGELMAN, S., "Physiological Competition as a Regulatory Mech-
      anism in Morphogenesis," Quart. Rev. Biol., 20 (1945), 121.

SPRINSON, D. B., and D. RITTENBERG, "The Rate of Utilization
      of Ammonia for Protein Synthesis," J. Bioi. Chem., 180 (1949a),
      707-714.

- - - , "The Rate of Interaction of the Amino Acids of the Diet
      with the Tissue Proteins," J. Bioi. Chem., 180 (1949b), 715-726.

STAGNER, ROSS, "Homeostasis as a Unifying Concept in Personality
      Theory," Psychol. Rev., 58 (1951),5-17.

STEIN·BELING, J. von, "tiber das Zeitgedachtnis bei Tiercn," Bioi.

      Rev., 10 (1935), 18.
STOWARD, P. J., "Thermodynamics of Biological Growth," Nature,

      Lond., 194 (1962), 977-978.
SYZ, HANS, "Reflection on Group- or Phylo-Analysis," -Acta Psycho-

      therapeutica, II (1963), Suppl., 37-88.

SZENT-GYoRGYI, A., "Teaching and the Expanding Knowledge,"
      Science, 146 (1964), 1278-1279.

TANNER, JAMES, and BARBEL INHELDER, editors, Discussions
      on Child Development, vol. 4, London, Tavistock, 1960.

THOMPSON, J. W., "The Organismic Conception in Meteorology,"

      General Systems, 6 (1961), 45-49.

THUMB, NORBERT, "Die Stellung der Psychologie zur Biologie:
      Gedanken zu L. von Bertalan{fy's Theoretischer Biologie," Zen-
      tralblatt fur Psychotherapie, 15 (1943), 139-149.

TOCH, HANS, and ALBERT HASTORF, "Homeostasis in Psychol-
      ogy: A Review and Critique," Psychiatry: Journal for the Study
      of Inter-Personal Processes, 18 (1955), 81-91.

TOYNBEE, A., A Study of History, vol. IX, London and New York,
      Oxford University Press, 1954.

- - - , A Study of History, vol. XII, Reconsiderations, London, New
      York: Oxford U. Press, 1961 (Galaxy), 1964.

TRIBI1'l'O, S. E. M. G. de, "Una Nueva Orientaci6n de la Filosofia
      Biol6gica: El Organicismo de Luis Bertalanffy, Primer premio
      'Miguel Cane,' ", Cursos y Conferencias (Buenos Aires), 28 (1946).

TRINCHER, K. S., Biology and Information: Elements of Biological
      Thermodynamics, New York, Consultants Bureau, 1965.
272  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

TSCHERMAK, A. von, Allgemeine Physiologie, 2 vols. Berlin,
      Springer, 1916, 1924.

TURING, A. M., "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to
      the Entscheidungsproblem," Proc. London. Math. Soc., Ser. 2, 42
      (1936).

UEXKVLL, J. von, Umwelt und Imnenwelt der Tiere, 2nd edition,

      Berlin, Springer, 1920.
- - - , Theoretische Biologie, 2nd edition, Berlin, Springer, 1929.
- - - , and G. KRISZAT, Streif:dlge durch die Umwelten von Tieren

      und Menschen, Berlin, Springer, 1934.
UNGERER, E., Die Wissenschaft vom Leben. Eine Geschichte der

      Biologie, Bd. III, FreiburgjMtinchen, Alber, 1966.
VICKERS, G., "Control, Stability, and Choice," General Systems, II

      (1957), 1-8.
VOLTERRA, V., Ler;:ons sur la Theorie Mathematique de la Lutte

      pour la Vie, Paris, Villars, 1931.
WAGNER, RICHARD, Probleme und Beispiele Biologischer Regelung,

      Stuttgart, Thieme, 1954.

WAHL, 0., "Neue Untersuchungen tiber das Zeitgedachtnis der
      Tiere," Z. Vergl. Physiol., 16 (1932), 529.

WATT, K. E. F., "The Choice and Solution of Mathematical Models
      for Predicting and Maximizing the Yield of a Fishery," General
      Systems, 3 (1958), 101-121.

WEAVER, W., "Science and Complexity," American Scientist, 36
      (1948), 536-644.

WEISS, P., "Experience and Experiment in Biology," Science, 136
      (1962a), 468-471.

- - - , "From Cell to Molecule," The Mole~ular Control of Cellular

    Activity, J. M. Allen, ed., New York, 1962b.

WERNER, G., "Beitrag zur mathematischen Behandlung pharmakol-
      ogischer Fragen," S.B. Akad. Wiss. Wien'j Math. Nat. Kl. 156
      (1947), 457-467.

WERNER, HEINZ, Comparative Ps),chology of Mental Development,
      New York, International Universities Press, 1957a.

- - - , "The Concept of Development from a Comparative and
      Organismic Point of View," The Concept of Development, Dale
      Harris, editor, Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1957b.

WHATMOUGH, ]., "Review of Logic and Language (Second Series),"
      A. G. N. Flew, editor, Classical Philology, 50 (1955), 67.

WHITEHEAD, A. N., Science and the Modern World, Lowell Lec-
      tures (1925), New York, The Macmilian Company, 1953.

WHITTACKER. R. H., "A Consideration of Climax Theory: The
     Climax as a Population and Pattern," Ecol. Monographs, 23 (1953),
      41-78.

WHORF, B. L., Collected Papers on Metalinguistics, Washington,
      Foreign Service Institute, Department of State, 1952.
References

- - - , Language, Thought and Reality: Selected Writings of B. L.
      Wharf, John Carroll, editor, New York, John Wiley & Sons, 1956.

WHYTE, LANCELOT, The Unconscious before Freud, New York,
      Basic Books, 1960.

WIENER, NORBERT, Cybernetics, New York, John Wiley & Sons,
       1948.

WOLFE, HARRY B., "Systems Analysis and Urban Planning-The
      San Francisco Housing Simulation Model," Trans. N.Y. Acad. Sci.,
      Series II, 29:8 (June 1967), 1043-1049.

WOODGER, J. H., "The 'Concept of Organism' and the Relation
      between Embryology and Genetics," Quart. Rev. BioI., 5/6 (1930-
      31), 1-3.

-_._, The Axiomatic Method in Biology, Cambridge, 1937.

WORRINGER, W., Abstraktion und Einfilhlung, Munich, Piper, 1908.
- - - , Formprobleme der Gotik, Munich, Piper, 1911.
YOURGRAU, W., "General System Theory and the Vitalism-Mechan-

      ism Controversy," Scientia (Italy), 87 (1952),307.
ZACHARIAS, J. R., "Structure of Physical Science," Science, 125

      (1957), 427-428.
ZEIGER, K., "Zur Geschichte der Zellforschung und ihrer Begriffe,"

      Handb. d. Allgem. Pathol., F. Buchner, E. Letterer, and F. Roulet,
      editors, Bd. 2, T. 1, 1-16, 1955.
ZERBST, E., "Eine Methode zur Analyse und quantitativen Auswertung
      biologischer steady·state 'Obergange," Experientia, 19 (1963a), 166.
- - - , "Untersuchungen zur Veranderung energetischer Fliessgleich-
      gewichte bei physiologischen Anpassungsvorgangen," I, II, Pflilgers
      Arch. ges. Physiol., 227 (1963b), 434-445, 446-457.
- - - , Zur Auswertung biologischer Anpassungsvorgiinge mit Hilfe
      der Fliessgleichgewichtstheorie. Habilitationsschrift. Berlin, Freie
      Universitat, 1966.

- - - , Eine Analyse der Sinneszellfunktion mit Hilte der von
      Bertalanlfy-Fliessgleichgewichtstheorie, Berlin, Freie Universitat, (in
      press) .

- - - , C. HENNERSDORF, and H. VON BRAMANN, "Die Tem-
      peraturadaptation der Herzfrequenz und ihre Analyse mit Hilfe
      der Fliessgleichgewichttheorie," 2nd International Biophysics Con-
      gress of the International Organization for Pure and Applied
      Biophysics, Vienna, Sept. 5-9, 1966.

ZUCKER., L., L. HALL, M. YOUNG, and T. F. ZUCKER, "Animal
      Growth and Nutrition, With Special Reference to the Rat,"
      Growth, 5 (194Ia), 399-413.

---, "Quantitive Formulation of Rat Growth," Growth, 5 (194lb),
      415-436.

ZUCKER, T. F., L. HALL, M. YOUNG, and L. ZUCKER, "The
      Growth Curve of the Albino Rat in Relation to Diet," ]. Nutr., 22
      (1941), 123-138.
274  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

ZUCKER, L. and T. F. ZUCKER, "A Simple Weight Relation Db·
     served in Well-Nourished Rats," ]. gen. Physiol. 25 (1942), 445-
     463.

ZWAARDEMAKER, H., "Die im ruhenden Korper vorgehenden
      Energiewanderungen," Erg. Physiol., 5 (1906).

- - - , "Allgemeine Energetik des tierischen Lebens (Bioenergetik),"
      Handbuch der normalen und pathologischen Physiologie, I (1927).
                                               ,

           SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING

   The following list is intended for further study in general
system theory as defined in this book, and its major fields of ap-
plication. For this reason, only a few representative examples are
cited from the large literature in fields such as cybernetics, in-
formation, game and decision theories, irreversible thermody-
namics, systems analysis and engineering, etc.

General; Mathematics of General System Theory

"Biologische Modelle," Symposium, Nova Acta Leopoldina (Halle,
      Germany), 1969. (Articles L. von Bertalanffy, H. Drischel, Benno
      Hess, etc.) .

BOGUSLAW, W., The New Utopians, Englewood Cliffs (N.J.),
      Prentice-Hall, 1965.

BUCKLEY, W. (ed.), Modern Systems Research for the Behavioral
      ScienJist. A Sourcebook, Chicago, Aldine Publishing Co., 1968.

General Systems, L. von Bertalanffy and A. Rapoport (eds.), Bedford
      (Mass.), P.O. Box 228, Society for General Systems Research, 12
      voIs. since 1956.

GORDON, Jr., Charles K., Introduction to Mathematical Structures,
      Belmont (CaL), Dickenson, 1967.

JONES, R. D. (ed.) , Unity and Diversity, Essays in Honor of Ludwig
      von Bertalanffy, New York, Braziller, 1969. (~rticles A. Auersperg,
      W. Beier and R. Laue, R. Brunner, A. Koestler, A. Rapoport,
      R. B. Zuniga, etc.).

KLIR, G. J., An Approach to General Systems Theory, Princeton
      (N.J.) , Nostrand, 1968.

MACCIA, Elizabeth Steiner, and George S. MACCIA, Development of
     Educational Theory Derived from Three Educational Theory
     Models, ,Columbus (Ohio), The Ohio State University, 1966.

MESAROVIC, M. D., Systems Research and Design; View on General
     Systems Theory, New York, Wiley, 1961 and 1964; Systems Theory
     and Biology, New York, Springer-Verlag, 1968.

System Theory, Proceedings of the Symposium on, Brooklyn (N.Y.),
      Polytechnic Institute, 1965.

Texty ke studiu teorie rizeni. ~ada: Teorie systimu a jeji aplikace,

    Prague, Vysoka Skola Politicka trv 1(S(;, 1966.
276  GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY

Biophysics

BEIER, Walter, Einfiihrung in die theoretische Biophysik, Stuttgart, G.
     Fischer, 1965.

BERTALANFFY, L. von, Biophysik des Fliessgleichgewichts, translated
      by W. H. Westphal, Braunschweig, Vieweg, 1953. Revised ed. with
     W. Beier and R. Laue, in preparation.

BRAY, H. G. and K. WHITE, "Organisms as Physico-Chemical Ma-
     chines," New Biology, 16 (1954) 70-85.

FRANKS, Roger G. K, Mathematical Modeling in Chemical Engineer-
      ing, New York, Wiley, 1967.

Quantitative Biology of Metabolism, International Symposia, A. Locker
      and O. Kinne (eds.), HelgoHinder Wissenschaftliche Meeresunter-
     suchungen, 9, 14 (1964), (1966).

RESCIGNO, Aldo and Giorgio SEGRE, Drug and Tracer Kinetics,
     Waltham (Mass.), Blaisdell, 1966.

YOURGRAU, Wolfgang, A. VAN DER MERWE and G. RAW,
      Treatise on Irreversible and Statistical Thermophysics, New York,
     Macmillan, 1966.

Biocybernetics

BAYLISS, L. K, Living Control Systems, San Francisco, Freeman, 1966.

DiSTEFANO, III, Joseph J., A. R. STUBBERUD, and I. J. WILLIAMS,

     Schaum's Outline of Theory and Problems of Feedback and Control
     Systems, New York, Schaum, 1967.
FRANK, L. K. et al., Teleological Mechanisms, N. Y. Acad. Se, 50
      (1948) .
GRODINS, Fred Sherman, Control Theory and Biological Systems,
      New York, Columbia University Press, 1963.
HASSENSTEIN, Bernhard, "Die bisherige Rolle der Kybernetik in der
     biologischen Forschung," Naturwissenschaftliche Rundschau, 13
      (1960) 349-355, 373-382, 419-424.
- - - , "Kybernetik und biologische Forschung," Handbuch der
     Biologie, L. von Bertalanffy and F. Gessner (eds.), Bd. I, Frankfurt
      a.M., Athenaion, 1966, pp. 629-730.
KALMUS, H. (ed.) , Regulation and Control in Living Systems, New
      York, Wiley, 1966.
MILSUM, John H., Biological Control Systems Analysis, New York,
      McGraw-Hill, 1966.
WIENER, N., Cybernetics, New York, Wiley, 1948.

Ecology and Related Fields

BEVERTON, R. J. H., and S. J. HOLT, "On the Dynamics of Ex-

     ploited Fish Populations," Fishery Investigation, Ser. II, vol. XIX.
     London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1957.
WATT, Kenneth K F., Systems Analysis in Ecology, New York,
     Academic Press, 1966.
Suggestions for Further Reading

Psychology and Psychiatry

BERTALANFFY, L. von, Robots, Men and Minds, New York, Braziller,
      1967.

GRAY, W., N. D. RIZZO and F. D. DUHL (eds.), General Systems
      Theory and Psychiatry, Boston, Little, Brown, 1968.

GRINKER, Roy R. (ed.) , Toward a Unified Theory of Human Be-
      havior, 2nd ed., New York, Basic Books, 1967.

KOESTLER, A., The Ghost in the Machine, New York, Macmillan,
      1968.

MENNINGER, K., with M. MAYMAN, and P. PRUYSER, The Vital
     Balance, New York, Viking Press, 1963.

Social Sciences

BUCKLEY, W., Sociology and Modern Systems Theory, Englewood
      Cliffs (N.].) , Prentice-Hall, 1967.

DEMERATH III, N.]., and R. A. PETERSON (eds.), System, Change,
      and Conflict. A Reader on Contemporary Sociological Theory and
      the Debate over Functionalism, New York, Free Press, 1967.

HALL, Arthur D., A Methodology for Systems Engineering, Princeton
      (N.].) , Nostrand, 1962.

PARSONS, Talcott, The Socml System, New York, Free Press, 1957.
SIMON, Herbert A., Models of Man, New York, Wiley, 1957.
SOROKIN, P. A., Sociological Theories of Today, New York, London,

      Harper & Row, 1966.
